Specification
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9 - 1) in Geography B (1GB0)
First teaching from September 2016
First certification from 2018 Issue 4
GCSE (9-1)
Geography B
About Pearson 
Pearson is the world's leading learning company, operating in countries around the world. We provide 
content, assessment and digital services to learners, educational institutions, employers, governments and 
other partners globally. We are committed to helping equip learners with the skills they need to enhance 
their employability prospects and to succeed in the changing world of work. We believe that wherever 
learning flourishes, so do people.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
This specification is Issue 4. Key changes are summarised on the next page. We will inform centres of any 
changes to this issue. The latest issue can be found on our website. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References to third party material made in this specification are made in good faith. Pearson does not 
endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may be subject to change, or 
any opinions expressed therein. (Material may include textbooks, journals, magazines and other 
publications and websites.) 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
ISBN 978 1 446 93167 7 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2025 
Summary of Pearson Edexcel GCSE in Geography B Issue 4 
changes 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this issue Page  
The exam time for Paper 2 has been increased from 1 hour 30 minutes to 1 hour 45 minutes. 
This change takes effect for 2026 exams. 
3 and 28 
 
If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, contact us via our website  
at: qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/contact-us.html. 
 
Contents 
1 Introduction 1 
Why choose Edexcel GCSE Geography B? 1 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this qualification 2 
Qualification at a glance 3 
2 Subject content and assessment information 5 
Component 1: Global Geographical Issues 7 
Component 2: UK Geographical Issues 16 
Component 3: People and Environment Issues – Making Geographical Decisions 30 
Geographical skills 36 
Mathematics and Statistics Skills 37 
Assessment Objectives 38 
3 Administration and general information 39 
Entries 39 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special consideration and malpractice 39 
Student recruitment and progression 41 
Appendix 1: Fieldwork Statement 44 
Appendix 2: Definitions 45 
Appendix 3: Exam command word definitions 46 
Appendix 4: The context for the development of this qualification 47 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 49 
Appendix 6: Codes 50 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
1 
 
1 Introduction 
Why choose Edexcel GCSE Geography B? 
We’ve listened to feedback from all parts of the geography subject community, including 
hundreds of fellow teachers. We’ve used this opportunity of curriculum change to redesign a 
qualification that is engaging and relevant to today’s geographers – a qualification that 
enables your students to explore the world, the issues it faces and their own place in it, and 
to help prepare them to succeed in their chosen pathway. 
Clear and coherent structure – our qualification has a straightforward structure with three 
components – Global Geographical Issues, UK Geographical Issues and People and 
Environment Issues – Making Geographical Decisions. 
Enquiry-based learning – the specification content is framed by geographical enquiry 
questions that encourage an investigative approach to each of the key ideas. As part of this 
enquiry process, students are encouraged to use integrated geographical skills, including 
appropriate mathematics and statistics, in order to explore geographical questions and 
issues. 
Provides an engaging real-world focus – students are encouraged to make geographical 
decisions by applying their knowledge, understanding and skills to real-life 21st-century 
people and environment issues. 
Engaging and manageable fieldwork – fieldwork environments are aligned with the core 
content of the course so that the experience of fieldwork can reinforce and enlighten learning 
in the classroom, and learning in the classroom can underpin learning in the field. Fieldwork 
tasks will remain for the lifetime of the specification so there is less time spent on planning 
and administration and more time to bring geography to life in the field. 
Straightforward assessments that are accessible for all abilities – there are three 
externally examined papers that provide gradual progression in demand throughout the 
topics. Across all three assessments there is consistent use of 12 different command words 
so that students know what to expect. 
Continuous progression – the new specification content develops students’ knowledge and 
understanding of place, process and interaction by first introducing them to global issues and 
then to UK issues, including two fieldwork investigations. Building on this, via a decision-
making exercise, students will investigate a contemporary local, national or regional people 
and environment issues within a global setting, drawing on their wider knowledge and 
understanding from across the course. 
Supports progression to A Level – the compulsory and optional topic content gives 
students to the opportunity to lay a foundation of knowledge and understanding that can be 
further developed at A Level. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
2 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this 
qualification 
Planning 
● Our Getting Started guide gives you an overview of the new GCSE qualifications to help 
you to get to grips with the changes to content and assessment and to help you 
understand what these changes mean for you and your students. 
● We will give you an editable course planner and scheme of work that you can adapt to 
suit your department. 
● Our mapping documents highlight key differences between the new and 2012 
qualifications. 
Teaching and learning  
There will be lots of free teaching and learning support to help you deliver the new 
qualifications, including: 
● topic packs for every topic, including teaching and learning ideas on new and more 
challenging topics and skills and geographical literacy 
● support for embedding geographical skills and fieldwork in teaching. 
Preparing for exams 
We will also provide a range of resources to help you prepare your students for the 
assessments, including: 
● additional assessment materials to support formative assessments and mock exams 
● marked exemplars of student work with examiner commentaries. 
ResultsPlus 
ResultsPlus provides the most detailed analysis available of your students’ exam 
performance. It can help you identify the topics and skills where further learning would 
benefit your students. 
Get help and support 
Our subject advisor service, led by Jon Wolton, and online communities, will ensure you 
receive help and guidance from us and that you can share ideas and information with other 
teachers. You can sign up to receive e-newsletters from Jon to keep up to date with 
qualifications and product and service news. 
Learn more at qualifications.pearson.com  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
3 
Qualification at a glance 
Content and assessment overview 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Geography B consists of three externally- 
examined papers.  
Students must complete all assessments in May/June in any single year. 
Component 1: Global Geographical Issues (*Paper 1 code: 1GB0/01) 
Written examination: 1 hour and 30 minutes 
37.5% of the qualification 
94 marks 
Content overview 
● Topic 1: Hazardous Earth 
● Topic 2: Development dynamics 
● Topic 3: Challenges of an urbanising world 
Assessment overview 
An externally-assessed written exam with three 30-mark sections. Of the 94 raw marks 
available, up to 4 marks are awarded for spelling, punctuation, grammar and use of 
specialist terminology. 
Section A: Hazardous Earth 
Section B: Development dynamics 
Section C: Challenges of an urbanising world 
The exam includes multiple-choice questions, short open, open response and extended 
writing questions, calculations and 8-mark extended writing questions. 
 
Component 2: UK Geographical Issues (*Paper 2 code: 1GB0/02) 
Written examination: 1 hour and 45 minutes 
37.5% of the qualification 
94 marks 
Content overview 
● Topic 4: The UK’s evolving physical landscape – including sub-topics 4A: Coastal change 
and conflict and 4B: River processes and pressures. 
● Topic 5: The UK’s evolving human landscape – including a Case Study - Dynamic UK 
cities. 
● Topic 6: Geographical investigations – including one physical fieldwork investigation and 
one human fieldwork investigation linked to Topics 4 and 5. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
4 
 
Assessment overview 
An externally-assessed written exam with three sections. Of the 94 marks available up to 
4 marks are awarded for spelling, punctuation, grammar and use of specialist terminology. 
Section A: The UK’s evolving physical landscape 
Section B: The UK’s evolving human landscape 
Section C: Geographical investigations 
● C1: Students choose one from two optional questions (Coastal change and conflict or 
River processes and pressures) 
● C2: Students choose one from two- optional questions (Dynamic urban areas or Changing 
rural areas). 
The exam includes multiple-choice questions, short open, open response, calculations and  
8-mark extended writing questions. 
 
Component 3: People and Environment Issues – Making Geographical Decisions 
(*Paper 3 code: 1GB0/03) 
Written examination: 1 hour and 30 minutes 
25% of the qualification 
64 marks 
Content overview 
● Topic 7: People and the biosphere 
● Topic 8: Forests under threat 
● Topic 9: Consuming energy resources 
Assessment overview 
An externally-assessed written exam with four sections. Of the 64 raw marks available, up to 
4 marks are awarded for spelling, punctuation, grammar and their use of specialist 
terminology. 
Section A: People and the biosphere 
Section B: Forests under threat 
Section C: Consuming energy resources 
Section D: Making a geographical decision 
The exam includes multiple-choice questions, short open, open response and extended 
writing questions. Section C will include 8-mark extended writing questions and Section D 
will offer a choice of one from three decisions assessed through a 12-mark extended writing 
question. 
 
*See Appendix 6: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to this 
qualification. 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
5 
2 Subject content and assessment 
information 
The subject content sets out the knowledge, understanding and skills relevant to this 
qualification. Together with the assessment information it provides the framework within 
which centres create their programmes of study, so ensuring progression from Key Stage 3 
national curriculum requirements and the possibilities for development into A Level. 
Qualification aims and objectives 
GCSE specifications for the discipline of geography gives students the opportunity to 
understand more about the world, the challenges it faces and their place within it. This GCSE 
course will deepen understanding of geographical processes, illuminate the impact of change 
and of complex people-environment interactions, highlight the dynamic links and 
interrelationships between places and environments at different scales, and develop 
students’ competence in using a wide range of geographical investigative skills and 
approaches. Geography enables young people to become globally and environmentally 
informed and thoughtful, enquiring citizens. 
The aims and objectives of this qualification are to enable students to build on their Key 
Stage 3 knowledge and skills to: 
● develop and extend their knowledge of locations, places, environments and processes, and 
of different scales, including global; and of social, political and cultural contexts (know 
geographical material) 
● gain understanding of the interactions between people and environments, change in 
places and processes over space and time, and the interrelationship between geographical 
phenomena at different scales and in different contexts (think like a geographer) 
● develop and extend their competence in a range of skills, including those used in 
fieldwork, in using maps and Geographical Information Systems (GIS) and in researching 
secondary evidence, including digital sources; and develop their competence in applying 
sound enquiry and investigative approaches to questions and hypotheses (study like a 
geographer) 
● apply geographical knowledge, understanding, skills and approaches appropriately and 
creatively to real-world contexts, including fieldwork, and to contemporary situations and 
issues; and develop well-evidenced arguments, drawing on their geographical knowledge 
and understanding (applying geography). 
Geographical skills 
Geographical Skills Students are required to develop a range of geographical skills, including 
mathematics and statistics skills, throughout their course of study. These skills may be 
assessed across any of the examined papers. The full list of geographical skills is provided on 
page 36. Some geographical skills are specific to particular topic content, these are 
numbered within the content and indicated in the ‘integrated skills’ sections within the topics 
throughout the content pages. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
6 
Subject content structure 
The subject content has been written so that each topic is introduced by way of a 
geographical overview before progressing into geographical depth. Geographical overview 
content aims to develop students’ broad, holistic understanding of the topic theme at a 
larger scale. Geographical depth content aims to develop students’ detailed knowledge and 
understanding of processes and interactions in a particular smaller scale place or context. 
Case Studies and located examples  
All students will study three in-depth case studies: 
● a case study of development in an emerging country in Topic 2 
● a case study of a megacity in a developing or an emerging country in Topic 3 
● a case study of how a major UK city is changing in Topic 5. 
In addition to the three main case studies, throughout the course it is a requirement to draw 
on located examples. Any located examples must be set within the broader contextual 
knowledge of the country. In order to make it clear where a located example should be 
developed, a 
  symbol has been used. You may wish to develop located examples within 
the countries selected for the three main case studies. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
7 
Component 1: Global Geographical Issues 
Overview 
This component draws across physical and human processes and people-environment 
interactions to consider key contemporary global geographical issues. The component is 
divided into three sections: 
● Topic 1: Hazardous Earth – an understanding of the global circulation of the atmosphere 
and changing climate. Plus two depth studies of an extreme weather hazard (tropical 
cyclones) and tectonic hazards at contrasting locations. 
● Topic 2: Development dynamics – an understanding of the scale of global inequality. Plus 
a depth study of how one emerging country is developing and the consequences for 
people, environment and the country’s relationship with the wider world 
● Topic 3: Challenges of an urbanising world – an overview of the causes and challenges of 
rapid urbanisation across the world. Plus one depth study of a megacity* in a developing 
or emerging country.  
*See Appendix 2: Definitions 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
8 
Content 
Topic 1: Hazardous Earth 
 
Enquiry question: How does the world’s climate system function, why does it 
change and how can this be hazardous for people? 
Key idea Detailed content 
1.1  The atmosphere 
operates as a 
global system 
which transfers 
heat around the 
Earth 
a.  T he global atmospheric circulation and how circulation cells 
and ocean currents transfer and redistribute heat energy 
around the Earth. 
b. How global atmospheric circulation determines the location of 
arid (high pressure) and high rainfall (low pressure) areas. (1) 
1.2  Climate has 
changed in the 
past through 
natural causes 
on timescales 
ranging from 
hundreds to 
millions of years 
a. The natural causes of climate change and how they explain 
past climate change events: asteroid collisions, orbital 
changes, volcanic activity, variations in solar output. 
b. E vidence for natural climate change (ice cores, tree rings, 
historical sources) and how it is used to reconstruct glacial and 
interglacial climate during the Quaternary and UK climate since 
Roman times to the present day. (2) 
1.3  Global climate is 
now changing 
as a result of 
human activity, 
and there is 
uncertainty 
about future 
climates 
a. H ow human activities (industry, transport, energy, farming) 
produce greenhouse gases (carbon dioxide, methane) that 
cause the enhanced greenhouse effect leading to global 
warming. 
b. Evidence for how human activity is causing climate change 
(sea level rise and warming oceans, global temperature rise, 
declining Arctic ice, increased extreme weather events) and 
the possible consequences on people. 
c. T he range of projections for global temperature change and 
sea level rise in the future, including physical processes and 
reasons for uncertainty about those projections. (3) 
Integrated skills:  
(1) Use and interpretation of climate graphs 
(2) Use and interpretation of line graphs/bar charts showing climate change 
(3) Use and interpretation of temperature and sea-level projection graphs to 2100. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
9 
 
Enquiry question: How are extreme weather events increasingly hazardous for 
people? 
Key idea Detailed content 
1.4  Tropical 
cyclones are 
caused by 
particular 
meteorological 
conditions 
a.  Characteristics (pressure, rotation, structure) and seasonal 
global distribution of tropical cyclones (hurricanes and 
typhoons) including source areas and tracks and how these 
change over time. (4) 
b. How the global circulation of the atmosphere leads to tropical 
cyclones in source areas, reasons why some tropical cyclones 
intensify and their dissipation. (5) 
1.5  Tropical 
cyclones present 
major natural 
hazards to 
people and 
places 
a.  P hysical hazards of tropical cyclones (high winds, intense 
rainfall, storm surges, coastal flooding, landslides) and their 
impact on people and environments. (6) 
b. W hy some countries are more vulnerable (physically, socially 
and economically) than others to the impacts of tropical 
cyclones. 
1.6  The impacts of 
tropical cyclones 
are linked to a 
country’s ability 
to prepare and 
respond to them 
a.  H ow countries can prepare for, and respond to, tropical 
cyclones: weather forecasting, satellite technology, warning 
and evacuation strategies, storm-surge defences. 
b. T he effectiveness of these methods of preparation and 
response in one developed country
  and in one developing or 
emerging country
 . 
Integrated skills:  
(4) Use of GIS to track the movement of tropical cyclones 
(5) Use of weather and storm-surge data to calculate Saffir-Simpson magnitude 
(6) Use of social media sources, satellite images and socio-economic data to assess impact. 
 = located example. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
10 
 
Enquiry question: Why do the causes and impacts of tectonic activity and 
management of tectonic hazards vary with location? 
Key idea Detailed content 
1.7  Earth’s layered 
structure, and 
physical 
properties is key 
to plate 
tectonics 
a. Earth’s layered structure (including the asthenosphere), with 
different composition and physical properties (temperature, 
density, composition, physical state). (7) 
b. How the core’s internal heat source (through radioactive 
decay) generates convection, the key foundation for plate 
motion. 
1.8  There are 
different plate 
boundaries, 
each with 
characteristic 
volcanic and 
earthquake 
hazards 
a. Distribution and characteristics of the three plate boundary 
types (conservative, convergent and divergent) and hotspots. 
(8) 
b. Causes of contrasting volcanic (volcano type, magma type/lava 
flows and explosivity) and earthquake hazards, including 
tsunami (shallow/deep, magnitude).(9) 
1.9  Tectonic 
hazards affect 
people, and are 
managed, 
differently at 
contrasting 
locations 
a. Primary and secondary impacts of earthquakes or volcanoes 
on property and people in a developed
 and emerging or 
developing country
 . 
b. Management of volcanic or earthquake hazards, in a 
developed
  and emerging or developing
  country including 
short-term relief (shelter and supplies) and long-term planning 
(trained and funded emergency services), preparation 
(warning and evacuation; building design) and prediction. (10) 
Integrated skills:  
(7) Interpret a cross-section of the Earth 
(8) Use and interpretation of world map showing distribution of plate boundaries and plates 
(9) Use of Richter Scale to compare magnitude of earthquake events 
(10) Use of social media sources, satellite images and socio-economic data to assess 
impact. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
11 
Topic 2: Development dynamics 
 
Enquiry question: What is the scale of global inequality and how can it be reduced? 
Key idea Detailed content 
2.1  There are 
different ways 
of defining and 
measuring 
development 
a. Contrasting ways of defining development (economic criteria 
and broader social and political measure) and measuring 
development (Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per capita, the 
Human Development Index (HDI), measures of inequality and 
indices of political corruption). (1) 
b. How countries at different levels of development (developing, 
emerging and developed) have differences in their 
demographic data (fertility rates, death rates, population 
structures, maternal and infant mortality rates). (2) 
2.2  There is global 
inequality in 
development 
and different 
theories in how 
it can be 
reduced 
a. The causes and consequences of global inequalities; social 
(education, health), historical (colonialism, neo-colonialism), 
environmental (climate, topography), economic and political 
(systems of governance, international relations). (3) 
b How Rostow’s modernisation theory and Frank’s dependency 
theory can be used to explain how and why countries develop 
over time. 
2.3  Approaches to 
development 
vary in type and 
success 
a. Characteristics of top-down and bottom-up strategies in terms 
of their scale, aims, funding and technology. The processes 
and players (transnational corporations (TNCs), governments) 
contributing to globalisation and why some countries have 
benefitted more than others. 
b. Advantages and disadvantages of different approaches to 
development: Non-governmental organisation-led (NGO-led) 
intermediate technology, Inter-governmental organisation 
(IGO)-funded large infrastructure and investment by TNCs. 
Integrated skills:  
(1) Comparing the relative ranking of countries using single versus composite (indices) 
development measures 
(2) Interpreting population pyramid graphs for countries at different levels of development 
(3) Using income quintiles to analyse global inequality. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
12 
Case Study 
Enquiry question: How is ONE of the world’s emerging countries managing to 
develop?  
To be studied in the context of an emerging country* (with high or medium human development). 
Key idea Detailed content: 
2.4  Development of 
the emerging 
country is 
influenced by its 
location and 
context in the 
world 
a.  The site, situation and connectivity of the country and its 
significance, in a national (environmental and cultural), 
regional and global context. 
b. Broad political, social, cultural and environmental context of 
the chosen country in its region and globally. 
2.5  Globalisation 
causes rapid 
economic 
change in the 
emerging 
country 
a.  The key economic trends (GDP, per capita GNI, changing 
importance of economic sectors, imports and exports and type 
and origin of foreign direct investment) since 1990. (4) 
b. The role of globalisation (advances in communications and 
transport technology, TNCs and outsourcing) and government 
policy (receipt of tied or multi-lateral aid, education and 
infrastructure investment, pro-FDI policy) in the development 
of the chosen country. (5) 
2.6  Rapid economic 
growth results 
in significant 
positive and 
negative 
impacts on 
people and 
environment in 
the emerging 
country 
a. How rapid economic change has contributed to demographic 
change (fertility and death rates), caused urbanisation (rural-
urban migration, city growth) and created different regions 
with different socio-economic characteristics. (6) 
b. Positive and negative impacts of economic development and 
globalisation on different age and gender groups. 
c. Impacts of economic development and globalisation on the 
environment (air, water and land pollution, greenhouse gases) 
at a variety of scales (human health and global climate 
change). 
2.7  Rapid economic 
development 
has changed the 
international 
role of the 
emerging 
country 
a.  How rapid economic development has changed the geopolitical 
influence (regional influence, role in international 
organisations) and relationships with the EU and USA. 
b. Conflicting views of the costs and benefits of changing 
international relations and the role of foreign investment 
(TNCs) in the economic development. 
Integrated skills:  
(4) Using numerical economic data to profile the chosen country 
(5) Using proportional flow-line maps to visualise trade patterns and flows 
(6) Using socio-economic data to calculate difference from the mean, for core and periphery 
regions. 
*See Appendix 2: Definitions  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
13 
Topic 3: Challenges of an urbanising world 
 
Overview of rapid urbanisation and contrasting global urban trends 
Enquiry question: What are the causes and challenges of rapid urban change? 
Key idea Detailed content 
3.1  The world is 
becoming 
increasingly 
urbanised 
a.  Past (since 1980) and current global trends in urbanisation, 
how it varies between global regions, and future projections of 
global urbanisation. (1) 
b. The global pattern of megacities (size, location, growth rates) 
and how in many countries some urban areas have 
disproportionate economic and/or political influence (urban 
primacy). 
3.2  Urbanisation is 
a result of 
socio-economic 
processes and 
change 
a. How economic change and migration (national and 
international) contributes to the growth and/or decline of cities 
in the developing, emerging and developed countries. 
b. Why urban economies are different in the developing, 
emerging and developed countries (formal versus informal 
employment, relative importance of economic sectors, working 
conditions). 
3.3  Cities change 
over time and 
this is reflected 
in changing land 
use 
a. How urban population numbers, distribution and spatial growth 
change over time (urbanisation, suburbanisation,  
de-industrialisation, counter-urbanisation and in some cases, 
regeneration). 
b. Characteristics of different urban land uses (commercial, 
industrial, residential) and the factors that influence land-use 
type (accessibility, availability, cost, planning regulations). (2) 
Integrated skills:  
(1) Use and interpretation of line graphs and calculating of rate of change/annual or decadal 
percentage growth 
(2) Using satellite images to identify different land use zones in urban areas. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
14 
Case Study 
 
Enquiry question: Why does quality of life vary so much within ONE megacity* in a 
developing country* OR emerging country*? 
To be studied in the context of ONE megacity in a developing or emerging country. 
Key idea Detailed content  
3.4  The location and 
context of the 
chosen 
megacity 
influences its 
growth, function 
and structure 
a.  Significance of site, situation and connectivity of the megacity 
in a national (environmental and cultural), regional and global 
context. 
b. The megacity’s structure (Central Business District (CBD), 
inner city, suburbs, urban-rural fringe) in terms of its functions 
and building age. 
3.5  The megacity in 
the chosen 
country is 
growing rapidly 
a.  Reasons for past and present trends in population growth 
(rates of natural increase, national and international migration, 
economic investment and growth) for the megacity. 
b. How population growth has affected the pattern of spatial 
growth and changing urban functions and land use. (3) 
3.6  Rapid 
population 
growth creates 
opportunities 
and challenges 
for people living 
in the chosen 
megacity 
a. The opportunities for people living in the megacity (access to 
education and health services, and formal and informal 
employment opportunities). 
b.  The challenges for people living in the megacity caused by 
rapid population growth (housing shortages, poor quality 
housing, insecure property rights, inadequate water supply and 
waste disposal, poor employment conditions, limited service 
provision and traffic congestion). 
c. The pattern of residential areas of extreme wealth contrasted 
with areas of poor quality housing and in some cases insecure 
property rights. Reasons for differences in quality of life within 
the megacity. The political and economic challenges of 
managing the megacity. (4) 
3.7  Quality of life in 
the chosen 
megacity can be 
improved by 
different 
strategies for 
achieving 
sustainability 
a. Advantages and disadvantages of city-wide government (top-
down) strategies for making the megacity more sustainable 
(managing water supply, waste disposal, transport and air 
quality). 
b. Advantages and disadvantages of community and NGO-led 
bottom-up strategies for making the megacity more 
sustainable (city housing, health and education services in the 
megacity). 
Integrated skills:  
(3) Using GIS/satellite images, historic images and maps to investigate spatial growth 
(4) Using quantitative and qualitative information to judge the scale of variations in quality 
of life. 
*See Appendix 2: Definitions 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
15 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2018. 
● The assessment is 1 hour and 30 minutes. 
● The assessment consists of three sections. 
● The assessment is out of 94 marks. 
● The paper will assess spelling, punctuation, grammar and use of specialist terminology 
which will contribute 4 marks towards the overall marks for this paper. 
● Each question is set in a context. 
● The exam includes multiple-choice questions, short open, open response, calculations and 
8-mark extended writing questions. 
● Extended writing questions will assess students’ ability to develop extended written 
arguments and to draw well-evidenced and informed conclusions about geographical 
questions and issues. 
● Calculators will be used in the examination. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and mark scheme for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Geography B Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
16 
Component 2: UK Geographical Issues 
Overview 
This component draws across physical and human processes and people-environment 
interactions to consider key contemporary geographical issues for the UK. The component is 
divided into three sections: 
● Topic 4: The UK's evolving physical landscape - an overview of the varied physical 
landscapes in the UK resulting from geology, geomorphic processes and human activity 
over time. Plus two depth studies of distinctive landscapes – Coastal change and conflict 
and River processes and pressures 
● Topic 5: The UK's evolving human landscape - an overview of the changing and varied 
human landscape of the UK, including the socio-economic and political processes that 
influence it. Plus a case study of a major UK city - Dynamic UK cities. 
● Topic 6: Geographical investigations - two investigations, including fieldwork and research, 
carried out in contrasting environments, one from 'Coastal change and conflict' or 'River 
processes and pressures' and one of either 'Dynamic urban areas' or 'Changing rural 
areas'. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
17 
Content 
Topic 4: The UK’s evolving physical landscape 
Overview of the UK’s physical landscape 
Enquiry question: Why does the physical landscape of the UK vary from place to 
place? 
Key idea Detailed content 
4.1 Geology and 
past processes 
have influenced 
the physical 
landscape of the 
UK 
a.  The role of geology, past tectonic and glacial processes (glacial 
erosion and deposition) in the development of upland (igneous 
and metamorphic rocks) and lowland (sedimentary rocks) 
landscapes. (1) 
b. Characteristics and distribution of the UK’s main rock types: 
sedimentary (chalk, carboniferous limestone, clay) igneous 
(granite), metamorphic (schists, slates). (2) 
4.2 A number of 
physical and 
human 
processes work 
together to 
create distinct 
UK landscapes 
a. Why distinctive upland and lowland landscapes result from the 
interaction of physical processes: weathering and 
climatological, post-glacial river and slope processes. (3) 
b. Why distinctive landscapes result from human activity 
(agriculture, forestry, settlement) over time. (4) 
Integrated skills:  
(1) Photograph analysis of common glacial, fluvial and coastal landscapes and features 
(2) Using simple geological cross-sections to show the relationship between geology and 
relief 
(3) Locating key physical features (uplands, lowland basins, rivers) on outline UK maps 
(4) Recognition of physical and human geography features on 1:25000 and 1:50000 OS 
maps. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
18 
Sub topic: Coastal change and conflict 
 
Enquiry question: Why is there a variety of distinctive coastal landscapes in the UK 
and what are the processes that shape them? 
Key idea Detailed content 
4.3  Distinctive 
coastal 
landscapes are 
influenced by 
geology 
interacting with 
physical 
processes (5) 
a. How geological structure (concordant/discordant, joints and 
faults) and rock type (hard/soft rock) influence erosional 
landforms (headlands and bays, caves, arches, cliffs, stacks, 
wave cut platforms) in the formation of coastal landscapes of 
erosion. (6) 
b. How UK climate (seasonality, storm frequency, prevailing 
winds), marine (destructive waves) and sub-aerial processes 
(mass movement, weathering) are important in coastal 
landscapes of erosion as well as the rate of coastal retreat. (7) 
c. How sediment transportation (longshore drift) and deposition 
processes (constructive waves) influence coastal landforms 
(spits, beaches and bars) on coastal landscapes of deposition. 
(8) 
4.4  Distinctive 
coastal 
landscapes are 
modified by 
human activity 
interacting with 
physical 
processes (5) 
a.  How human activities (development, agriculture, industry, 
coastal management) have direct or indirect effects on coastal 
landscapes. 
b. H ow the interaction of physical and human processes is 
causing change on one named coastal landscape
  including 
the significance of its location. 
Integrated skills:  
(5) Explore the kinds of questions capable of being investigated through fieldwork 
(6) Calculation of mean rates of erosion using a multi-year data set 
(7) Use of BGS Geology maps (paper or online) to link coastal form to geology 
(8) Recognition of coastal landforms on 1:25000 and 1:50000 OS maps. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
19 
 
Enquiry question: What are the challenges for coastal landscapes and communities 
and why is there conflict about how to manage them? 
Key idea Detailed content 
4.5  The interaction 
of human and 
physical 
processes 
present 
challenges along 
coastlines and 
there are a 
variety of 
management 
options (9) 
a.  Why there are increasing risks from coastal flooding 
(consequences of climate change on marine erosion and 
deposition, including an increased frequency of storms and 
rising sea level) and the threats to people and environment. 
(10) 
b. Why there are costs and benefits to, and conflicting views 
about, managing coastal processes by hard engineering 
(groynes and sea walls) and by soft engineering (beach 
replenishment, slope stabilisation) as well as more sustainable 
approaches (‘do nothing’ and ‘strategic realignment’ linked to 
Integrated Coastal Zone Management). (11) (12) 
Integrated skills:  
(9) Explore the kinds of questions that can be investigated through fieldwork 
(10) Use of 1:25000 and 1:50000 OS maps, and GIS, to investigate what is threatened by 
rapid erosion 
(11) Use of simple cost-benefit analysis to investigate coastal defence options 
(12) Use of 1:25000 and 1:50000 OS maps, and GIS, to investigate the impact of policy 
decisions. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
20 
Sub topic: River processes and pressures 
Enquiry question: Why is there a variety of river landscapes in the UK and what 
are the processes that shape them? 
Key idea Detailed content  
4.6  Distinctive river 
landscapes have 
different 
characteristics 
formed by 
interacting 
physical 
processes (13) 
a.  How river landscapes contrast between the upper courses, 
mid-courses and lower courses of rivers and why channel 
shape (width, depth), valley profile, gradient, discharge, 
velocity and sediment size and shape change along the course 
of a named UK river. (14) (15) 
b.   The interaction of erosion (hydraulic action, abrasion, attrition 
and solution), transport (traction, saltation, suspension and 
solution) and depositional processes in river landform 
formation (meanders, interlocking spurs, waterfalls, flood 
plains, levees and oxbow lakes, deltas). (16) 
c.  Influence of climate, geology and slope processes on river 
landscapes and sediment load and how storm hydrographs and 
lag-times can be explained by physical factors (geology, soil 
type, slope, drainage basin shape, antecedent conditions). 
4.7  River 
landscapes are 
influenced by 
human activity 
interacting with 
physical 
processes (13) 
a.  How human activities (urbanisation, land-use change, 
deforestation) change river landscapes which alter storm 
hydrographs. (17) 
b.  How the interaction of physical and human processes is 
causing river flooding on one named river
 , including the 
significance of its location. 
Integrated skills:  
(13) Explore the kinds of questions that can be investigated through fieldwork 
(14) Use 1:25000 and 1:50000 OS maps to determine valley cross-section from contour 
lines 
(15) Use of BGS Geology maps (paper or online) to link river-long profiles to geology 
(16) Recognition of river landforms on 1:25000 and 1:50000 OS maps 
(17) Drawing simple storm hydrographs using rainfall and discharge data. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
21 
 
Enquiry question: What are the challenges for river landscapes, people and 
property and how can they be managed? 
Key idea Detailed content 
4.8  Some rivers are 
more prone to 
flood than 
others and there 
is a variety of 
river 
management 
options (18) 
a.  Increasing risks from river flooding (increased frequency of 
storms and land-use change) and the threats to people and 
environment. 
b. Costs and benefits of managing flood risk by hard engineering 
(flood walls, embankments, flood barriers) and by soft 
engineering (flood plain retention, river restoration). (19) (20) 
Integrated skills:  
(18) Explore the kinds of questions that can be investigated through fieldwork 
(19) Use of simple cost-benefit analysis to investigate river management options 
(20) Use of 1:25000 and 1:50000 OS maps, and GIS, to investigate the impact of policy 
decisions. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
22 
Topic 5: The UK’s evolving human landscape 
 
Overview of the UK’s human landscape 
Enquiry question: Why are places and people changing in the UK? 
Key idea Detailed content 
5.1  Population, 
economic 
activities and 
settlements are 
key elements of 
the human 
landscape 
a.  D ifferences between urban core and rural (population density 
and age structure, economic activities and settlement) and 
how UK and EU government policies have attempted to reduce 
them (via enterprise zones, investment in transport 
infrastructure, regional development). (1) 
5.2  The UK 
economy and 
society is 
increasingly 
linked and 
shaped by the 
wider world 
a. Why national and international migration over the past 50 
years has altered the population geography of the UK 
(numbers, distribution, age structure) and how UK and EU 
immigration policy has contributed to increasing ethnic and 
cultural diversity. (2) (3) 
b.  Why the decline in primary and secondary sectors and the rise 
of the tertiary and quaternary sectors in urban and rural areas 
has altered economic and employment structure in contrasting 
regions of the UK. 
c. Why globalisation, free-trade polices (UK and EU) and 
privatisation has increased foreign direct investment (FDI) and 
the role of TNCs in the UK economy. (3) 
Integrated skills:  
(1) Use and interpretation of UK population pyramids form different time periods 
(2) Use of census data sets to understand changes to the UK’s population 
(3) Use of Eurostat to investigate FDI and immigration to the UK. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
23 
Case Study – Dynamic UK cities 
 
Enquiry question: How is ONE major* UK city changing? 
To be studied in the context of ONE major city in the UK. 
Key idea Detailed content 
5.3 The context of 
the city 
influences its 
functions and 
structure (1) 
a.  Significance of site, situation and connectivity of the city in a 
national (cultural and environmental), regional and global 
context. 
b. The city’s structure (Central Business District (CBD), inner city, 
suburbs, urban-rural fringe), in terms of its functions and 
variations in building age and density, land-use and 
environmental quality. 
5.4  The city 
changes 
through 
employment, 
services and the 
movement of 
people 
a. Causes of national and international migration that influence 
growth and character the different parts of the city (age 
structure, ethnicity, housing, services, culture). 
b. Reasons for different levels of inequality, in employment and 
services, education, health in the different parts of the city. (2) 
5.5  The changing 
city  creates 
challenges and 
opportunities 
a. How parts of the city have experienced decline (de-
industrialisation, de-population): de-centralisation (out-of-town 
shopping centres, retail and business parks), e-commerce, 
developments in transport. (3) 
b. How parts of the city have experienced economic and 
population growth (sprawl on the rural-urban fringe, financial 
and business services, investment by trans-national 
corporations, gentrification/studentification, culture and 
leisure). 
5.6  Ways of life in 
the city can be 
improved by 
different 
strategies  (1) 
a. How regeneration and rebranding of the city has positive and 
negative impacts on people (increased population, 
environmental quality and economic opportunities). (3) 
b. Strategies aimed at making urban living more sustainable and 
improving quality of life in the city (recycling, employment, 
green spaces, transport, affordable and energy-efficient 
housing). (5) 
5.7  The city is 
interdependent 
with rural areas, 
leading to 
changes in rural 
areas 
a. The city and accessible rural areas are interdependent (flows of 
goods, services and labour), which leads to economic, social 
and environmental costs and benefits for both.  
b. Why a rural area has experienced economic and social changes 
(counter-urbanisation, pressure on housing, increased leisure 
and recreation and population change) due to its links with the 
city. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
24 
 
Key idea Detailed content 
5.8  The changing 
rural area 
creates 
challenges and 
opportunities 
a.  The challenges of availability and affordability of housing, 
decline in primary employment, provision of healthcare and 
education and how they affect quality of life (IMD) for some 
rural groups (elderly and young people).  
b.  New income and economic opportunities are created by rural 
diversification (farm shops, accommodation, leisure activities) 
and tourism projects, but these may have environmental 
impacts. (3) 
Integrated skills 
(1) Explore the kinds of questions capable of being investigated through fieldwork. 
(2) Using census data sets to compare areas within inner cities. 
(3) Use of 1:25000 and 1:50000 OS maps to identify different land use types.  
(4) Using crime and IMD databases to investigate the extent of inner-city problems. 
*See Appendix 2: Definitions 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
25 
Topic 6: Geographical investigations 
The experience of fieldwork helps students to develop new geographical insight into two of 
the contrasting environments studied in Topics 4 and 5 of this component. 
Students must carry out fieldwork and research as part of their investigations. Fieldwork 
must be outside the classroom and school/college grounds. It does not have to take place in 
the UK necessarily but the examination for this Paper will always treat fieldwork within the 
context of the UK. 
Students must carry out two investigations in Topic 6 that link to Topics 4 and 5. One 
investigation in a physical environment either Investigating coastal change and conflict or 
Investigating river processes and pressures. And a second investigation in a human 
environment from either Investigating dynamic urban areas or Investigating changing rural 
areas. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
26 
Contexts for fieldwork  
Investigating coastal change and conflict 
 
Investigate the impact of coastal management on coastal processes and communities. 
Fieldwork and 
research  
General focus of fieldwork 
1.  Formulating 
enquiry 
questions 
Students must have an opportunity to develop understanding of 
the kinds of questions capable of being investigated through 
fieldwork in coastal environments. Students must have an 
opportunity to develop a question(s) based on their location and 
the task. 
2.  Selecting 
fieldwork 
methods  
Fieldwork data collection must include at least: 
● one quantitative fieldwork method to measure how coastal 
management has affected beach morphology and sediment 
characteristics 
● one qualitative fieldwork method to collect data on coastal 
management measures and their success. 
3.  Secondary data 
sources 
● A geology map e.g. Geology of Britain viewer 
● One other source. 
 
Investigating river processes and pressures 
 
Investigating how and why drainage basin and channel characteristics influence flood risk for 
people and property along a river in the UK. 
Fieldwork and 
research 
General focus of fieldwork 
1.  Formulating 
enquiry 
questions 
Students must have an opportunity to develop understanding of 
the kinds of questions capable of being investigated through 
fieldwork in river environments. Students must have an 
opportunity to develop a question(s) based on their location and 
the task. 
2.  Selecting 
fieldwork 
methods  
Fieldwork data collection must include at least: 
● one quantitative fieldwork method to measure changes in river 
channel characteristics 
● one qualitative fieldwork method to collect data on factors that 
might influence flood risk.
 
3.  Secondary data 
sources 
● A flood risk map e.g. Environmental Agency Flood Risk map 
● One other source chosen by the centre. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
27 
Investigating dynamic urban areas 
 
Investigate how and why quality of life varies within urban areas. 
Fieldwork and 
research 
General focus of fieldwork 
1.  Formulating 
enquiry 
questions 
Students must have an opportunity to develop understanding of 
the kinds of questions capable of being investigated through 
fieldwork in urban environments. Students must have an 
opportunity to develop a question(s) based on their location and 
the task. 
2.  Selecting 
fieldwork 
methods  
Fieldwork data collection must include at least: 
● one qualitative fieldwork method to collect data on the views 
and perceptions of quality of life  
● one quantitative fieldwork method to collect data on 
environmental quality.   
3.  Secondary data 
sources 
● Census data e.g. Office for National Statistics (ONS) 
Neighbourhood Statistics 
● One other source chosen by the centre. 
 
Investigating changing rural areas 
 
Investigating how and why deprivation varies within rural areas in the UK. 
Fieldwork and 
research 
General focus of fieldwork 
1.  Formulating 
enquiry 
questions 
Students must have an opportunity to develop understanding of 
the kinds of questions capable of being investigated through 
fieldwork in rural environments. Students must have an 
opportunity to develop a question(s) based on their location and 
the task. 
2.  Selecting 
fieldwork 
methods  
Fieldwork data collection must include at least: 
● a qualitative fieldwork method to collect data on the views and 
perceptions on quality of rural life 
● a quantitative fieldwork method to collect data on environmental 
quality. 
3.  Secondary data 
sources  
● Census data e.g. Office for National Statistics (ONS) 
Neighbourhood Statistics 
● One other source chosen by the centre. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
28 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2018. 
● The assessment is 1 hour and 45 minutes. 
● The assessment consists of four sections. 
● The assessment is out of 94 marks. 
● The paper will assess spelling, punctuation, grammar and use of specialist terminology 
which will contribute 4 marks towards the overall marks for this paper. 
● Each question is set in a context. 
● tudents must answer one from two optional questions (Investigating coastal and conflict 
or Investigating river processes and pressures) in Section C1. Students must then answer 
one from two optional questions (Investigating dynamic urban areas or Investigating 
changing rural areas) in Section C2. 
● The exam includes multiple-choice questions, short open, open response, calculations and 
8-mark extended writing questions.  
● Extended writing questions will assess students' ability to develop extended written 
arguments and to draw well-evidenced and informed conclusions about geographical 
questions and issues. 
● Calculators will be used in the examination. 
In the examination in any given year, students will be assessed on at least two of the six 
enquiry stages below, across both their investigations: 
 
Stage in 
the enquiry 
process 
Description 
1 Understanding of the kinds of question capable of being investigated through 
fieldwork and an understanding of the geographical enquiry processes 
appropriate to investigate them. 
2 Understanding of the range of techniques and methods used in fieldwork, 
including observation and different kinds of measurement. 
3 Processing and presenting fieldwork data in various ways, including maps, 
GIS, graphs and diagrams (hand-drawn and computer-generated). 
4 Analysing and explaining data collected in the field, using knowledge of 
relevant geographical case studies and theories. 
5 Drawing evidenced conclusions and summaries from fieldwork transcripts and 
data. 
6 Reflecting critically on fieldwork data, methods used, conclusions drawn and 
knowledge gained. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and mark scheme for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Geography A Sample Assessment Materials 
(SAMs) document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
29 
Authentication of fieldwork 
Centres must complete the Fieldwork Statement in Appendix 1. This form must be completed 
as evidence that students have undertaken appropriate fieldwork as part of their programme 
of study for this qualification. Pearson will publish the final deadline date for submission of 
this form through our website each year. Failure to return the Fieldwork Statement on time 
will constitute malpractice on the part of the Centre, see page 40. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
30 
Component 3: People and Environment Issues – 
Making Geographical Decisions 
Overview 
In this component, students will develop their knowledge and understanding of the processes 
and interactions between people and environment and investigate related issues at a variety 
of scales. 
This component has three sections: 
● Topic 7: People and the biosphere – an overview of the global distribution and 
characteristics of large-scale ecosystems, why the biosphere is important to human 
wellbeing and how humans use and modify it in order to obtain resources 
● Topic 8: Forests under threat – a detailed study of tropical rainforests and the taiga, 
looking at processes and interactions and issues related to their biodiversity and to their 
sustainable use and management 
● Topic 9: Consuming energy resources – a study of renewable and non-renewable energy, 
its supply and demand, access and energy security issues, its sustainable use and 
management 
● The content and concepts from topics 7, 8 and 9 should be taught through a range of 
contexts. 
Characteristics of the geographical decision-making process 
The examination will consist of a booklet of sources, provided in the examination, that 
exemplify a geographical issue drawing from Topics 7, 8 and 9 and underpinning conceptual 
knowledge from Components 1 and 2. It requires students to make effective use of, analyse 
and interpret the resource material provided in the examination. The final 12-mark question 
requires students to consider physical and human geography together, draw on information 
in the booklet of sources, and make reasoned justifications for proposed solutions in terms of 
their likely impact on both people and environment. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
31 
Topic 7: People and the biosphere 
 
Overview of global biomes and the importance of the biosphere 
Enquiry question: Why is the biosphere so important to human wellbeing and how 
do humans use and modify it to obtain resources? 
Key idea Detailed content  
7.1  The Earth is 
home to a 
number of very 
large 
ecosystems 
(biomes) the 
distribution of 
which is 
affected by 
climate and 
other factors 
a. H ow the global distribution and characteristics of major biomes 
(tropical, temperate and boreal forests, tropical and temperate 
grasslands, deserts and tundra) are influenced by climate 
(temperature, precipitation, sunshine hours). (1) (2) 
b. L ocal factors (altitude, rock and soil type, drainage) can alter 
the biome distribution locally and how the biotic (flora, fauna) 
and abiotic (soils, rock, water, atmosphere) components of 
biomes interact. 
7.2  The biosphere is 
a vital life-
support system 
for people as it 
provides both 
goods and 
services 
a. How the biosphere provides resources for Indigenous and other 
local people (food, medicine, building materials and fuel 
resources) but is also increasingly exploited commercially for 
energy, water and mineral resources. 
b. H ow the biosphere regulates the composition of the 
atmosphere, maintains soil health and regulates water within 
the hydrological cycle, providing globally important services. 
c The global and regional trends increasing demand for food, 
energy and water resources (population growth, rising 
affluence, urbanisation and industrialisation) and theories on 
the relationships between population and resources (Malthus 
and Boserup). (3) 
Integrated skills:  
(1) Comparing climate graphs for different biomes 
(2) Use of world maps to show the location of global biomes 
(3) Use and interpretation of line graphs showing the range of future global population 
projections, and population in relation to likely available resources. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
32 
Topic 8: Forests under threat 
 
Tropical rainforest and taiga (boreal) forest 
Enquiry question: What are the threats to forest biomes and how can they be 
reduced? 
Key idea Detailed content  
8.1  The structure, 
functioning and 
adaptations of 
the tropical 
rainforest* 
reflect the 
equatorial 
climate 
a. How biotic and abiotic characteristics are interdependent 
(climate, soil, water, plants, animals and humans), how plants 
(stratified layers, buttress roots, drip tips) and animals are 
adapted to the climate. 
b. Why tropical rainforests have a very high rate of nutrient 
cycling which, in turn, supports high levels of biodiversity and 
complex food webs. (1) 
8.2  The taiga shows 
different 
characteristics, 
reflecting the 
more extreme 
and highly 
seasonal climate 
a. How biotic and abiotic characteristics are interdependent 
(climate, soil, water, plants, animals and humans), how taiga 
plants (cone-shaped, needles, simple structure) and animals 
(migratory) are adapted to the climate.   
b. W hy the taiga has lower productivity, with less active nutrient 
cycling and much lower levels of biodiversity. (1) 
8.3  Tropical 
rainforests are 
threatened 
directly by 
deforestation 
and indirectly by 
climate change 
a. C auses of deforestation: commercial hardwood logging, 
subsistence and commercial agriculture, local demand for fuel 
wood and how demand for biofuels, mineral resources and 
electricity (HEP) contribute to deforestation. 
b. W hy climate change is an indirect threat to the health of 
tropical rainforests (ecosystem stress, drought). (2) 
8.4  The taiga is 
increasingly 
threatened by 
commercial 
development 
a. D irect threats from logging for softwood, pulp and paper 
production and indirect threats resulting from the exploitation 
of minerals, fossil fuels and HEP potential. 
b. H ow acid precipitation, forest fires, pests and diseases and 
forest fires contribute to a loss of biodiversity. (2) 
8.5  Conservation 
and sustainable 
management of 
tropical rain 
forests is vital if 
goods and 
services are not 
to be lost for 
future 
generations 
a. A dvantages and disadvantages of global actions (CITES, REDD) 
designed to protect tropical rainforest species and areas and 
why deforestation rates are rising in some areas but falling in 
others. 
b. T he challenge of achieving sustainable forest management and 
why alternative livelihoods (ecotourism, sustainable farming) 
might better protect the remaining tropical rainforest. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
33 
 
Key idea Detailed content  
8.6  The taiga 
wilderness areas 
need to be 
protected from 
over-
exploitation 
a. Challenges of creating and maintaining protected wilderness 
areas, national parks and sustainable forestry in the taiga. 
b. Reasons for conflicting views on protecting or exploiting forest 
and natural resources in the taiga. 
Integrated skills:  
(1) Use an interpretation of nutrient cycle diagrams and food webs diagrams 
(2) Use of GIS to identify the pattern of forest loss. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
34 
Topic 9: Consuming energy resources 
 
Enquiry question: How can the growing demand for energy by met without serious 
environmental consequences? 
Key idea Detailed content 
9.1  Energy 
resources can 
be classified in 
different ways 
and their 
extraction and 
use has 
environmental 
consequences 
a. H ow energy resources can be classified as non-renewable 
(finite stocks of fossil fuel coal, oil and gas), renewable (flows 
of solar, wind, HEP) and recyclable (nuclear, biofuels). 
b. H ow mining and drilling can have environmental impacts 
(landscape scarring, oil spills, carbon emissions, removal of 
forests) and the landscape impacts of renewable energy (HEP 
flooding, land use for wind turbines and solar panels). 
9.2  Access to 
energy 
resources is not 
evenly 
distributed 
which has 
implications for 
people 
a. H ow access to energy resources is affected by access to 
technology and physical resources (geology, accessibility, 
climate and landscape influences on renewable potential). (1) 
b. T he global pattern of energy use per capita and the causes of 
variations (levels of economic development, reliance of 
traditional fuel sources, demand from different economic 
sectors). 
9.3  The global 
demand for oil 
is increasing, 
but supplies are 
unevenly 
available 
a. H ow oil reserves and production are unevenly distributed and 
why oil consumption is growing (rising per capita GDP, rapid 
industrialisation in emerging economies). 
b. H ow oil supply and oil prices are affected by changing 
international relations (conflicts, diplomatic relations) and 
economic factors (periods of recession versus boom, over or 
under supply). (2) 
Integrated skills 
(1) Use and interpretation of world maps showing the distribution of energy resources 
(2) Use of oil price and oil production data to graph trends over time. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
35 
 
Key idea Detailed content  
9.4  The world’s 
continuing 
reliance of fossil 
fuels increases 
pressure to 
exploit new 
areas 
a. E conomic benefits and costs of developing new conventional oil 
and gas sources in ecologically-sensitive and isolated areas. 
b. E nvironmental costs (negative impacts on water quality and 
ecosystems) of developing new unconventional oil and gas 
sources (tar sands, shale gas) in ecologically-sensitive and 
isolated areas. 
9.5  Reducing 
reliance on 
fossil fuels 
presents major 
technical 
challenges 
a. T he role of energy efficiency and energy conservation (in 
transport and the home) in reducing demand, helping finite 
energy supplies last longer and reducing carbon emissions. 
b. C osts and benefits of alternatives to fossil fuels (biofuels, wind, 
solar and HEP) and future technologies (hydrogen) aimed at 
reducing carbon footprints, improving energy security and 
diversifying the energy mix. 
9.6  Attitudes to 
energy and 
environmental 
issues are 
changing 
a. H ow different groups (consumers, TNCs, governments, climate 
scientists and environmental groups) have contrasting views 
about energy futures (business as usual versus sustainable). 
b. H ow, in some developed countries, rising affluence, 
environmental concerns and education are changing attitudes 
to unsustainable energy consumption and reducing carbon 
footprints. (3) 
Integrated skills:  
(3) Calculation of carbon and ecological footprints. 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2018. 
● The assessment is 1 hour and 30 minutes. 
● The assessment is out of 64 marks. 
● The paper will assess spelling, punctuation, grammar and use of specialist terminology 
which will contribute 4 marks towards the overall marks for this paper. 
● Each section explores an aspect of a geographical issue leading to the final decision 
making question related to the issue. 
● The exam includes multiple-choice question and will include short open, open response 
and extended writing questions. Section C will include 6-mark extended writing questions 
and Section D will offer a choice of one from three decisions assessed by a 12-mark 
extended writing question. 
● Extended writing questions will assess students’ ability to develop extended written 
arguments and to draw well-evidenced and informed conclusions about geographical 
questions and issues. 
● Calculators will be used in the examination. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and mark scheme for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Geography B Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
36 
Geographical skills 
Students are required to develop a range of geographical skills throughout their course of 
study. These skills may be assessed across any of the examined components. The full list of 
geographical skills is given below. Some geographical skills are specific to particular subject 
content; these are indicated in the ‘integrated skills’ sections within the topics throughout the 
specification. 
Atlas and map skills: 
● recognise and describe distributions and patterns of both human and physical features at 
a range of scales using a variety of maps and atlases 
● draw, label, annotate, understand and interpret sketch maps 
● recognise and describe patterns of vegetation, land use and communications 
infrastructure, as well as other patterns of human and physical landscapes 
● describe and identify the site, situation and shape of settlements. 
Graphical skills: 
● label and annotate and interpret different diagrams, maps, graphs, sketches and 
photographs 
● use and interpret aerial, oblique, ground and satellite photographs from a range of 
different landscapes 
● use maps in association with photographs and sketches and understand links to directions. 
Data and information research skills: 
● use online census sources to obtain population and local geo-demographic information. 
Investigative skills: 
● identify questions or issues for investigation, develop a hypothesis and/or key questions 
● consider appropriate sampling procedures (systematic vs random vs stratified) and sample 
size 
● consider health and safety and undertake risk assessment 
● select data collection methods and equipment to ensure accuracy and reliability, develop 
recording sheets for measurements and observation 
● use of ICT to manage, collate, process and present information, use of hand-drawn 
graphical skills to present information in a suitable way 
● write descriptively, analytically and critically about findings 
● develop extended written arguments, drawing well evidenced and informed conclusions 
about geographical questions and issues. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
37 
Mathematics and Statistics Skills 
These skills are taken from the document Geography GCSE subject content published by the 
Department for Education (DfE) April 2014. These skills may be assessed across any of the 
examined components. Some mathematics and statistics skills are specific to particular 
subject content; these are indicated in the ‘integrated skills’ sections within the topics 
throughout the specification. 
Cartographic skills: 
● use and understand gradient, contour and spot height on OS maps and other isoline maps  
● interpret cross sections and transects  
● use and understand coordinates, scale and distance 
● describe and interpret geo-spatial data presented in a GIS framework. 
Graphical skills: 
● select and construct appropriate graphs and charts to present data, using appropriate 
scales and including bar charts, pie charts, pictograms, line charts, histograms with equal 
class intervals 
● interpret and extract information from different types of graphs and charts including any 
of the above and others relevant to the topic  
● interpret population pyramids, choropleth maps and flow-line maps.  
Numerical skills: 
● demonstrate an understanding of number, area and scale and the quantitative 
relationships between units  
● design fieldwork data collection sheets and collect data with an understanding of accuracy, 
sample size and procedures, control groups and reliability  
● understand and correctly use proportion and ratio, magnitude and frequency  
● draw informed conclusions from numerical data.  
Statistical skills: 
● use appropriate measures of central tendency, spread and cumulative frequency (median, 
mean, range, quartiles and inter-quartile range, mode and modal class)  
● calculate percentage increase or decrease and understand the use of percentiles 
● describe relationships in bivariate data: sketch trend lines through scatter plots; draw 
estimated lines of best fit; make predictions; interpolate and extrapolate trends 
● be able to identify weaknesses in selective statistical presentation of data. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
38 
Assessment Objectives 
 
Students must: % in GCSE 
AO1 Demonstrate knowledge of locations, places, processes, 
environments and different scales 
15 
AO2 Demonstrate geographical understanding of: 
● concepts and how they are used in relation to places, 
environments and processes 
● the inter-relationships between places, environments and 
processes 
25 
AO3 Apply knowledge and understanding to interpret, analyse 
and evaluate geographical information and issues and to 
make judgements 
35 
(10% applied to 
fieldwork contexts) 
AO4 Select, adapt and use a variety of skills and techniques to 
investigate questions and issues and communicate findings 
25 
(5% used to 
respond to 
fieldwork data and 
contexts) 
Total 100% 
 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
Paper 
Assessment Objectives Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives AO1 % AO2 % AO3 % AO4 % 
Paper 1: Global Geographical 
Issues 
7.5 13.7 8.7 7.5 37.5% 
Paper 2: UK Geographical 
Issues 
5 7.5 14.2 10.8 37.5% 
Paper 3: People and 
Environmental Issues – 
Making Geographical 
Decisions 
2.5 3.8 12.1 6.7 25% 
Total for GCSE 15% 25% 35% 25% 100% 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
39 
3 Administration and general information 
Entries 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for this qualification can be found in 
our UK Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations officers and is 
available on our website: qualifications.pearson.com 
Forbidden combinations and discount code 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more than one GCSE, or other Level 2 
qualifications with the same discount code, will have only the grade for their 'first entry' 
counted for the purpose of the School and College Performance Tables (please see 
Appendix 6: Codes). For further information about what constitutes 'first entry' and full 
details of how this policy is applied, please refer to the DfE website: www.education.gov.uk 
Students should be advised that, if they take two GCSEs with the same discount code, 
schools and colleges to which they wish to progress are very likely to take the view that they 
have achieved only one of the two GCSEs. The same view may be taken if students take two 
GCSE or other Level 2 qualifications that have different discount codes but which have 
significant overlap of content. Students or their advisers who have any doubts about their 
subject combinations should check with the institution to which they wish to progress before 
embarking on their programmes. 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, 
special consideration and malpractice 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality policy requires all students to 
have equal opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our qualifications 
to be awarded in a way that is fair to every student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the Equality Act 2010) are not, 
when they are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in comparison to 
students who do not share that characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification and that 
this achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their peers. 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with special 
educational needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to: 
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the assessment. 
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an individual 
student with a disability, without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding bodies comply with the duty under the 
Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students will 
then know what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for assessment. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
40 
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable adjustments 
where a person with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in undertaking an 
assessment. The awarding organisation is required to take reasonable steps to overcome 
that disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be unique to that individual and 
therefore might not be in the list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of factors, 
which will include: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding 
organisation, timeframes or affects the security or integrity of the assessment. This is 
because the adjustment is not ‘reasonable’. 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student's mark or grade to 
reflect temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the 
examination/assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a material 
effect on a candidate’s ability to take an assessment or demonstrate their level of attainment 
in an assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to apply for access arrangements 
and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special 
consideration, please refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk. 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that compromises or seeks to 
compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in examinations must be reported to Pearson using a JCQ M1 Form 
(available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form should be emailed to 
candidatemalpractice@pearson.com. Please provide as much information and supporting 
documentation as possible. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies 
with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice constitutes staff or centre malpractice. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
41 
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and maladministration of 
our qualifications. As with candidate malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is any act that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the 
integrity of the qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported 
immediately, before any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson on  
a JCQ M2(a) Form (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form, 
supporting documentation and as much information as possible can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions 
lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More-detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the document 
JCQ General and Vocational Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice. 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to comply with the requirements of 
Ofqual's General Conditions of Recognition. 
This GCSE qualification will be graded and certificated on a nine-grade scale from 9 to 1 
using the total subject mark where 9 is the highest grade. Individual papers are not graded. 
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum judged by Pearson to be of 
sufficient standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U result. 
The first certification opportunity for this qualification will be 2018. 
Student recruitment and progression 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
This qualification has been built to progress from the geographical knowledge, understanding 
and skills in the geography programmes of study for the National Curriculum in England. 
Although the qualification does not directly assess geographical knowledge, understanding 
and skills of the content geography programmes of study for the National Curriculum in 
England it assumes that this geographical knowledge, understanding and skills have been 
developed lower down the key stages. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
42 
Progression 
Students can progress from this qualification to a number of different qualifications at 
Level 3, including GCE in Geography, Geology, Environmental Sciences, Travel and Tourism, 
and Leisure and Recreation. 
With this rounded qualification that helps them to understand the world around them 
students can, usually with further training, progress to employment. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
43 
 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Fieldwork Statement 44 
Appendix 2: Definitions 45 
Appendix 3: Exam command word definitions 46 
Appendix 4: The context for the development of this qualification 47 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 49 
Appendix 6: Codes 50 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
44 
 
Appendix 1: Fieldwork Statement 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography 1GA0/1GB0 
Centre name:  
 
 
Centre number:  
All candidates must carry out fieldwork, outside of the classroom and school grounds, on at 
least two occasions.   
Details of fieldwork 
Fieldwork occasion 1 
Specification topic links: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fieldwork date:____________________ 
 
Location:___________________________ 
 
Number of students:___________________ 
Key issues/questions investigated: 
 
 
 
 
Fieldwork occasion 2 
Specification topic links: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fieldwork date:____________________ 
 
Location:___________________________ 
 
Number of students:___________________ 
Key issues/questions investigated: 
 
Head teacher declaration 
I confirm that the fieldwork occasions recorded above have been carried out in accordance 
with Pearson Edexcel GCSE Geography fieldwork requirements and that all candidates 
entered through our centre have had the opportunity to attend. 
 
Head teacher name:  
Head teacher signature:  Date:  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
45 
Appendix 2: Definitions 
Terms used in this specification and their definition. 
Term Definition 
Developing country Country with low human development (LHD), a poor country 
Emerging country Country with high and medium human development (HMHD), 
recently emerging country 
Developed country Country with very high human development (VHHD) 
Megacity Urban area with a population of over 10 million 
Major city City with a population of at least 200,000 inhabitants 
Human Development is measured by the Human Development Index (HDI). For further 
information on which countries are categorised as Low, Medium, High and Very High Human 
Development by HDI please go to this website: http://hdr.undp.org or email 
TeachingGeography@pearson.com for further information on the definitions used within this 
document. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
46 
Appendix 3: Exam command word 
definitions 
This table lists the command words that could be used in the examinations for this 
qualification and their definitions. 
Command Word Definition 
Identify/State/Name Recall or select one or more pieces of information. 
Define State the meaning of a term. 
Calculate Produce a numerical answer, showing relevant working. 
Draw/plot Create a graphical representation of geographical information. 
Label Add a label/labels to a given resource, graphic or image. 
Describe Give an account of the main characteristics of something or the 
steps in a process. Statements in the response should be developed 
but do not need to include a justification or reason. 
Compare Find the similarities and differences of two elements given in a 
question. Each response must relate to both elements, and must 
include a statement of their similarity/difference. 
Explain Provide a reasoned explanation of how or why something occurs. An 
explanation requires a justification/exemplification of a point. Some 
questions will require the use of annotated diagrams to support 
explanation. 
Suggest Apply understanding to provide a reasoned explanation of how or 
why something may occur. A suggested explanation requires a 
justification/exemplification of a point. 
Assess Use evidence to determine the relative significance of something. 
Give consideration to all factors and identify which are the most 
important. 
Evaluate Measure the value or success of something and ultimately provide a 
substantiated judgement/conclusion. Review information and then 
bring it together to form a conclusion, drawing on evidence such as 
strengths, weaknesses, alternatives and relevant data. 
Select...and justify Select one option from those given and justify the choice, drawing 
across the resources provided and knowledge/understanding. The 
justification should include consideration of the alternative options in 
order to provide a supported argument in favour of the chosen 
option. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
47 
Appendix 4: The context for the 
development of this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] and our 
ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
● reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with those 
taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
● consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment to ensure this qualification is 
suitable for a UK context 
● reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in their 
documents GCSE (9 to 1) Qualification Level Conditions and Requirements and GCSE Subject 
Level Conditions and Requirements for Geography, published in April 2014. 
 
 
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification Principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
● demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning and 
measuring higher-order skills 
● rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and valid 
assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in end users of the knowledge, skills 
and competencies of certified students 
● inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students develop at 
different rates and have different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
● empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills, see Appendix 5. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
48 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
 
“ The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important change to the 
education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications will assist them in 
helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an ‘Expert 
Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or because of 
our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the world as diverse as 
Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification development 
process that has included: 
● Extensive international comparability of subject content against the highest-performing 
jurisdictions in the world 
● Benchmarking assessments against UK and overseas providers to ensure that they are at 
the right level of demand 
● Establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-specific 
expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
● Subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future oriented. The 
design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, meaning learner outcomes 
have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a learner’s 
success in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident that we have 
supported the development of qualifications that are outstanding for their coherence, 
thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as representing world-class best 
practice. 
’’    
  
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Sing Kong Lee 
Director, National Institute of Education, 
Singapore 
  
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
  
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
49 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently flagged the 
need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable them to respond with 
confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines skills, or 
competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that can be learned and 
that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform an activity or task and can be 
built upon and extended through learning.’ [1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected and 
evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this process, we 
identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the most evidence-based and 
robust skills framework. We adapted the framework slightly to include the Program for 
International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT Literacy and Collaborative Problem Solving 
(CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves: [2]  
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve general 
cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and communicate. [3]  
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, oral communication, written communication, assertive 
communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, service 
orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared understanding, 
taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team organisation. 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work stress, 
adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, and physical 
adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual teams, 
work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and able to acquire 
new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher education, 
as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the teaching and learning of 
this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning materials, developed with 
stakeholders, to support our qualifications.  
 
[1]  OECD (2012), Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (2012):  
http://skills.oecd.org/documents/OECDSkillsStrategyFINALENG.pdf 
[2]  Koenig, J. A. (2011) Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop, National Research Council 
[3]  PISA (2011) The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy, PISA 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography B 
Specification – Issue 4 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
50 
Appendix 6: Codes 
 
Type of code Use of code Code 
Discount codes Every qualification is assigned to a 
discount code indicating the subject area 
to which it belongs. This code may 
change. See our website 
(qualifications.pearson.com) for details of 
any changes. 
RF4 
 
National 
Qualifications 
Framework (NQF) 
codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an 
Ofqual National Qualifications Framework 
(NQF) code. 
The NQF code is known as a Qualification 
Number (QN). This is the code that 
features in the DfE Section 96 and on the 
LARA as being eligible for 16–18 and  
19+ funding, and is to be used for all 
qualification funding purposes. The QN will 
appear on students’ final certification 
documentation. 
The QN for this 
qualification is: 
601/8135/7 
 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to 
enter students for a qualification. Centres 
will need to use the entry codes only when 
claiming students’ qualifications. 
GCSE – 1GB0 
Paper codes These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be 
entered for individual components. 
Paper 1: 1GB0/01 
Paper 2: 1GB0/02 
Paper 3: 1GB0/03 
 
 
 
DB280824 9781446931677_GCSE2016_L12_GEOGRAPHY_B_ISSUE3.DOC.1–58/0 
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office: 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121