This dra/f_t   qualiﬁ  cation has not yet been accredited by Ofqual. It is published to enable teachers to have early sight of our 
proposed approach to Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9 - 1) in Music (1MU0). Further changes may be required 
and no assurance can be given at this time that the proposed qualiﬁ  cation will be made available in its current form, or 
that it will be accredited in time for ﬁ  rst teaching in September 2016 and ﬁ  rst award in 2018.
Speciﬁ  cation
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9 - 1) in Religious Studies B (1RB0)
First teaching from September 2016
First certiﬁ  cation from 2018 Issue 2
GCSE (9-1)
Religious Studies B
Beliefs in Action
 
 
About Pearson 
Pearson is the world's leading learning company operating in countries around the world. We 
provide content, assessment and digital services to learners, educational institutions, 
employers, governments and other partners globally. We are committed to helping equip 
learners with the skills they need to enhance their employability prospects and to succeed in 
the changing world of work. We believe that wherever learning flourishes, so do people.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This specification is Issue 2. Key changes are summarised on the next page. We will inform 
centres of any changes to this issue. The latest issue can be found on our website. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References to third party material made in this specification are made in good faith. Pearson 
does not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may 
be subject to change, or any opinions expressed therein. (Material may include textbooks, 
journals, magazines and other publications and websites.) 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
ISBN 978 1 446 92784 7
 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2024 
 
 
Summary of changes to GCSE Religious Studies B 
specification Issue 2 
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this issue 1 Page 
numbers 
Information about the content and assessment has been updated to improve 
clarity. 
4–6 
Topic references (e.g. 1A, 1B, etc) and the names of the Sections (e.g. Beliefs 
and Teachings) have been added throughout the taught content at the top of 
each page. 
8–117 
Minor amendments have been made to correct errors and also improve 
consistency (e.g. capitalisation, spelling and punctuation). More detail on 
these updates is available separately. 
8–117 
Changes have been made to the Malpractice information to reflect procedural 
changes since 2016 
122 
The definition of ‘evaluate’ in the taxonomy has been updated to make it 
clearer and also to align better with the updated mark schemes 
130 
 
If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, please contact us via 
our website at: qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/contact-us.html. 
 
 
 
 
Contents 
1 Introduction 2 
Why choose Edexcel GCSE Religious Studies B? 2 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this qualification 3 
Qualification at a glance 4 
2 Subject content 7 
Area of Study 1: Religion and Ethics 8 
Area of Study 2: Religion, Peace and Conflict 45 
Area of Study 3: Religion, Philosophy and Social Justice 82 
Assessment Objectives 119 
3 Administration and general information 120 
Entries 120 
Student recruitment and progression 122 
Appendix 1: The context for the development of this 
qualification 127 
Appendix 2: Transferable skills 129 
Appendix 3: Command Words 130 
Appendix 4: Codes 131 
 
 

 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
2 
1 Introduction 
Why choose Edexcel GCSE Religious Studies B? 
We have listened to feedback from all parts of the religious studies community, including 
higher education. We have used this opportunity of curriculum change to redesign 
qualifications to reflect the demands of a truly modern and evolving religious studies 
environment. These new qualifications will allow students to apply a wide range of concepts 
allowing them to confidently interpret, contextualise and analyse the expressions of religions 
and world views they encounter. This is one of two GCSE Religious Studies qualifications 
offered.  
A specification to suit everyone – With our suite of two full course GCSE Religious Studies 
specifications you can pick the one that meets the needs of all your students. 
Familiar topics – Our areas of study focus on the key questions such as Ethics, Philosophy, 
Peace and Conflict, which include topics such as marriage and the family, crime and 
punishment, and matters of life and death. 
Flexible structure – The specification content is split into three Areas of Study, allowing 
you to pick the two that are best suited to you and your students’ needs and interests. 
Choice of religion – Each area of study is available in all seven religions, allowing you to 
choose the right combination to keep students engaged and motivated through the course. 
Develops understanding and appreciation – Students will develop an appreciation of 
religious thought and its contribution to individuals, communities and societies.  
Helps develop a holistic understanding of religion – Students will develop knowledge 
and understanding of two religions, enabling them to understand and articulate their own 
and others’ beliefs, values and commitments. 
Develops transferable skills for progression – Students will develop analytical and 
critical thinking skills to enable them to present a wide range of well-informed and 
reasonable arguments, aiding in progression to AS and A level study. 
Accessible assessment – Our exam papers have been designed with a straightforward 
structure and consistent use of command words in questions. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
3 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this 
qualification 
Planning 
● Our Getting Started guide gives you an overview of the new GCSE level qualification to 
help you to get to grips with the changes to content and assessment and to help you 
understand what these changes mean for you and your students. 
● We will give you an editable course planner and scheme of work that you can adapt to 
suit your department.  
● Our mapping documents highlight key differences between the new and current GCSE 
Religious Studies qualifications. 
Teaching and learning  
There will be lots of free teaching and learning support to help you deliver the new 
qualifications, including: 
● guidance documents 
● exemplars 
● a student guide 
● materials for your options evenings.  
Preparing for exams 
We will also provide a range of resources to help you prepare your students for the 
assessments, including marked exemplars of student work with examiner commentaries.  
ResultsPlus 
ResultsPlus provides the most detailed analysis available of your students’ exam 
performance. It can help you identify the topics and skills where further learning would 
benefit your students.  
Get help and support 
Our support line, Ask the Expert and online community will ensure you receive help and 
guidance from us and that you can share ideas and information with other teachers. You can 
sign up to receive e-newsletters from the subject advisor service to keep up to date with 
qualification updates and product and service news.  
The Religious Studies Team can be contacted by email: 
TeachingReligiousStudies@pearson.com  
Learn more at qualifications.pearson.com 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
4 
Qualification at a glance 
Content and assessment overview 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Religious Studies B consists of three 
Areas of Study from which students study two, which are then assessed through two 
externally set examination papers. 
Schools must select a different religion for their two Areas of Study. Schools who select 
Catholic Christianity for an Area of Study are not permitted to select Christianity for their 
second Area of Study and vice versa.  
Students must complete all assessment in May/June in any single year. 
 
Paper 1: Area of Study 1 – Religion and Ethics (*Paper code: 1RB0/1A–1G)  
Written examination: 1 hour and 45 minutes 
50% of the qualification 
102 marks 
Content overview 
One religion must be studied from a choice of seven: 
1A Catholic Christianity 
1B Christianity 
1C Islam. 
1D Buddhism 
1E Hinduism 
1F Judaism 
1G Sikhism. 
Students must study all four content sections for the chosen religion.  
● Beliefs 
● Marriage and the Family  
● Living the Religious Life 
● Matters of Life and Death 
Assessment overview 
● Students must answer all questions for the chosen religion. 
● The assessment consists of four questions. Each question is numbered (a) to (d). 
● The paper includes short open, open response and extended writing questions. 
● 5% of the marks will be for spelling, punctuation and grammar and use of specialist 
terminology (SPaG). 
 
*See Appendix 4: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to this 
qualification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
5 
 
Paper 2: Area of Study 2 – Religion, Peace and Conflict (*Paper code: 1RB0/ 
2A–2G)  
Written examination: 1 hour and 45 minutes 
50% of the qualification 
102 marks 
Content overview 
One religion must be studied from a choice of seven: 
2A Catholic Christianity 
2B Christianity 
2C Islam. 
2D Buddhism 
2E Hinduism 
2F Judaism 
2G Sikhism. 
Students must study all four content sections for the chosen religion. 
● Beliefs 
● Crime and Punishment 
● Living the Religious Life  
● Peace and Conflict 
Assessment Overview 
● Students must answer all questions for the chosen religion. 
● The assessment consists of four questions. Each question is numbered (a) to (d). 
● The paper includes short open, open response and extended writing questions. 
● 5% of the marks will be for spelling, punctuation and grammar and use of specialist 
terminology (SPaG). 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
6 
 
Paper 3: Area of Study 3 – Religion, Philosophy and Social Justice (*Paper code: 
1RB0/3A–3G)  
Written examination: 1 hour and 45 minutes 
50% of the qualification 
102 marks 
One religion must be studied from a choice of seven: 
3A Catholic Christianity 
3B Christianity 
3C Islam. 
3D Buddhism 
3E Hinduism 
3F Judaism 
3G Sikhism. 
Content overview 
Students must study all four content sections based upon their chosen religion.  
● Beliefs 
● Philosophy of Religion 
● Living the Religious Life  
● Equality  
Assessment Overview 
● Students must answer all questions for the chosen religion. 
● The assessment consists of four questions. Each question is numbered (a) to (d). 
● The paper includes short open, open response and extended writing questions. 
● 5% of the marks will be for spelling, punctuation and grammar and use of specialist 
terminology (SPaG). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
7 
2 Subject content 
Qualification aims and objectives 
The aims and objectives of this qualification are to enable students to:  
● develop their knowledge and understanding of religions and non-religious beliefs, such as 
atheism and humanism 
● develop their knowledge and understanding of religious beliefs, teachings, and sources of 
wisdom and authority, including through their reading of key religious texts, other texts, 
and scriptures of the religions they are studying 
● develop their ability to construct well-argued, well-informed, balanced and structured 
written arguments, demonstrating their depth and breadth of understanding of the subject 
● engage with questions of belief, value, meaning, purpose, truth, and their influence on 
human life 
● reflect on and develop their own values, beliefs and attitudes in the light of what they 
have learnt and will contribute to their preparation for adult life in a pluralistic society and 
global community 
● demonstrate knowledge and understanding of two religions 
● demonstrate knowledge and understanding of key sources of wisdom and authority 
including scripture and/or sacred texts, where appropriate, which support contemporary 
religious faith 
● understand the influence of religion on individuals, communities and societies 
● understand significant common and divergent views between and/or within religions and 
beliefs 
● apply knowledge and understanding in order to analyse questions related to religious 
beliefs and values 
● construct well-informed and balanced arguments on matters concerned with religious 
beliefs and values. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
8 
Area of Study 1: Religion and Ethics 
The focus of this area of study is on Religion and Ethics; this is one of three areas of study, 
of which students must complete two. 
For this area of study, students must study all four content sections in relation to one 
religion: 
1 Beliefs  
2 Marriage and the Family 
3 Living the Religious Life 
4 Matters of Life and Death 
Students must study a different religion in their second area of study. Students who study 
one area of study from the perspective of Catholic Christianity are prohibited from studying 
Christianity in their second area of study. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
9 
Area of Study 1A – Catholic Christianity 
Overview 
This area of study comprises a study in depth of Catholic Christianity as a lived religion 
within the United Kingdom and throughout the world, and its beliefs and teachings on life, 
specifically within families, and with regard to matters of life and death. 
There are four sections: Catholic Beliefs, Marriage and the Family, Living the Catholic Life 
and Matters of Life and Death. 
The significance and importance of the various beliefs, issues and practices to Catholics 
today should be explored throughout the sections. This should include reference to how the 
Bible informs a Catholic’s understanding of the topics and how approaches to the issues are 
underpinned by philosophical arguments and ethical theory as applicable.  
Students will be expected to study Catholic Christianity within the context of the wider British 
society, the religious traditions of which are, in the main, Christian. Students should compare 
and contrast the areas of belief and practice within Catholic Christianity with wider Christian 
perspectives as outlined in the content below. 
● Beliefs about the afterlife and their significance (1.8)* 
● The practice and significance of worship (3.2)* 
Students should recognise that Catholic Christianity is one of the many religions and world 
views in Great Britain, which include Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism, Sikhism, and 
non-religious views such as Humanism and atheism. This knowledge may be applied 
throughout the assessment of the specified content. 
Students should compare and contrast the areas of ethics and/or philosophy within 
Christianity with wider Christian perspectives and non-religious views as outlined in the 
content below. 
Students should also recognise that within Catholic Christianity there may be more than one 
perspective in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed. Common and 
divergent views within the wider Christian tradition in the way beliefs and teachings are 
understood and expressed should be included throughout, including reference to Orthodox, 
Protestant and other Christian traditions.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
10 
1A Catholic Christianity  
Section 1: Catholic Beliefs 
Students should have an understanding of: 
1.1 The Trinity: the nature and significance of the Trinity as expressed in the Nicene 
Creed; the nature and significance of the oneness of God; the nature and 
significance of each of the Persons individually: God as the Father, Son and Holy 
Spirit; how this is reflected in worship and belief in the life of a Catholic today. 
1.2 Biblical understandings of God as a Trinity of Persons: the nature and significance 
of God as a Trinity of Persons, including reference to the baptism of Jesus 
(Matthew 3:13–17); the historical development of the doctrine of the Trinity, 
including reference to the First Council of Nicaea and the First Council of 
Constantinople. 
1.3 Creation: the nature and significance of the biblical account of Creation, including 
Genesis 1–3; and how it may be understood in divergent ways in Christianity, 
including reference to literal and metaphorical interpretations; the significance of 
the Creation account for Catholics in understanding the nature and characteristics 
of God, especially as Creator, benevolent, omnipotent and eternal. 
1.4 The significance of the Creation account in understanding the nature of humanity: 
the nature and significance of the nature of humanity being created in the image of 
God, including reference to Genesis 1–3 and divergent understandings of 
humanity’s relationship with Creation (dominion and stewardship); the implications 
of these beliefs for Catholics today. 
1.5 The Incarnation: Jesus as incarnate Son, the divine Word, both fully God and fully 
human; the scriptural origins of this belief, including John 1:1–18 and its 
importance for Catholics today. 
1.6 The events in the Paschal Mystery: Catholic teachings about the life, death, 
resurrection and ascension of Jesus, including reference to Luke 24; the 
redemptive efficacy of these events and their significance for Catholics today. 
1.7 The significance of the life, death, resurrection and ascension of Jesus for Catholic 
beliefs about salvation and grace, including John 3:10–21 and Acts 4:8–12; the 
implications and significance of these events for Catholic practice today.  
1.8* Catholic beliefs about eschatology: life after death; the nature of resurrection, 
judgement, heaven, hell and purgatory, including reference to John 11:17–27  
and 2 Corinthians 5:1–10; divergent Christian beliefs about life after death, with 
reference to purgatory and the nature of resurrection; why belief in life after death 
is important for Catholics today. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
11 
1A Catholic Christianity  
Section 2: Marriage and the Family 
Students should have an understanding of: 
2.1 The importance and purpose of marriage for Catholics: the significance of marriage 
in Catholic life; Catholic teachings about marriage, including Not Just Good, But 
Beautiful by Pope Francis; divergent Christian, non-religious (including atheist and 
Humanist) attitudes to the importance of marriage in society, including the sanctity 
of marriage, a lack of importance, cohabitation and the Catholic responses to these 
attitudes. 
2.2 Catholic teaching about the importance of sexual relationships: Catholic teaching 
about sexual relationships as marital, unitive and procreative, including Catechism 
of the Catholic Church 2360–2365; Catholic teaching on sexual relationships 
outside of marriage and same-sex sexual relationships; divergent Christian,  
non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) attitudes to sexual relationships, 
including the acceptance of sexual relationships outside marriage and same-sex 
sexual relationships and Catholic responses to them. 
2.3 Catholic teaching about the purpose and importance of the family: procreation; 
security and education of children; Catholic responses to the different types of 
family within 21st-century society (nuclear, single parent, same-sex parents, 
extended and blended families), including Familiaris Consortio 36–85. 
2.4 Support for the family in the local Catholic parish: how and why the local parish 
tries to support families, including through family worship, the sacraments, classes 
for parents, groups for children and counselling, with reference to the Family Group 
Movement and Catechism of the Catholic Church 2226; the importance of the 
support of the local parish for Catholic families today. 
2.5 Catholic teaching on family planning and the regulation of births: Catholic teaching 
about artificial contraception and natural family planning, including reference to 
Humanae Vitae; divergent Christian, non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) 
attitudes to family planning, including acceptance of artificial methods of 
contraception by some Protestant Churches and the application of ethical theories, 
such as situation ethics, and Catholic responses to them. 
2.6 Catholic teaching about divorce, annulment and remarriage: Catholic teaching on 
divorce, annulment and remarriage, including Catechism of the Catholic Church 
2382–2386; divergent Christian, non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) 
attitudes to divorce, annulment and remarriage, including the application of ethical 
theories such as situation ethics and Catholic responses to them. 
2.7 Catholic teaching about the equality of men and women in the family with reference 
to Catechism of the Catholic Church 2207, including the dignity of work within the 
home; divergent Christian teachings and attitudes about the equality and roles of 
men and women in the family and Catholic responses to them. 
2.8 Catholic teachings about gender prejudice and discrimination: Catholic opposition to 
gender prejudice and discrimination, including theology of the body; examples of 
Catholic opposition to gender prejudice and discrimination, including Catechism of 
the Catholic Church 1938; divergent Christian attitudes to gender differences, 
including the role of women in the Church, prejudice and discrimination and 
Catholic responses to them. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
12 
1A Catholic Christianity 
Section 3: Living the Catholic Life 
Students should have an understanding of: 
3.1 The sacramental nature of reality: Catholic teachings about how the whole of 
creation manifests the presence of God; the meaning and effects of each of the 
seven sacraments, including Catechism of the Catholic Church 1210–1211; the 
practice and symbolism of each sacrament; how sacraments communicate the 
grace of God; divergent Christian attitudes to sacraments, including reference to 
Orthodox and Protestant Christianity. 
3.2* Liturgical worship within Catholic Christianity: the nature and significance of the 
Mass for Catholics, including its structure and the Eucharist as the ‘source and 
summit of Christian life’, with reference to Lumen Gentium paragraph 7; divergent 
Christian attitudes towards the practice and meaning of liturgical worship, 
including its significance for Catholics and the less structured worship in 
evangelical Christian denominations. 
3.3 The funeral rite as a liturgical celebration of the Church: practices associated with 
the funeral rite in the home, the church and the cemetery, including reference to 
'Preparing my funeral' by Vincent Nichols, Archbishop of Westminster; the aims of 
the funeral rite, including communion with the deceased; the communion of the 
community and the proclamation of eternal life to the community and its 
significance for Catholics. 
3.4 Prayer as the ‘raising of hearts and minds to God’: the nature and significance of 
different types of prayer; the Lord’s Prayer, including Matthew 6:5–14, set 
(formulaic) prayers and informal (extempore) prayer; when each type might be 
used and why; the importance of prayer and the importance for Catholics of 
having different types of worship. 
3.5 The role and importance of forms of popular piety: the nature and significance of 
the Rosary, Eucharistic adoration and Stations of the Cross; how each of these 
might be used and why; the importance of having different types of worship for 
Catholics, including reference to Catechism of the Catholic Church 1674–1676; 
divergent Christian attitudes to these forms of piety.  
3.6 Pilgrimage: the nature, history and purpose of Catholic pilgrimage; the significance 
of the places people go on pilgrimage; divergent Christian understandings about 
whether pilgrimage is important for Christians today, with specific reference to 
Jerusalem, Lourdes, Rome, Walsingham and the Catechism of the Catholic Church 
2691–2696. 
3.7 Catholic Social Teaching: how Catholic Social Teaching reflects the teaching to 
show love of neighbour; Catholic teaching on justice, peace and reconciliation, 
Evangelii Gaudium paragraphs 182–237 – The inclusion of the poor in society; how 
these teachings might be reflected in the lives of individual Catholics, including 
reference to Matthew 25:31–46 (the Parable of the Sheep and Goats); the work of 
CAFOD, what it does and why. 
3.8 Catholic mission and evangelism: the history and significance of mission and 
evangelism for Catholics; divergent ways this is put into practice by the Church 
and individual Catholics locally, nationally and globally, and how this fulfils the 
commission of Jesus and teachings of the Church, including Evangelii Gaudium 
Chapter 5. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
13 
1A Catholic Christianity 
Section 4: Matters of Life and Death 
Students should have an understanding of: 
4.1 Catholic teachings about the origins and value of the universe: scientific 
explanations for the origins of the universe and Catholic responses to them, 
including the work of Georges Lemaître; the value of the universe in Catholic 
teaching; divergent Christian responses to the possible view that the universe can 
be used as a commodity, including interpretations of Genesis 1–2. 
4.2 Catholic teachings about the sanctity of life: why Catholics regard human life as 
holy; how the Bible can be interpreted to show life as special, including reference to 
being created in the image of God as shown in Genesis 1–3; the importance of the 
sanctity of life for Catholics today. 
4.3 Catholic responses to scientific and non-religious explanations about the origins and 
value of human life, such as evolution and survival of the fittest; Catholic responses 
with reference to October 27, 2014, Pope Francis’s statement at the Pontifical 
Academy of Sciences about evolution; the significance of the responses to scientific 
and non-religious explanations, such as evolution and survival of the fittest, for 
Catholics today. 
4.4 Implications of Catholic teachings about value and sanctity of life for the issue of 
abortion: the nature of abortion; Church teachings about abortion, including 
reference to Humanae Vitae; divergent pro-life and pro-choice Christian,  
non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) arguments, including the application 
of ethical theories, such as situation ethics, and Catholic responses to them. 
4.5 Catholic teachings and beliefs about life after death: Catholic teachings that support 
the existence of a life after death, including Ephesians 2:1–10; divergent Christian 
and non-religious arguments for life after death (including remembered lives, 
paranormal, logic, reward, comfort and meeting loved ones); the significance of 
belief in life after death for Catholics. 
4.6 Catholic responses to non-religious arguments against life after death: why 
Catholics reject arguments against belief in life after death (including as a source of 
comfort, lack of evidence, fraudulent accounts and social control), including  
1 Peter 3:18–22. 
4.7 Implications of Catholic teachings about the value and sanctity of life for the issue 
of euthanasia: the nature of euthanasia; Church teachings about euthanasia, 
including Catechism of the Catholic Church 2276–2279 and support for hospice 
care; divergent Christian, non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) arguments 
surrounding its use, including the application of ethical theories, such as situation 
ethics, and Catholic responses to them. 
4.8 Catholic responses to issues in the natural world: Catholic responses to threats to 
the world including pollution, global warming and the use of natural resources; 
stewardship and humanity’s role as stewards; differing Catholic responses to animal 
rights, animal experimentation and the use of animals for food, with reference to 
Catechism of the Catholic Church 2415–2418, including the application of ethical 
theories such as utilitarianism. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
14 
Area of Study 1B – Christianity 
Overview 
This area of study comprises a study in depth of Christianity as a lived religion within the 
United Kingdom and throughout the world, and its beliefs and teachings on life, specifically 
within families, and with regard to matters of life and death. 
There are four sections: Christian Beliefs, Marriage and the Family, Living the Christian Life 
and Matters of Life and Death. 
The significance and importance of the various beliefs, issues and practices to Christians 
today should be explored throughout the sections. This should include reference to how the 
Bible informs a Christian’s understanding of the topics and how approaches to the issues are 
underpinned by philosophical arguments and ethical theory as applicable.  
Students will be expected to study Christianity within the context of the wider British society, 
the religious traditions of which are, in the main, Christian. Students should recognise that 
Christianity is one of the many religions and world views in Great Britain, which include 
Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism, Sikhism and non-religious views such as Humanism 
and atheism. This knowledge may be applied throughout the assessment of the specified 
content.  
Students should compare and contrast two areas of belief and practice within Christianity 
with one of either Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism, or Sikhism: 
● Beliefs about the afterlife and their significance (1.6)* 
● The practice and significance of worship (3.1)* 
Students should compare and contrast the areas of ethics and/or philosophy within 
Christianity with non-religious views as outlined in the content below. 
Students should also recognise that within Christianity there may be more than one 
perspective in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed. Common and 
divergent views within Christianity in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and 
expressed should be included throughout, including reference to Catholic, Orthodox, 
Protestant and other Christian traditions.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
15 
1B Christianity 
Section 1: Christian Beliefs  
Students should have an understanding of: 
1.1  The Trinity: the nature and significance of the Trinity as expressed in the Nicene 
Creed; the nature and significance of the oneness of God; the nature and 
significance of each of the Persons individually, including reference to  
Matthew 3:13–17; how this is reflected in Christian worship and belief today. 
1.2 The creation of the universe and of humanity: the biblical account of creation and 
divergent ways in which it may be understood by Christians, including as literal 
and metaphorical; the role of the Word and Spirit in creation, including  
John 1:1–18 and Genesis 1–3; the importance of creation for Christians today. 
1.3 The Incarnation: the nature and importance of the person of Jesus Christ as the 
incarnate Son of God; the biblical basis of this teaching, including John 1:1–18 
and 1 Timothy 3:16 and its significance for Christians today. 
1.4 The last days of Jesus’ life: the Last Supper, betrayal, arrest, trial, crucifixion, 
resurrection and ascension of Jesus; the accounts of these within the Bible, 
including Luke 22–24 and the significance of these events to understanding the 
person of Jesus Christ. 
1.5 The nature and significance of salvation and the role of Christ within salvation: 
law, sin, grace and Spirit, the role of Christ in salvation, including John 3:10–21 
and Acts 4:8–12; the nature and significance of atonement within Christianity and 
its link to salvation. 
1.6* Christian eschatology: divergent Christian teachings about life after death, 
including the nature and significance of resurrection, judgement, heaven, and hell 
and purgatory, with reference to the 39 Articles of Religion and Catholic teachings; 
how beliefs about life after death are shown in the Bible, including reference to  
2 Corinthians 5:1–10 and divergent understandings as to why they are important 
for Christians today. 
1.7 The problem of evil/suffering and a loving and righteous God: the problems it 
raises for Christians about the nature of God, including reference to omnipotence 
and benevolence, including Psalm 103; how the problem may cause believers to 
question their faith or the existence of God; the nature and examples of natural 
suffering, moral suffering. 
1.8 Divergent solutions offered to the problem of evil/suffering and a loving and 
righteous God: biblical, theoretical and practical, including reference to Psalm 119, 
Job, free will, vale of soul-making, prayer, and charity; the success of solutions to 
the problem.  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
16 
1B Christianity 
Section 2: Marriage and the Family 
Students should have an understanding of: 
2.1 The importance and purpose of marriage for Christians: Christian teachings about 
the significance of marriage in Christian life; the purpose of marriage for Christians, 
including Mark 10:6–9; divergent Christian and non-religious (including atheist and 
Humanist) attitudes to the importance of marriage in society, including the sanctity 
of marriage, a lack of importance, cohabitation and Christian responses to these 
attitudes. 
2.2 Christian teachings about the nature and importance of sexual relationships: 
divergent Christian teachings about sexual relationships; Christian attitudes towards 
sexual relationships outside of marriage and same-sex sexual relationships, 
including interpretations of 1 Corinthians 6:7–20; divergent Christian and non-
religious (including atheist and Humanist) attitudes to sexual relationships, 
including the acceptance of sexual relationships outside marriage and same-sex 
sexual relationships and Christian responses to them. 
2.3 Christian teachings about the purpose and importance of the family: procreation, 
security and education of children, with reference to Ephesians 6:1–4; divergent 
Christian responses to different types of family within 21st-century society (nuclear, 
single parent, same-sex parents, extended and blended families). 
2.4 Support for the family in the local parish: how and why the local church community 
tries to support families, through family worship (including Matthew 19:13–14), 
rites of passage, classes for parents, counselling and groups for children (including 
Sunday schools); the importance of the support of the local parish for Christians 
today. 
2.5 Christian teaching about family planning and regulation of births: divergent 
Christian attitudes about contraception and family planning, including teachings 
about the artificial methods of contraception by some Protestant Churches and the 
Catholic Church, with reference to Humanae Vitae; different non-religious (including 
atheist and Humanist) attitudes to family planning and the application of ethical 
theories such as situation ethics and Christian responses to them.  
2.6 Christian teachings and attitudes towards divorce and remarriage: Christian 
teachings about divorce and remarriage, including Matthew 19:1–12; divergent 
Christian, non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) attitudes to divorce and 
remarriage, including the application of ethical theories, such as situation ethics, 
and Christian responses to them.  
2.7 Christian teaching about the equality of men and women in the family: Christian 
teachings and attitudes about the role of men and women in the family, including 
reference to Genesis 1–3 and Ephesians 5:21–30; divergent Christian attitudes 
about the equality and role of men and women in the family and Christian 
responses to them. 
2.8 Christian teachings about gender prejudice and discrimination: Christian opposition 
to gender prejudice and discrimination including Galatians 3:23–29; examples of 
Christian opposition to gender prejudice and discrimination; divergent Christian 
attitudes to gender differences, including the role of women in the Church, prejudice 
and discrimination and Christian responses to them. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
17 
1B Christianity 
Section 3: Living the Christian Life 
Students should have an understanding of:  
3.1* Christian worship: liturgical and non-liturgical forms of worship, including activities 
which are informal and individual, with reference to the Book of Common Prayer; 
when each form might be used and why; divergent Christian attitudes towards the 
practices, meaning and significance of liturgical and non-liturgical forms of worship 
in Christian life today, with reference to denominations which worship with less 
structure such as some Pentecostal churches. 
3.2 The role of the sacraments in Christian life and their practice in two denominations: 
the role of the sacraments/ordinance as a whole; the nature and importance of  
the meaning and celebration of baptism and the Eucharist in at least two 
denominations, including reference to the 39 Articles XXV–XXXVI; divergent 
Christian attitudes towards the use and number of sacraments in Orthodox, Catholic 
and Protestant traditions. 
3.3 The nature and purpose of prayer: the nature of and examples of the different 
types of prayer; set prayers; informal prayer and the Lord’s Prayer, including 
Matthew 6:5–14; when each type might be used and why; divergent Christian 
attitudes towards the importance of each type of prayer for Christians today. 
3.4 Pilgrimage: the nature, history and purpose of pilgrimage, including interpretations 
of Luke 2:41–43; the significance of the places people go on pilgrimage; divergent 
Christian teachings about whether pilgrimage is important for Christians today, with 
specific reference to Catholic and Protestant understandings; the activities 
associated with, and significance of, Jerusalem, Iona, Taize and Walsingham. 
3.5 Christian religious celebrations: the nature and history of Christian festivals in  
the church year, including Christmas and Easter; the significance of celebrating 
Advent and Christmas; the significance of celebrating Holy Week and Easter, with 
reference to interpretations of 1 Corinthians 15:12–34.  
3.6 The future of the Christian Church: Church growth, the history and purpose of 
missionary and evangelical work, including reference to Mark 16:9–20 and  
John 20:21–22; divergent ways this is put into practice by the Church locally, 
nationally and globally; Christian attitudes of why evangelical work is important for 
the Church and for individual Christians. 
3.7 The role and importance of the local church in the local community: how and why it 
helps the individual believer and the local area; local parish activities, including 
interpretations of 1 Peter 5:1–4, ecumenism, outreach work, the centre of Christian 
identity and worship through living practices. 
3.8 The role and importance of the Church in the worldwide community: how and  
why it works for reconciliation and the problems faced by the persecuted Church; 
divergent Christian responses to teachings about charity, including 1 Corinthians 13 
and Matthew 25:31–46; the work of Christian Aid, what it does and why. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
18 
1B Christianity 
Section 4: Matters of Life and Death 
Students should have an understanding of: 
4.1 Christian teachings about the origins and value of the universe: scientific 
explanations for the origins of the universe and Christian responses to them, 
including the work of Georges Lemaître; the value of the universe in Christian 
teaching; Christian responses to the possible view that the universe can be used as 
a commodity, including interpretations of Genesis 1–2.  
4.2 Christian teachings about the sanctity of life: why human life is holy; how the Bible 
can be interpreted to show life as special, including reference to being created in 
the image of God as shown in Genesis 1–3; the importance of sanctity of life for 
Christians today. 
4.3 Christian responses to scientific and non-religious explanations about the origins 
and value of human life, such as evolution and survival of the fittest, including 
Special Agenda IV Diocesan Synod motions compatibility of science and Christian 
belief (Diocese of Manchester); the significance of the responses to scientific and 
non-religious explanations, such as evolution and survival of the fittest, for 
Christians today. 
4.4 Implications of the value and sanctity of life for the issue of abortion: the nature of 
abortion; divergent Christian pro-life and pro-choice teachings about abortion, 
including reference to Humanae Vitae; non-religious (including atheist and 
Humanist) arguments surrounding its use, including the application of ethical 
theories, such as situation ethics, and Christian responses to them. 
4.5 Christian teachings and beliefs about life after death: Christian teachings and 
beliefs that support the existence of a life after death, including the resurrection of 
Jesus and Ephesians 2:1–10; divergent Christian arguments for life after death 
(including remembered lives, paranormal, logic, reward, comfort and meeting loved 
ones who have passed on); the significance of belief in life after death for 
Christians.  
4.6 Christian responses to non-religious arguments against life after death: why 
Christians reject arguments against belief in life after death (including as a source 
of comfort, lack of evidence, fraudulent accounts and social control), including  
1 Peter 3:18–22. 
4.7 Implications of Christian teachings about the value and sanctity of life for the issue 
of euthanasia: the nature of euthanasia; Christian teachings and divergent 
responses to euthanasia, including support for hospice care and interpretations of 
Job 2:1–10; non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) arguments surrounding 
its use, including the application of ethical theories, such as situation ethics, and 
Christian responses to them. 
4.8 Christian responses to issues in the natural world: Christian responses to threats to 
the world, including pollution, global warming and the use of natural resources; 
stewardship and humanity’s role as stewards, including The Christian Declaration 
on Nature, Assisi 1986; differing Christian responses to animal rights, animal 
experimentation and the use of animals for food, including the application of ethical 
theories such as utilitarianism. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
19 
Area of Study 1C – Islam 
Overview 
This area of study comprises a study in depth of Islam as a lived religion within the United 
Kingdom and throughout the world, and its beliefs and teachings on life, specifically within 
families, and with regard to matters of life and death. 
There are four sections: Islamic Beliefs, Marriage and the Family, Living the Muslim Life and 
Matters of Life and Death. 
The significance and importance of the various beliefs, issues and practices to Muslims today 
should be explored throughout the sections. This should include reference to how the Qur’an 
informs a Muslim’s understanding of the topics and how approaches to the issues are 
underpinned by philosophical arguments and ethical theory as applicable.  
Students will be expected to study Islam within the context of the wider British society, the 
religious traditions of which are, in the main, Christian. Students should compare and 
contrast the areas of belief and practice within Islam with Christianity as outlined in the 
content below. 
● Beliefs about the afterlife and their significance (1.8)* 
● The practice and significance of worship (3.3)* 
Students should recognise that Islam is one of the many religions and world views in Great 
Britain, which include Buddhism, Hinduism, Judaism, Sikhism and non-religious views such 
as Humanism and atheism. This knowledge may be applied throughout the assessment of 
the specified content. 
Students should compare and contrast the areas of ethics and/or philosophy within Islam 
and non-religious views as outlined in the content below. 
Students should also recognise that within Islam there may be more than one perspective in 
the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed. Common and divergent views 
within Islam in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed should be 
included throughout, including reference to Sunni and Shi’a traditions.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
20 
1C Islam 
Section 1: Muslim Beliefs  
Students should have an understanding of: 
1.1 The Six Beliefs of Islam: their nature, history and purpose, including Kitab  
al-iman 1:4; how they are understood and expressed in Sunni and Shi’a Muslim 
communities today; the importance of these principles for Muslims. 
1.2 The Five Roots of ‘Usul ad-Din in Shi’a Islam: Tawhid (oneness of Allah); 'Adl 
(Divine Justice); Nubuwwah (Prophethood); Imamah (Successors to Muhammad) 
and Mi'ad (The Day of Judgment and the Resurrection); the nature, history and 
purpose of the Five Roots with reference to their Qur’anic basis, including Surah 
112 (the oneness of Allah); the importance of these principles for different Shi’a 
communities today, including Sevener and Twelver. 
1.3 The nature of Allah: how the characteristics of Allah are shown in the Qur’an and 
why they are important; Tawhid (oneness), including Surah 16:35–36, 
immanence, transcendence, omnipotence, beneficence, mercy, fairness and 
justice, Adalat in Shi’a Islam. 
1.4 Risalah: the nature and importance of prophethood for Muslims, including  
Surah 2:136; what the roles of prophets teach Muslims, exemplified in the lives of 
Adam, Ibrahim, Isma’il, Musa, Dawud, Isa, and Muhammad. 
1.5 Muslim holy books (Kutub) – the nature, history, significance and purpose of 
Muslim holy books with reference to: the Qur’an; the Tawrat (Torah), including  
Surah 5:43–48; the Zabur (Psalms), including Surah 4:163–171; the Injil 
(Gospel), including Surah 57:27; and the Sahifah (Scrolls). Divergent Muslim 
views about the importance of the holy books in their lives today. 
1.6 Malaikah: the nature and importance of angels for Muslims; how angels Jibril, 
Izra’il and Mika’il are shown in the Quran, including Surah 32:11 and 2:97–98, and 
their significance for Muslims today. 
1.7 al-Qadr: the nature and importance of Predestination for Muslims; how al-Qadr 
and human freedom relates to the Day of Judgement, including reference to Sahih 
al-Bukhari 78:685; divergent understandings of predestination in Sunni and Shi’a 
Islam; the implications of belief in al-Qadr for Muslims today.  
1.8* Akhirah: Muslim teachings about life after death; the nature of judgement, 
paradise and hell; how they are shown in the Qur’an, including Surah 17:49–72; 
divergent ways in which Muslim teachings about life after death affect the life of a 
Muslim today.  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
21 
1C Islam 
Section 2: Marriage and the Family 
Students should have an understanding of: 
2.1 The importance and purpose of marriage in Islam: the significance of marriage in 
Muslim life; Muslim teachings about marriage including Surah 4:1–24, Surah 
24:30–34 and Surah 53:4–18; non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) 
attitudes to the importance of marriage in society, including a lack of importance, 
cohabitation and Muslim responses to these attitudes. 
2.2 Muslim teaching about the importance of sexual relationships: divergent Muslim 
teaching about sexual relationships as fulfilling physical, emotional and spiritual 
needs; Muslim teachings on sexual relationships outside of marriage, including 
Surah 23:5–11 and same-sex sexual relationships; non-religious (including atheist 
and Humanist) attitudes to sexual relationships, including the acceptance of sexual 
relationships outside marriage and same-sex sexual relationships and Muslim 
responses to them. 
2.3 Muslim teaching about the purpose and importance of the family: Muslim teaching 
about the purpose of families, including Surah 46:15–18: procreation and the 
strengthening of the ummah; divergent Muslim responses to the different types of 
family within 21st-century society (nuclear, single parent, same-sex parents, 
extended and blended families). 
2.4 Support for the family in the ummah: how and why the community tries to support 
families, including through worship, rites of passage, classes for parents, groups for 
children and counselling; divergent understandings of the importance of this 
support for Muslims today and how it might strengthen the ummah, with reference 
to Surah 3:102–105. 
2.5 Muslim teaching on contraception: divergent Muslim teachings and attitudes  
about contraception and family planning, including reference to Sahih al-Bukhari 
34:432, and 62:136; different non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) 
attitudes to family planning and the application of ethical theories, such as situation 
ethics, and Muslim responses to them. 
2.6 Muslim teaching about divorce: divergent Muslim beliefs, teachings and attitudes 
towards divorce and remarriage, including Surah 2:226–241 and the different rules 
for performing a divorce in Shi’a and Sunni Islam; different non-religious (including 
atheist and Humanist) attitudes to divorce and remarriage, including the application 
of ethical theories, such as situation ethics, and Muslim responses to them. 
2.7 Muslim teaching about the equality of men and women in the family: divergent 
Muslim beliefs, teachings and attitudes about the role of men and women in the 
family with reference to the Qur’an, including Surah 4 and the time of Muhammad. 
2.8 Muslim teachings about gender prejudice and discrimination: Muslim attitudes to 
gender prejudice and discrimination, including Surah 33:35; examples of gender 
equality in action in Islam. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
22 
1C Islam 
Section 3: Living the Muslim Life 
Students should have an understanding of: 
3.1 Ten Obligatory Acts of Shi’a Islam: their nature, history and purpose of the Ten 
Obligatory Acts; the diversity of practice and importance of Ten Obligatory Acts  
for Shi’a Muslims today; their basis in the Qur’an, including reference to Surah 
9:71–73; divergent understandings of these principles within Sunni Islam, 
including links with the Five Pillars. 
3.2 Shahadah as one of the Five Pillars: the nature, role and significance of Shahadah 
for Sunni and Shi’a Muslims, including reference to Surah 3:17–21; why reciting 
Shahadah is important for Muslims, and its place in Muslim practice today. 
3.3* Salah as one of the Five Pillars, including reference to Surah 15:98–99 and 29:45: 
the nature, history, significance and purpose of Salah for Sunni and Shi’a Muslims, 
including different ways of understanding them; how Salah is performed, including 
ablution, times, directions, movements and recitations, in the home and mosque 
and Jummah prayer. 
3.4 Sawm as one of the Five Pillars: the nature, role, significance and purpose of 
fasting during Ramadan, including Surah 2:183–185; those who are excused from 
fasting and why. The significance of the Night of Power: the nature, history and 
purpose of the Night of Power; why Laylat al-Qadr is important for Muslims today. 
3.5 Zakah as one of the Five Pillars and Khums: the nature, role, significance and 
purpose of Zakah and Khums, including Surah 9:58–60 and 8:36–42; why Zakah is 
important for Sunni Muslims; why Khums is important for Shi’a Muslims; the 
benefits of receiving Zakah or Khums. 
3.6 Hajj as one of the Five Pillars: the nature, role, origins and significance of Hajj, 
including Surah 2:124–130 and 22:25–30; how Hajj is performed and why Hajj is 
important for Muslims; benefits and challenges of performing Hajj for Muslims. 
3.7 Jihad: the origins, meaning and significance of Jihad in Islam; divergent 
understandings of Jihad within Islam, including the difference between lesser and 
greater Jihad; the conditions for declaration of lesser Jihad, including reference to 
Surah 2:190–194 and 22:39; the importance of Jihad in the life of Muslims. 
3.8 The nature, origins, activities, meaning and significance of the celebration/ 
commemoration of Id-ul-Adha, with reference to Surah 37:77–111, and Id-ul-Fitr 
in Sunni Islam, with reference to their place within Shi’a Islam; and Id-ul-Ghadeer, 
with reference to Hadith and the interpretation of Surah 5:3, and Ashura in Shi’a 
Islam, with reference to their place within Sunni Islam. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
23 
1C Islam 
Section 4: Matters of Life and Death 
Students should have an understanding of: 
4.1 Muslim teachings about origins and value of the universe: scientific explanations for 
the origins of the universe and Muslim responses to them, including Surah 67:1–5, 
and the compatibility of the Qur’an and science; divergent Muslim teachings about 
the value of the universe in Islam and the possible view that the universe is to be 
used as a commodity. 
4.2 Muslim teachings about the sanctity of life: Muslim teachings about why human life 
is holy; how life is shown as special in the Qur’an, including Surah 5:32 and 4:29; 
Muslim teachings on the sanctity of life; divergent understandings of the 
importance of sanctity of life for Muslims today. 
4.3 Muslim responses to scientific and non-religious explanations about the origins and 
value of human life, including evolution and survival of the fittest, including 
interpretations of Surah 32:4–10 and 21:30–33; the significance of the responses 
to scientific and non-religious explanations, such as evolution and survival of the 
fittest, for Muslims today. 
4.4 Implications of the Muslim teachings about the value and sanctity of life for the 
issue of abortion: divergent Muslim teachings about the nature and use of abortion, 
including reference to ensoulment and Sahih al-Bukhari 55:549; non-religious 
(including atheist and Humanist) arguments surrounding its use, including the 
application of ethical theories, such as situation ethics, and Muslim responses to 
them. 
4.5 Muslim responses to the existence of death and the afterlife: Muslim teachings and 
beliefs that support the existence of a life after death with reference to the Qur’an, 
including Surah 28:60–80; divergent Muslim responses to arguments for life after 
death (including remembered lives, paranormal, logic, reward, comfort and meeting 
loved ones); the significance of arguments for belief in life after death for Muslims.  
4.6 Muslim responses to non-religious arguments against life after death, including 
Surah 45:22–37: why Muslims reject arguments against belief in life after death, 
including as a source of comfort, lack of evidence, fraudulent accounts, social 
control. 
4.7 Implications of Muslim teachings about the value and sanctity of life for the issue of 
euthanasia: Muslim teachings about the nature and use of euthanasia;  
non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) arguments surrounding its use; the 
application of ethical theories, such as situation ethics, and Muslim responses to 
them, including Surah 2:153–156 and support for hospice care. 
4.8 Muslim responses to issues in the natural world: Muslim teachings and responses to 
threats to the world, including pollution, global warming and the use of natural 
resources, stewardship and humanity’s role as khalifah; divergent Muslim 
responses to animal rights, animal experimentation and the use of animals for food, 
including Sahih al-Bukhari 45:656 and the application of ethical theories such as 
utilitarianism. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
24 
Area of Study 1D – Buddhism 
Overview 
This area of study comprises a study in depth of Buddhism as a lived religion within the 
United Kingdom and throughout the world, and its beliefs and teachings on life, specifically 
within families, and with regard to matters of life and death. 
There are four sections: Buddhist Beliefs, Marriage and the Family, Living the Buddhist Life 
and Matters of Life and Death. 
The significance and importance of the various beliefs, issues and practices to Buddhists 
today should be explored throughout the sections. This should include reference to how 
scripture informs a Buddhist’s understanding of the topics and how approaches to the issues 
are underpinned by philosophical arguments and ethical theory as applicable.  
Students will be expected to study Buddhism within the context of the wider British society, 
the religious traditions of which are, in the main, Christian. Students should compare and 
contrast the areas of belief and practice within Buddhism with Christianity as outlined in the 
content below. 
● Beliefs about the afterlife and their significance (1.5)* 
● The practice and significance of worship (3.6)* 
Students should recognise that Buddhism is one of the many religions and world views in 
Great Britain, which include Hinduism, Judaism, Islam, Sikhism and non-religious views such 
as Humanism and atheism. This knowledge may be applied throughout the assessment of 
the specified content. 
Students should compare and contrast the areas of ethics and/or philosophy within 
Buddhism and non-religious views as outlined in the content below. 
Students should also recognise that within Buddhism there may be more than one 
perspective in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed. Common and 
divergent views within Buddhism in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and 
expressed should be included throughout, including reference to Theravada and Mahayana 
traditions.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
25 
1D Buddhism  
Section 1: Buddhist Beliefs  
Students should have an understanding of: 
1.1 The life of the Buddha: the nature and history of the events in the life of the Buddha 
and why they are important to Buddhists today, including ancestry, birth, princely 
life, marriage and the Four Sights, with reference to Buddhavamsa XXVI; the 
enlightenment of the Buddha and founding of the Sangha. 
1.2 Dhamma: the nature and different meaning of dhamma (dependent origination 
/conditionality); the nature and importance of paticca-samuppada and the Three 
Marks of Existence, including reference to the Story of Nagasena and the Chariot in 
the Milinda Panha; suffering (dukkha), no fixed self (anicca) and soul or essence 
(anatta); the implications of belief in dhamma for Buddhists today. 
1.3 First Noble Truth, including reference to the Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta: the 
nature of dukkha; Buddhist teachings about suffering; the different types of 
suffering as pain, fabrication and change; the importance of suffering for Buddhists 
today. 
1.4 Second Noble Truth, including reference to Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta: the 
nature of samudaya (the root of suffering); Buddhist teachings about the causes of 
suffering, including the Sermon at Benares; the Three Poisons and how they are 
represented in the Wheel of Life; divergent understandings of the Wheel of Life, 
with reference to Theravada and Mahayana Buddhism. 
1.5* Third Noble Truth, including reference to the Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta: the 
nature of nirodha and the cessation of tanha; Buddhist teachings about the ending 
of desire; the nature of the cycle of samsara; different understandings of nibbana 
and enlightenment and their importance for Buddhists today. 
1.6 Fourth Noble Truth, including reference to the Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta: the 
nature of the Middle Way (magga); Buddhist teachings about the Eightfold Path 
leading to nibbana. The Threefold Way: the nature, purpose and importance of sila 
(ethics), samadhi (meditation) and panna (wisdom); divergent understandings of 
the importance Eightfold Path and the Threefold Way for Buddhist life today. 
1.7 Human life: divergent Buddhist understandings of the nature and importance of the 
Five Khandas (aggregates), including the Khandha Sutta; divergent Buddhist 
understandings of the nature and importance of sunnata and tathagatagarbha 
(Buddha-nature); divergent Buddhist understandings of the nature and importance 
of Arahant and Bodhisattva Ideals; divergent Buddhist understandings of the nature 
and history of Buddhahood and the Pure Land. 
1.8 Buddhist ethical teachings: divergent Buddhist understandings of the nature, 
purpose and importance of kamma, including Dhammapada 181–187 and the 
Khuddakapatha, merit and rebirth, karuna (compassion), metta (loving kindness), 
pancha sila (the Five Precepts) and the paramitas (Six Perfections); the divergent 
applications of each of these ethical teachings in Buddhist life today. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
26 
1D Buddhism 
Section 2: Marriage and the Family 
Students should have an understanding of: 
2.1 The importance and purpose of marriage in Buddhism: divergent understandings of 
the significance of marriage in Buddhist life; divergent Buddhist teachings about 
marriage, including its importance, the Sigalovada Sutta, and the possible ideal of 
celibacy; divergent non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) attitudes to the 
importance of marriage in society, including a lack of importance, cohabitation and 
the Buddhist responses to these attitudes.  
2.2 Sexual relationships: Buddhist teachings about the nature and importance of sexual 
relationships, including reference to the Third Precept, Cunda Kammaraputta Sutta; 
different attitudes to celibacy, for example Jodo Shinshu monks; divergent Buddhist 
teachings and attitudes towards sexual relationships outside of marriage and same-
sex sexual relationships; non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) attitudes to 
sexual relationships, including the acceptance of sexual relationships outside 
marriage and same-sex sexual relationships and Buddhist responses to them. 
2.3 Buddhist teaching about the purpose and importance of the family: Buddhist 
teaching about the purpose of families, including the Sigalovada Sutta; Buddhist 
responses to the different types of family within 21st-century society (nuclear, 
single parent, same-sex parents, extended and blended families). 
2.4 Support for the family in the sangha, including the role of the sangha as a refuge as 
taught in The Khuddakapatha 1: how and why the community tries to support 
families, including through worship, rites of passage, festivals and counselling; 
divergent understandings of the importance of this support for Buddhists today. 
2.5 Buddhist teaching on contraception: divergent Buddhist teachings and attitudes 
about contraception and family planning, including reference to The Natural World 
by XIV Dalai Lama; non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) attitudes to 
family planning and the application of ethical theories such as situation ethics and 
Buddhist responses to them. 
2.6 Buddhist teachings about divorce: divergent Buddhist beliefs, teachings and 
attitudes towards divorce and remarriage, including A Happy Married Life: A 
Buddhist Perspective by Ven. K. Sri Dhammananda; non-religious (including atheist 
and Humanist) attitudes to divorce and remarriage, including the application of 
ethical theories, such as situation ethics, and Buddhist responses to them. 
2.7 Buddhist teachings and attitudes about the equality of men and women in the 
family: divergent Buddhist beliefs, teachings and attitudes about the role of men 
and women in the family, including reference to the life of the Buddha and 
Sigalovada Sutta. 
2.8 Buddhist teachings and attitudes about gender prejudice and discrimination, 
including the Soma Sutta: Buddhist opposition to gender prejudice and 
discrimination; examples of gender equality in action in Buddhism. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
27 
1D Buddhism 
Section 3: Living the Buddhist Life 
Students should have an understanding of: 
3.1 Meditation: the nature, purpose and significance of meditation in Buddhism; the 
different types of meditation: samatha (concentration), metta bhavana (loving 
kindness) and vipassana (insight); meditative practices, including mindfulness 
breathing and zazen, divergent understanding of the nature and importance of 
visualisation of the Buddha and Bodhisattvas, including Amitāyus Meditation Sutra; 
how the different practices are used by Mahayana and Theravada Buddhists and the 
benefits from their use. 
3.2 Chanting: the nature, purpose and role of chanting in Buddhism as a devotional 
practice and to gain mental concentration, including Dhammapada 1–2, confidence 
and joy. The divergent understandings of the importance of chanting in Buddhist life 
today: Theravada Buddhism, including Tiratana Buddhism, with reference to 
Dhammapada 190, and Mahayana Buddhism, including Nam Myoho Renge Kyo. 
3.3 Mantra recitation: divergent understandings of the nature, purpose, role and 
importance of mantra recitation with reference to Theravada Buddhism, including 
Namo Buddhaya (‘Homage to the Buddha’), and Mahayana Buddhism; the nature 
and purpose of using sacred syllables, devotional articles, offerings and mala beads 
and why they are used in different schools of Buddhism. 
3.4 Features of Buddhist places of worship: the divergent nature, history and design of 
Buddhist places of worship, including temples, gompas, viharas, shrines in 
Theravada, Mahayana and Triratna Buddhism; how and why the places of worship 
are used, including reference to the shrine room, shrine facing east, and the library, 
showing the importance of learning with reference to the Kimsila Sutta.  
3.5 How and why objects of devotion are used within different Buddhist places of 
worship, buddharupas, including reference to Vakkali Sutta, shrine, Bodhi tree; 
divergent understandings of why devotional objects are important in Buddhism 
today. 
3.6* Puja: the nature and purpose of puja in the vihara and the home, including reference 
to Mangala Sutta; examples of the different types; when each type might be used 
and why; the importance of having different types of worship and their use in 
different Buddhist contexts. 
3.7 Death and mourning rituals and ceremonies: the divergent celebration and 
significance of the ceremonies in Buddhist communities and to Buddhists; the 
distinct significance of the rituals associated with death and mourning in Theravada 
communities and in Japan and Tibet, with reference to the Tibetan Book of the Dead. 
3.8 Festivals and retreats: the divergent nature, history, purpose and importance of 
festivals and retreats in Buddhism; divergent understandings of the origins, meaning 
and features of celebration of specific festivals and retreats, including Wesak, 
Vassa/Rain Retreat and Kathina, with reference to the Anapanasati Sutta, and 
Uposatha days in Theravada Buddhism; Hanamatsuri and Obon (Japanese), 
Parinibbana Day in Mahayana Buddhism, and Lama Tsong Khapa Day in Tibet. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
28 
1D Buddhism 
Section 4: Matters of Life and Death 
Students should have an understanding of: 
4.1 Buddhist teachings about the origins and value of the universe: Buddhist responses 
to scientific explanations for the origins of the universe, including the origins having 
no significance and reference to The Universe in a Single Atom Chapter 4 by the 
XIV Dalai Lama; the value of the universe and the natural world in Buddhism; 
divergent Buddhist responses to and teachings on the possible view that the 
universe is to be used as a commodity. 
4.2 Buddhist teachings about the sanctity of life, including reference to the First Precept 
in The Khuddakapatha: Buddhist teachings about why human life is special; how 
life is shown as special in Buddhism; divergent understandings regarding the 
importance of life for Buddhists today. 
4.3 Buddhist responses to scientific and non-religious explanations about the origins 
and value of human life, including evolution and survival of the fittest, including 
interpretations of Cula-Malunkyovada Sutta; divergent understandings of the 
significance of the responses to scientific and non-religious explanations, such as 
evolution and survival of the fittest, for Buddhists today. 
4.4 Implications of the Buddhist teachings about the value and sanctity of life for the 
issue of abortion: divergent Buddhist teachings about the nature and use of 
abortion, including the First Precept and New York Times Interview with the Dalai 
Lama Sunday, December 5, 1993; non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) 
arguments surrounding its use, including the application of ethical theories, such as 
situation ethics, and Buddhist responses to them. 
4.5 Buddhist responses to the existence of death and the afterlife: Buddhist teachings 
and beliefs that support the existence of a life after death, including the Wheel of 
Life and the impermanence of the self, including reference to Sahasodgata 
Avadana, Divyavadana 21; divergent Buddhist responses to arguments for life after 
death (including remembered lives, paranormal, logic, reward, comfort and meeting 
loved ones); the significance of arguments for belief in life after death for 
Buddhists. 
4.6 Buddhist responses to non-religious arguments against life after death: why 
Buddhists reject arguments against belief in life after death (including as a source 
of comfort, lack of evidence, fraudulent accounts, social control), including 
Brahmajala Sutta 4. 
4.7 Implications of Buddhist teachings about the value and sanctity of life for the issue 
of euthanasia: Buddhist teachings about the nature and use of euthanasia including 
Vakkali Sutta; non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) arguments 
surrounding its use, including the application of ethical theories, such as situation 
ethics, and Buddhist responses to them including support for hospice care, 
including the Buddhist Hospice Trust. 
4.8 Buddhist responses to issues in the natural world: Buddhist teachings and 
responses to threats to the world, including pollution, global warming and the use 
of natural resources, including Dhammapada 270 and The Buddhist Declaration on 
Nature (Assisi 1986); divergent Buddhist responses to animal rights, animal 
experimentation and the use of animals for food, including the application of ethical 
theories such as utilitarianism. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
29 
Area of Study 1E – Hinduism 
Overview 
This area of study comprises a study in depth of Hinduism as a lived religion within the 
United Kingdom and throughout the world, and its beliefs and teachings on life, specifically 
within families, and with regard to matters of life and death. 
There are four sections: Hindu Beliefs, Marriage and the Family, Living the Hindu Life and 
Matters of Life and Death. 
The significance and importance of the various beliefs, issues and practices to Hindus today 
should be explored throughout the sections. This should include reference to how scripture 
informs a Hindu’s understanding of the topics and how approaches to the issues are 
underpinned by philosophical arguments and ethical theory as applicable.  
Students will be expected to study Hinduism within the context of the wider British society, 
the religious traditions of which are, in the main, Christian. Students should compare and 
contrast the areas of belief and practice within Hinduism with Christianity as outlined in the 
content below. 
● Beliefs about the afterlife and their significance (1.5)* 
● The practice and significance of worship (3.4)* 
Students should recognise that Hinduism is one of the many religions and world views in 
Great Britain, which include Buddhism, Judaism, Islam, Sikhism and non-religious views such 
as Humanism and atheism. This knowledge may be applied throughout the assessment of 
the specified content. 
Students should compare and contrast the areas of ethics and/or philosophy within Hinduism 
and non-religious views as outlined in the content below. 
Students should also recognise that within Hinduism there may be more than one 
perspective in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed. Common and 
divergent views within Hinduism in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and 
expressed should be included throughout, including reference to Shaivism and Vaishnavism.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
30 
1E Hinduism 
Section 1: Hindu Beliefs  
Students should have an understanding of: 
1.1 The nature of Brahman: The nature of Brahman as spirit, ultimate reality or 
absolute truth; how the characteristics of Brahman are shown in Hindu scriptures, 
including Katha Upanishad 2.2.6–8. 
1.2 The nature and importance of understanding Brahman as Nirguna Brahman and 
Saguna Brahman: how Nirguna Brahman and Saguna Brahman are shown in 
Hindu scripture, for example Nirguna (Taittiriya Upanishad 2.7.1–2) and Saguna 
(Rig Veda 1.154.1–2); the nature and importance of Vaikuntha (spiritual worlds); 
divergent ways in which belief in each may be expressed in the life of Hindus 
today. 
1.3 Three aspects of the divine: Brahman, Antaryami and Bhagavan; the nature and 
significance of the divine as Brahman (everywhere and non-personal), Antaryami 
(within the heart) and Bhagavan (beyond, as a personal loving God); how the 
three aspects are shown in Hindu scriptures, including Mundaka Upanishad 2.1; 
why belief in the three aspects of the divine are important in Hindu life and for 
religious pluralism today. 
1.4 Manifestations of the Divine: the nature and importance of how the deities are 
shown in Hindu scriptures; avatars and murti; the nature and role of male deities: 
divergent understandings of the importance of Vishnu (including Rig Veda 1.22) 
and Shiva; the nature and role of the female force, Shakti, including Parvati and 
Lakshmi. 
1.5* The nature of the individual and life within Hinduism: the nature and importance 
of the atman (eternal self), karma, the cycle of samsara, moksha; divergent Hindu 
understandings of the nature of the individual and life, including interpretations of 
Brihadaranyaka Upanishad 4.4; why beliefs about the atman, karma, samsara and 
moksha are important for Hindus today. 
1.6 The purpose of human life for Hindus: the nature and significance of the four aims 
of life (Purusharthas) – dharma, artha, kama and moksha; the nature and 
significance of anatana dharma (eternal law), including Bhagavad Gita 3.35; the 
nature and significance of varnashrama dharma (duties according to materialistic 
situation in life). 
1.7 Hindu responses to suffering, knowledge and ignorance: Hindu teachings about 
suffering, knowledge and ignorance such as ahimsa, respect, empathy, 
mind/sense control, humility, and love, including Mahabharata 5.39; divergent 
Hindu understandings as to why there is suffering, knowledge and ignorance for 
Hindus today. 
1.8 Hindu cosmology: the nature of the Hindu cosmology as shown in Hindu 
scriptures, including Rig Veda 10.129; the nature and importance of the cycle of 
four ages (yugas), including descriptions of the Kali Yuga in the Mahabharata, 
many worlds and their diverse inhabitants; the nature and divergent 
understandings of the importance of the concepts of prakriti (matter/nature),  
tri-guna (three qualities) and maya (illusion). 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
31 
1E Hinduism  
Section 2: Marriage and the Family 
Students should have an understanding of: 
2.1 The importance and purpose of marriage for Hindus: Hindu teachings about the 
importance and purpose of marriage in Hindu life, including Rig Veda 10.85.36–47; 
divergent Hindu, non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) attitudes to the 
importance of marriage in society, including a lack of importance, cohabitation and 
Hindu responses to them. 
2.2 Hindu teachings about the nature and importance of sexual relationships; Hindu 
teachings and attitudes towards sexual relationships, including interpretations of 
Bhagavad Gita 5.21–23; divergent Hindu teachings and attitudes towards sexual 
relationships outside of marriage and same-sex sexual relationships; different  
non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) attitudes to sexual relationships, 
including the acceptance of sexual relationships outside marriage and same-sex 
sexual relationships and Hindu responses to them. 
2.3 Hindu teachings about the purpose and importance of the family – procreation, 
security and education of children, with reference to Bhagavad Gita 1.37–43; 
divergent Hindu responses to different types of family within 21st century (nuclear, 
single parent, same-sex parents, extended and blended families). 
2.4 Support for the family in the local Hindu community: how and why the community 
tries to support families (with reference to Bhagavad Gita 1.37–43), including 
through worship, rites of passage, festivals and counselling; the importance of the 
support of the local Hindu community for Hindu families today. 
2.5 Hindu teaching about family planning and regulation of births: divergent Hindu 
attitudes about contraception and family planning, including reference to the 
householder stage, with reference to Bhagavad Gita 3.37–43; different non-
religious (including atheist and Humanist) attitudes to family planning and the 
application of ethical theories, such as situation ethics, and Hindu responses to 
them. 
2.6 Hindu teachings and attitudes towards divorce and remarriage: Hindu teachings 
about divorce and remarriage, including reference to the Hindu Marriage Act 1955 
(India) and arguments used to support or reject divorce; non-religious (including 
atheist and Humanist) attitudes to divorce and remarriage, including the application 
of ethical theories, such as situation ethics, and Hindu responses to them. 
2.7 Hindu teachings about the equality of men and women in the family: Hindu 
teachings and attitudes about the role of men and women in the family, including 
reference to Manusmriti 3.55–60; divergent Hindu attitudes about the equality of 
men and women in the family. 
2.8 Hindu teachings about gender prejudice and discrimination: Hindu opposition to 
gender prejudice and discrimination, including interpretations of Bhagavad Gita 
6.29–32; examples of gender equality in action in Hinduism. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
32 
1E Hinduism 
Section 3: Living the Hindu Life 
Students should have an understanding of: 
3.1 The nature and purpose of Hindu yoga: the nature and purpose of different forms 
of yoga, karma yoga (action), jnana yoga (knowledge), astanga/raja yoga 
(meditation) and bhakti yoga (devotion); examples of when each form of yoga 
might be used, how and why; the importance of having different types of yoga; 
reference to Bhagavad Gita 6.44–47. 
3.2 Focuses of worship and representations of the divine: the nature, purpose and 
importance of different ways of worshipping, including worshipping one god 
(personal or non-personal) or many deities, gurus and holy places (land, hills, 
rivers and sacred plants and animals); the scriptural basis for the different focuses 
of worship and representations of the divine in worship, including interpretations of 
Bhagavad Gita 6.20–31. 
3.3 The importance of Hindu places of worship: the nature, features of, use, and 
purpose of worship in different places, including in the temple, in the home, 
outside, shrines and festival celebration and in the space of the heart, with 
reference to interpretations of Bhagavad Gita 9.13–27; the benefits for Hindus of 
having different places to worship in. 
3.4* The nature and purpose of prayer in the temple and the home: the nature, features 
of use and purpose of the different forms of worship, including meditation, puja, 
havan, darshan, arti, bhajan, kirtan and japa, with reference to interpretations of 
Bhagavad Gita 6.44–47; divergent understandings of the benefits for Hindus of 
having different forms of worship. 
3.5 Hindu sacred festivals: the nature, history, purpose and significance of Hindu 
sacred festivals; the origins and meaning of specific festivals, including Diwali, Holi, 
Navratri Dussehra, Ram Navami, Ratha-yatra, Janmashtami, and Raksha Bandhan, 
including interpretations of Brhadaranyaka Upanishad 1.3.28. 
3.6 Hindu pilgrimage: the nature, history and purpose of Hindu pilgrimages; the 
significance of the places Hindus go on pilgrimage; divergent understandings of 
why pilgrimage may, or may not be, important for Hindus today; the nature, 
features, history and importance of pilgrimage to the Ganges, including 
interpretations of Rig Veda 10.75, Vrindavana and Varanasi. 
3.7 Hindu environmental projects: divergent understandings of the nature, purpose 
and significance of environmental care for Hindus; the importance of care for rivers 
and sacred places for Hindus; how Hindus care for the environment, examples of 
what they do and why, including reference to cow protection and interpretations of 
Rig Veda 10.87.16–19. 
3.8 Hindu charity work: the nature and purpose of charity for Hindus; Hindu teachings 
about charity; the work of one named Hindu charity working to promote wellbeing, 
social inclusion and women’s rights, what it does and why, including interpretations 
of Bhagavad Gita 3.10–12. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
33 
1E Hinduism  
Section 4: Matters of Life and Death 
Students should have an understanding of: 
4.1 Hindu teachings about the origins and value of the universe: scientific explanations 
for the origins of the universe and Hindu responses to them, including Rig Veda 
10.129; the compatibility of Hindu beliefs and science; the value of the universe in 
Hinduism; divergent Hindu responses to the possible view that the universe may be 
used as a commodity. 
4.2 Hindu teachings about the sanctity of life: why human life might be regarded as 
holy; how life is shown as special in the scriptures, including interpretations of 
Katha Upanishad 1.3.3; the importance of sanctity of life for Hindus today. 
4.3 Hindu responses to scientific and non-religious explanations about the origins and 
value of human life, such as evolution and survival of the fittest; the significance of 
the responses to scientific and non-religious explanations, such as evolution and 
survival of the fittest, for Hindus today, including interpretations of Rig Veda 
10.129. 
4.4 Implications of the Hindu teachings about the value and sanctity of life for the issue 
of abortion: the nature of abortion; divergent Hindu teachings about abortion, 
including interpretations of Atharva Veda 6.113; non-religious (including atheist 
and Humanist) arguments surrounding its use, including the application of ethical 
theories, such as situation ethics, and Hindu responses to them. 
4.5 Hindu teachings about life after death: Hindu teachings and beliefs that support the 
existence of a life after death, including Bhagavad Gita 4.23–30; divergent Hindu 
responses to arguments for life after death (remembered lives, paranormal, logic, 
reward, comfort and meeting loved ones who have passed on); the significance of 
belief in life after death for Hindus. 
4.6 Hindu responses to non-religious arguments against life after death: why Hindus 
reject arguments against belief in life after death (including as a source of comfort, 
lack of evidence, fraudulent accounts, social control), including Bhagavad Gita  
15.6–12. 
4.7 Implications of the Hindu teachings about the value and sanctity of life for the issue 
of euthanasia: the nature of euthanasia; Hindu teachings about euthanasia, 
including interpretations of Bhagavad Gita 7.25–30; divergent Hindu, non-religious 
(including atheist and Humanist) arguments surrounding its use; the application of 
ethical theories, such as situation ethics, and Hindu responses to them, including 
support for hospice care.  
4.8 Hindu responses to issues in the natural world: Hindu responses to threats to the 
world, including pollution, global warming and the use of natural resources; Hindu 
teachings about environmental care, including The Hindu Declaration on Nature – 
Assisi 1986 and interpretations of Bhagavad Gita 13.27–34; divergent Hindu 
responses to animal rights, animal experimentation and the use of animals for food, 
including the application of ethical theories such as utilitarianism. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
34 
Area of Study 1F – Judaism 
Overview 
This area of study comprises a study in depth of Judaism as a lived religion within the United 
Kingdom and throughout the world, and its beliefs and teachings on life, specifically within 
families, and with regard to matters of life and death. 
There are four sections: Jewish Beliefs, Marriage and the Family, Living the Jewish Life and 
Matters of Life and Death. 
The significance and importance of the various beliefs, issues and practices to Jews today 
should be explored throughout the sections. This should include reference to how scripture 
informs a Jew’s understanding of the topics and how approaches to the issues are 
underpinned by philosophical arguments and ethical theory as applicable.  
Students will be expected to study Judaism within the context of the wider British society, 
the religious traditions of which are, in the main, Christian. Students should compare and 
contrast the areas of belief and practice within Judaism with Christianity as outlined in the 
content below. 
● Beliefs about the afterlife and their significance (1.8)* 
● The practice and significance of worship (3.4)* 
Students should recognise that Judaism is one of the many religions and world views in 
Great Britain, which include Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam, Sikhism and non-religious views 
such as Humanism and atheism. This knowledge may be applied throughout the assessment 
of the specified content. 
Students should compare and contrast the areas of ethics and/or philosophy within Judaism 
and non-religious views as outlined in the content below. 
Students should also recognise that within Judaism there may be more than one perspective 
in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed. Common and divergent 
views within Judaism in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed should 
be included throughout, including reference to Orthodox, Reform and Liberal traditions.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
35 
1F Judaism  
Section 1: Jewish Beliefs  
Students should have an understanding of: 
1.1 The nature of the Almighty: how the characteristics of the Almighty are shown in 
the Torah, and why they are important in Jewish life today, including One, Creator, 
Law-Giver and Judge, including reference to Genesis 2. 
1.2 The nature and importance of Shekhinah: how the divine presence is shown in the 
Torah and why it is important including interpretations of 2 Chronicles 7:1–3; the 
divergent understandings of Shekhinah found in different forms of Orthodox 
Judaism and the importance of them for Jews today. 
1.3 The nature and purpose of the Messiah: how messiahship is shown in the 
scriptures, including Jeremiah 23:5–8; the nature and significance of the Messianic 
Age and the Jewish responsibility to bring it about; divergent understandings of the 
Messiah in different forms of Orthodox and Reform Judaism and the importance of 
them for Jewish people today. 
1.4 The covenant with Abraham and his descendants: the nature and history of the 
Abrahamic covenant; the role of Abraham in the covenant, including Genesis 17; 
why the Promised Land covenanted to Abraham and his descendants is important 
for Jews today. 
1.5  The Covenant at Sinai: the nature and history of the Covenant at Sinai (the Ten 
Commandments), including Exodus 20; the role and significance of Moses in the 
Covenant at Sinai; divergent understandings of how and why the Decalogue is 
important in Jewish life today. 
1.6 Sanctity of life: why human life is holy for Jewish people; how life is shown as 
special. The nature and importance of Pikuach Nefesh (primacy of life): life takes 
precedence over everything, with reference to Talmud Yoma 83–84; divergent 
understandings of how and why the principle of Pikuach Nefesh is applied by Jews 
today. 
1.7 Moral principles and the Mitzvot: the nature and importance of the Mitzvot, 
including reference to the Mishneh Torah of Maimonides: Sefer Madda; the 
importance of the relationship between keeping the Mitzvot and free will; the 
Mitzvot between humans and the Almighty, and between humans; divergent 
understandings of the importance of the Mitzvot between the Almighty and 
humans, and between humans, for Jewish life today.  
1.8* Jewish beliefs about life after death: divergent Jewish understandings of the nature 
and significance of life after death including reference to different forms of 
Orthodox and Reform Judaism; Jewish teachings about life after death including 
interpretations of Ecclesiastes 12; the nature of resurrection and judgement; why 
belief in life after death may be important for Jews today. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
36 
1F Judaism  
Section 2: Marriage and the Family 
Students should have an understanding of: 
2.1 The importance and purpose of marriage for Jews: Jewish teachings about the 
importance and purpose of marriage in Jewish life, including Proverbs 18.22;  
non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) attitudes to the importance of 
marriage in society, including a lack of importance, cohabitation and the Jewish 
responses to them. 
2.2 Jewish teachings about the nature and importance of sexual relationships: Jewish 
teachings about sexual relationships, including Genesis 1:26–31 and Song of 
Songs; divergent Jewish teachings and attitudes towards sexual relationships 
outside of marriage and same-sex sexual relationships; different non-religious 
(including atheist and Humanist) attitudes to sexual relationships, including the 
acceptance of sexual relationships outside marriage and same-sex sexual 
relationships and Jewish responses to them. 
2.3 Jewish teachings about the purpose and importance of the family: Jewish 
teachings about the purpose of family – procreation; security and education of 
children with reference to Psalm 127:3–5; divergent Jewish and non-religious 
(including atheist and Humanist) responses to the purpose of the family; different 
types of family within 21st-century society (nuclear, single parent, same-sex 
parents, extended and blended families). 
2.4 Support for the family in the Jewish community: how and why the local 
community tries to support families, including through family worship, rites of 
passage, classes for parents, groups for children and counselling, with reference 
to Talmud Bava Batra 21a–b; the importance of the support of the local Jewish 
community for Jews today. 
2.5 Jewish teaching about family planning and regulation of births: divergent Jewish 
teachings and attitudes about contraception and family planning, including 
reference to the Talmud, Yevamot 61b; different non-religious (including atheist 
and Humanist) attitudes to family planning and the application of ethical theories, 
such as situation ethics, and Jewish responses to them. 
2.6 Jewish teachings and attitudes towards divorce and remarriage: divergent Jewish 
teachings about divorce and remarriage, including reference to Maimonides, 
Mishneh Torah, Ishut 24 and arguments used to support or reject divorce; Jewish, 
non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) attitudes to divorce and 
remarriage, including the application of ethical theories, such as situation ethics, 
and Jewish responses to them. 
2.7 Jewish teachings and attitudes about the equality of men and women in the 
family: Jewish teachings and attitudes about the equality and roles of men and 
women in the family, including reference to Genesis 1:26–31; divergent Jewish 
attitudes about the roles of men and women in the family and Jewish responses to 
them. 
2.8 Jewish teachings about gender prejudice and discrimination: Jewish opposition to 
gender prejudice and discrimination, including The Basic Law: Human Dignity and 
Liberty (1992 The Knesset); examples of gender equality in action in Judaism. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
37 
1F Judaism 
Section 3: Living the Jewish Life 
Students should have an understanding of: 
3.1 The nature and purpose of Jewish public acts of worship: the nature, features and 
purpose of Jewish public worship, including interpretations of Psalms 116:12–19; 
the nature, features and importance of synagogue services for the Jewish 
community and the individual.  
3.2 The Tenakh and the Talmud: the nature, features, purpose and significance of the 
Tenakh (the written law) and Talmud (the oral law) for Jews in daily life today with 
reference to Perkei Avot 2; the nature and purpose of Jewish laws food laws, 
kashrut, including kosher and treifah and the separation of dairy and meat, 
including reference to Deuteronomy 14:3–10; the divergent implications of the 
Jewish food laws for Jews today. 
3.3 The nature and purpose of prayer in the home and of private prayer: the nature, 
features and purpose of prayer three times a day; the importance of having 
different forms of prayers, including interpretations of Psalms 55:16–23. 
3.4* The nature and importance of the Shema and the Amidah (the standing prayer); 
when the Shema and the Amidah might be used, how and why, including reference 
to the Mezuzah; the importance of having the Shema and the Amidah for Jews 
today, including reference to Deuteronomy 6:4. 
3.5 The importance of ritual for Jews today: the nature, features and purpose of birth 
rituals (including Brit Milah), Bar and Bat Mitzvahs, and marriage rituals, including 
interpretations of Genesis 21:1–8, Genesis 17 and Leviticus 12; the nature, 
purpose and importance of the mourning rituals of funeral, shiva, avelut and 
yahrzeit for Jews today; divergent understandings of the importance of each ritual 
for different forms of Orthodox and Reform Judaism today. 
3.6 The nature, features, history and purpose of celebrating Shabbat: the nature, 
features and purpose of the celebration of Shabbat in the home and in the 
synagogue, including interpretations of Exodus 31:12–18; why the celebration of 
Shabbat is important for the Jewish community and the individual today. 
3.7 Jewish festivals: the nature, history, purpose and significance of Jewish festivals; 
the origins and meaning of specific festivals, including Rosh Hashanah, Yom Kippur, 
Pesach, Shavuot and Sukkot, including interpretations of Leviticus 23 (Rosh 
Hashanah); divergent understandings of why festivals are important to different 
forms of Orthodox and Reform Judaism today. 
3.8 Features of the synagogue: the nature, history and purpose of the different design 
of the synagogues in Liberal, Reform and Orthodox Judaism, including facing 
Jerusalem, layout of seating the Ark and the bimah and with reference to Proverbs 
14:28; how and why the synagogue is used by the different communities, including 
reference to Exodus 27:20–21; how and why objects of devotion are used within 
the synagogues, including a yad, Torah Scroll, ner tamid and menorah. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
38 
1F Judaism 
Section 4: Matters of Life and Death 
Students should have an understanding of: 
4.1 Jewish teachings about the origins and value of the universe: scientific explanations 
for the origins of the universe and Jewish responses to them, including reference to 
Genesis 1–3; the value of the universe in Jewish teaching; divergent Jewish 
responses to the possible view that the universe may be used as a commodity. 
4.2 Jewish teachings about the value of life: how life is shown as special in the Tenakh, 
including reference to being created in the image of the Almighty as shown in 
Genesis 1–3; divergent Jewish teachings on the value of life; the significance of 
sanctity of life for Jews today. 
4.3 Jewish responses to scientific and non-religious explanations about the origins of 
human life, such as evolution and survival of the fittest, including Genesis 1:26–31; 
the significance of the responses to scientific and non-religious explanations, such 
as evolution and survival of the fittest, for Jews today. 
4.4 Implications of the value and sanctity of life for the issue of abortion: the nature of 
abortion; divergent Jewish teachings about abortion, including the Mishnah, 
Sanhedrin 4:5; non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) arguments 
surrounding its use, including the application of ethical theories, such as situation 
ethics, and Jewish responses to them. 
4.5 Jewish teachings about life after death: Jewish teachings and beliefs that support 
the existence of a life after death, including reference to Maimonides’s ‘Thirteen 
Principles of the Jewish Faith’; divergent Jewish arguments for life after death 
(remembered lives, paranormal, logic, reward, comfort and meeting loved ones 
who have passed on); divergent understandings of the significance of belief in life 
after death in different Jewish traditions. 
4.6 Jewish responses to non-religious arguments against life after death: why Jews 
may reject arguments against belief in life after death (including as a source of 
comfort, lack of evidence, fraudulent accounts, social control), including Isaiah 25. 
4.7 Implications of the value and sanctity of life for the issue of euthanasia: the nature 
of euthanasia; different Jewish teachings about euthanasia, including different 
interpretations of Judges 9:51–57; divergent Jewish, non-religious (including 
atheist and Humanist) arguments surrounding its use, including the application of 
ethical theories, such as situation ethics, and Jewish responses to them, including 
support for hospice care.  
4.8 Jewish responses to issues in the natural world: Jewish responses to threats to the 
world, including pollution, global warming and the use of natural resources; Jewish 
teachings about environmental care, specifically stewardship and humanity’s role as 
stewards, including reference to Psalm 24:1–3 and The Jewish Declaration on 
Nature – Assisi 1986; divergent Jewish responses to animal rights, animal 
experimentation and the use of animals for food, including the application of ethical 
theories such as utilitarianism. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
39 
Area of Study 1G – Sikhism 
Overview 
This area of study comprises a study in depth of Sikhism as a lived religion within the United 
Kingdom and throughout the world, and its beliefs and teachings on life, specifically within 
families, and with regard to matters of life and death. 
There are four sections: Sikh Beliefs, Marriage and the Family, Living the Sikh Life and 
Matters of Life and Death. 
The significance and importance of the various beliefs, issues and practices to Sikhs today 
should be explored throughout the sections. This should include reference to how scripture 
informs a Sikh’s understanding of the topics and how approaches to the issues are 
underpinned by philosophical arguments and ethical theory as applicable.  
Students will be expected to study Sikhism within the context of the wider British society, 
the religious traditions of which are, in the main, Christian. Students should compare and 
contrast the areas of belief and practice within Sikhism with Christianity as outlined in the 
content below. 
● Beliefs about the afterlife and their significance (1.4)* 
● The practice and significance of worship (3.5)* 
Students should recognise that Sikhism is one of the many religions and world views in Great 
Britain, which include Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism, Sikhism and non-religious views 
such as Humanism and atheism. This knowledge may be applied throughout the assessment 
of the specified content. 
Students should compare and contrast the areas of ethics and/or philosophy within Sikhism 
and non-religious views as outlined in the content below. 
Students should also recognise that within Sikhism there may be more than one perspective 
in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed. Common and divergent 
views within Sikhism in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed should 
be included throughout, including reference to Khalsa and non-Khalsa Sikhs.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
40 
1G Sikhism  
Section 1: Sikh Beliefs 
Students should have an understanding of: 
1.1 The nature of God: how the characteristics of God are shown in the Mool Mantar, 
Guru Granth Sahib 1, and why the characteristics are important and why the Mool 
Mantar is significant for Sikhs.  
1.2 God as Creator: the nature and importance of God as Creator (Karta Purakh) for 
Sikhs; Sikh teachings on God as Creator, including Guru Granth Sahib 12 and 94. 
1.3 The nature of human life: the purpose and significance of life as an opportunity to 
unite with God; Sikh understandings of why uniting with God is important; how 
uniting with God will affect their lives, including Guru Granth Sahib 12. 
1.4* Sikh beliefs about life after death: the nature of karma, rebirth and mukti 
(liberation); how they are shown in the Guru Granth Sahib, including reference to 
Guru Granth Sahib 2, 11 and 78; divergent understandings of how and why karma, 
rebirth and mukti are important for Sikh life today.  
1.5 Purpose of life: the nature and importance of being gurmukh (God-centred) not 
manmukh (self-centred) and the elimination of haumai (ego/pride), including 
reference to Guru Granth Sahib 125 and 226; what actions make a gurmukh Sikh; 
divergent understandings of why being gurmukh and eliminating haumai is 
important in Sikh life today. 
1.6 The oneness of humanity: how the equality of all humans is shown in the Guru 
Granth Sahib, including Guru Granth Sahib 349; how equality is shown in stories 
from the lives of the Gurus, including the example of Mai Bhago and the 
appointment of women as teachers; and how equality is shown in Sikh life today; 
how and why complete equality of men and women is important for Sikhs today. 
1.7 Sewa (service to others): the nature of sewa, including tan, man and dhan; the 
origins and purpose of sewa and its importance in the development of Sikhism, 
including Guru Granth Sahib 26; divergent understandings of the practice and 
importance of sewa in Sikh life today in reflecting the priority of service to others.  
1.8 Sangat: the nature and history of the sangat; divergent understandings of why the 
sangat is important for Sikhs, including Guru Granth Sahib 1316; the concept of 
Sat Sangat and divergent understandings of its significance for Sikhs; problems for 
Sikhs living without a sangat. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
41 
1G Sikhism  
Section 2: Marriage and the Family 
Students should have an understanding of: 
2.1 The importance and purpose of marriage in Sikhism: the significance and purpose 
of marriage in Sikh life; Sikh teachings about marriage, including the Lavan by 
Guru Ram Das; divergent non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) attitudes 
to the importance of marriage in society, including a lack of importance, 
cohabitation and the Sikh responses to these attitudes. 
2.2 Sikh teaching about the importance of sexual relationships: divergent Sikh teaching 
about sexual relationships; Sikh teaching on sexual relationships outside of 
marriage and same-sex sexual relationships, including Guru Granth Sahib 4 and 
discussion of the January 2005 edict of the Jathedar of the Akal Takht in Amritsar; 
non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) attitudes to sexual relationships, 
including the acceptance of sexual relationships outside marriage and same-sex 
sexual relationships and Sikh responses to them. 
2.3 Sikh teaching about the purpose and importance of the family: Sikh teaching about 
the purpose of families – procreation, security and education of children, including 
Guru Granth Sahib 71 and 599; divergent Sikh responses to the different types of 
family within 21st-century society (nuclear, single parent, same-sex parents, 
extended and blended families). 
2.4 Support for the family in the Sikh community: how and why the local community 
tries to support families, including through family worship, rites of passage, classes 
for parents, groups for children and counselling; the importance of this support in 
the sangat for Sikhs today, including Rahit Maryada Chapter 10. 
2.5 Sikh teaching on contraception: divergent Sikh teachings and attitudes about 
contraception and family planning, including reference to the concept of kaam and 
The Sikh Missionary Society Introduction to Sikhism, Section VII: Sikhism & Modern 
Problems Q124; different non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) attitudes 
to family planning and the application of ethical theories, such as situation ethics, 
and Sikh responses to them. 
2.6 Sikh teachings about divorce: divergent Sikh teachings and attitudes towards 
divorce and remarriage, including reference to Rahit Maryada Chapter 11 and 
arguments used to support or reject divorce; non-religious (including atheist and 
Humanist) attitudes to divorce and remarriage, including the application of ethical 
theories, such as situation ethics, and Sikh responses to them. 
2.7 Sikh teaching about the equality of men and women in the family: divergent Sikh 
beliefs, teachings and attitudes about the role of men and women in the family 
including Guru Granth Sahib 788. 
2.8 Divergent Sikh teachings about gender prejudice and discrimination: Sikh teachings 
about gender prejudice and discrimination, including Guru Granth Sahib 473; 
examples of Sikh opposition to gender prejudice and discrimination. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
42 
1G Sikhism 
Section 3: Living the Sikh Life 
Students should have an understanding of: 
3.1 Features of the gurdwara: the nature, history and purpose of the design of the 
Gurdwara as the ‘Door/Gate of the Guru’, including Rahit Maryada Chapters 4–6; 
how and why objects of devotion are used within the gurdwara: Guru Granth Sahib, 
takht, chanani, chaur, the langar hall, four doors, and the Nishan Sahib; divergent 
understandings of the importance of these features in Sikh life today. 
3.2 The gurdwara: the role and importance of the gurdwara within the Sikh community 
including reference to Guru Granth Sahib 1391; activities that take place within the 
gurdwara and why; the nature and importance of visiting Sikh historical gurdwaras: 
the Harmandir Sahib in Amritsar (the Golden Temple); divergent understandings of 
the importance of making such visits, including reference to Guru Granth Sahib 4. 
3.3 Langar: the history of langar including Guru Granth Sahib 967; the nature and 
purposes of langar; the significance of langar for Sikhs today, especially as an 
expression of sewa. 
3.4 Nam Japna – meditating on the name of God: the nature and significance of Nam 
Japna; diverse ways in which the Nam Japna is used in the gurdwara and in Sikh 
daily life, including Guru Granth Sahib 1142. 
3.5* Prayer, including reference to Guru Granth Sahib 305: the nature, role and purpose 
of prayer in the home; the different types of prayer; when prayer might take place 
and why; the importance of having different prayers. 
3.6 Akhand path (continuous 48-hour reading of the Guru Granth Sahib): the nature, 
history, role and purpose of the akhand path including reference Rahit Maryada 
Chapter 7; how and why Sikhs might take part in the akhand path: why the akhand 
path is important for the Sikh community and for individual Sikhs. 
3.7 Gurpurbs and commemorations: divergent understandings of the nature, history and 
purpose of gurpurbs and commemorations; why they are important for Sikhs today. 
The origins and meaning of gurpurbs, including Guru Nanak’s birthday, Vaisakhi, 
including reference to the account of the events found in Gurbilas Patshahi 10. 
Divali: the origins and meaning of commemorations, including the martyrdom of 
Guru Arjan and Guru Tagh Bahadur Ji. 
3.8 Birth and naming rituals and ceremonies: the celebration and significance of Naam 
Karan and Hukamnama; the significance of Amrit Sanskar (the initiation ceremony) 
for Sikh families, including reference to the Rahit Maryada Chapters 11 and 13; 
divergent understandings of these ceremonies between khalsa and  
non-khalsa Sikhs; the significance of the names Singh and Kaur in the naming and 
Amrit ceremonies, and for Sikh identity today. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
43 
1G Sikhism  
Section 4: Matters of Life and Death 
Students should have an understanding of: 
4.1 Sikh teachings about the origins and value of the universe: scientific explanations 
for the origins of the universe and Sikh responses to them, including the 
compatibility of Sikh beliefs and science; divergent Sikh responses and teachings 
about the value of the universe in Sikhism, including Guru Granth Sahib 1037; 
responses to the possible view that the universe may be used as a commodity.  
4.2 Sikh teachings about the sanctity of life: Sikh teachings about why human life is 
holy; Sikh teachings on the sanctity of life including Guru Granth Sahib 1239; 
divergent understandings of the importance of sanctity of life for Sikhs today. 
4.3 Sikh responses to scientific and non-religious explanations about the origins of 
human life including evolution and survival of the fittest with reference to 
interpretations of Guru Granth Sahib 19; the significance of the responses to 
scientific and non-religious explanations, such as evolution and survival of the 
fittest, for Sikhs today. 
4.4 Implications of the Sikh teachings about the value and sanctity of life for the issue 
of abortion: the nature of abortion; different Sikh teachings about the nature and 
use of abortion, including reference to Guru Granth Sahib 74 and whether life 
begins at conception; non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) arguments 
surrounding its use, including the application of ethical theories, such as situation 
ethics, and Sikh responses to them. 
4.5 Sikh responses to the existence of death and the afterlife: Sikh teachings and 
beliefs that support the existence of a life after death; divergent Sikh responses to 
arguments for life after death (including remembered lives, including possible 
interpretations of Guru Granth Sahib 19, paranormal, logic, reward, comfort and 
meeting loved ones); the significance of arguments for belief in life after death for 
Sikhs. 
4.6 Sikh responses to non-religious arguments against life after death: why Sikh reject 
arguments against belief in life after death (including as a source of comfort, lack of 
evidence, fraudulent accounts, social control), including Guru Granth Sahib 430.  
4.7 Implications of the Sikh teachings about the value and sanctity of life for the issue 
of euthanasia: Sikh teachings about the nature and use of euthanasia, including 
reference to Lord Indarjit Singh’s speech in the House of Lords on  
12 December 2014 in the Lords’ Debate on Assisted Dying; non-religious (including 
atheist and Humanist) arguments surrounding its use, including the application of 
ethical theories, such as situation ethics, and Sikh responses to them, including 
support for hospice care.  
4.8 Sikh responses to issues in the natural world: Sikh responses to threats to the 
world, including pollution, global warming and the use of natural resources, 
including Guru Granth Sahib 1037; divergent Sikh responses to animal rights, 
including animal experimentation and the use of animals for food, and the 
application of ethical theories such as utilitarianism. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
44 
Assessment information 
Paper 1: Area of Study 1 – Religion and Ethics 
● First assessment: May/June 2018.  
● The assessment is 1 hour and 45 minutes. 
● The assessment is out of 102 marks. 
● Students must answer all sections and all questions on the chosen religion. The religion 
must be different for each area of study. 
● The paper may include short open, open response and extended writing questions. 
● The paper will assess spelling, punctuation and grammar (SPaG) and use of specialist 
terminology and these will contribute a minimum of 5% of marks towards the overall 
weighting for this paper. 
Synoptic assessment 
Synoptic assessment requires students to work across different parts of a qualification and to 
show their accumulated knowledge and understanding of a topic or subject area. 
Synoptic assessment enables students to show their ability to combine their skills, knowledge 
and understanding with breadth and depth of the subject.  
Synopticity will be assessed where students are required to bring together their knowledge 
and understanding of religion from across the course of study. 
Sample assessment materials 
Sample papers and mark schemes for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel  
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Religious Studies B Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) 
document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
45 
Area of Study 2: Religion, Peace and Conflict 
The focus of this area of study is on Religion, Peace and Conflict; this is one of three areas of 
study of which students must complete two. 
For this area of study, students must study all four content sections in relation to one 
religion: 
1. Beliefs  
2. Crime and Punishment 
3. Living the Religious Life 
4. Peace and Conflict 
Students must study a different religion in their second area of study; students who study 
one Area of Study from the perspective of Catholic Christianity are prohibited from studying 
Christianity in their second Area of Study. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
46 
Area of Study 2A – Catholic Christianity 
Overview 
This area of study comprises a study in depth of Catholic Christianity as a lived religion 
within the United Kingdom and throughout the world, and its beliefs and teachings on life, 
specifically about the issues of peace and conflict, and crime and punishment. 
There are four sections: Catholic Beliefs, Crime and Punishment, Living the Catholic Life and 
Peace and Conflict. 
The significance and importance of the various beliefs, issues and practices to Catholics 
today should be explored throughout the sections. This should include reference to how the 
Bible informs a Catholic’s understanding of the topics and how approaches to the issues are 
underpinned by philosophical arguments and ethical theory as applicable.  
Students will be expected to study Catholic Christianity within the context of the wider British 
society, the religious traditions of which are, in the main, Christian. Students should compare 
and contrast the areas of belief and practice within Catholic Christianity with wider Christian 
perspectives as outlined in the content below. 
● Beliefs about the afterlife and their significance (1.8)* 
● The practice and significance of worship (3.2)* 
Students should recognise that Catholic Christianity is one of the many religions and world 
views in Great Britain, which include Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism, Sikhism and non-
religious views such as Humanism and atheism. This knowledge may be applied throughout 
the assessment of the specified content. 
Students should compare and contrast the areas of ethics and/or philosophy within Catholic 
Christianity with wider Christian perspectives and non-religious views as outlined in the 
content below. 
Students should also recognise that within Catholic Christianity there may be more than one 
perspective in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed. Common and 
divergent views within the wider Christian tradition in the way beliefs and teachings are 
understood and expressed should be included throughout including reference to Orthodox, 
Protestant and other Christian traditions.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
47 
2A Catholic Christianity 
Section 1: Catholic Beliefs 
Students should have an understanding of: 
1.1 The Trinity: the nature and significance of the Trinity as expressed in the Nicene 
Creed; the nature and significance of the oneness of God; the nature and 
significance of each of the Persons individually: God as the Father, Son and Holy 
Spirit; how this is reflected in worship and belief in the life of a Catholic today. 
1.2 Biblical understandings of God as a Trinity of Persons: the nature and significance 
of God as a Trinity of Persons, including reference to the baptism of Jesus  
(Matthew 3:13–17); the historical development of the doctrine of the Trinity, 
including reference to the First Council of Nicaea and the First Council of 
Constantinople. 
1.3 Creation: the nature and significance of the biblical account of Creation, including 
Genesis 1–3; and how it may be understood in divergent ways in Christianity, 
including reference to literal and metaphorical interpretations; the significance of 
the Creation account for Catholics in understanding the nature and characteristics 
of God, especially as Creator, benevolent, omnipotent and eternal. 
1.4 The significance of the Creation account in understanding the nature of humanity: 
the nature and significance of the nature of humanity being created in the image of 
God, including reference to Genesis 1–3 and divergent understandings of 
humanity’s relationship with Creation (dominion and stewardship); the implications 
of these beliefs for Catholics today. 
1.5 The Incarnation: Jesus as incarnate Son, the divine Word, both fully God and fully 
human; the scriptural origins of this belief, including John 1:1–18 and its 
importance for Catholics today. 
1.6 The events in the Paschal Mystery: Catholic teachings about the life, death, 
resurrection and ascension of Jesus, including reference to Luke 24; the redemptive 
efficacy of these events and their significance for Catholics today. 
1.7 The significance of the life, death, resurrection and ascension of Jesus for Catholic 
beliefs about salvation and grace, including John 3:10–21 and Acts 4:8–12; the 
implications and significance of these events for Catholic practice today.  
1.8* Catholic beliefs about eschatology: life after death; the nature of resurrection, 
judgement, heaven, hell and purgatory, including reference to John 11:17–27 and  
2 Corinthians 5:1–10; divergent Christian beliefs about life after death, with 
reference to purgatory and the nature of resurrection; why belief in life after death 
is important for Catholics today. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
48 
2A Catholic Christianity  
Section 2: Crime and Punishment  
Students should have an understanding of: 
2.1 Catholic attitudes towards justice: the nature of justice and why justice is important 
for Catholics, including Micah 3:1–12; Catholic teachings and responses to why 
justice is important for victims; non-religious attitudes (including atheist and 
Humanist) about why justice is important, regardless of religion and belief, and 
Catholic responses to these attitudes. 
2.2 Catholic attitudes towards crime: Catholic teachings about and responses to the 
nature, causes and problem of crime, including John 8:1–11; what action is taken 
by Christian individuals and Christian groups to end crime, including Prison 
Fellowship. 
2.3 Catholic teachings about good, evil and suffering: Catholic teachings about the 
nature of good actions and how they are rewarded, and teachings about the nature 
of evil actions; non-religious attitudes (including atheist and Humanist) about why 
people suffer, including believing in religion, and Catholic responses to them; 
divergent Christian understandings of why people suffer, including the Parable of 
the Sheep and Goats (Matthew 25:31–46).  
2.4 Catholic attitudes towards punishment: the nature of punishment; why punishment 
is important for Catholics; the nature and meaning of biblical teachings about 
punishment, including Luke 12:35–48; Catholic teachings on why punishment can 
be regarded as justice and why punishment might be needed in society.  
2.5 Catholic attitudes towards the aims of punishment: Catholic attitudes towards each 
of the aims of punishment (protection, retribution, deterrence and reformation); 
the nature and meaning of biblical examples of teaching about punishment, 
including Galatians 6:1–10. 
2.6 Catholic teachings about forgiveness: Catholic teachings and responses to the 
nature of forgiveness and biblical teachings about it; how offenders are forgiven by 
the community and why this is needed; Catholic teachings about mercy and why is 
it important to show mercy to criminals, including Matthew 5:21–26. 
2.7 Catholic teachings about the treatment of criminals: Catholic teachings about the 
treatment of criminals, including Proverbs 31:8–9; Catholic teachings about the use 
of torture, human rights, fair trial and trial by jury; divergent attitudes, including 
the application of ethical theories, such as situation ethics, towards the treatment 
of criminals, which may accept the use of torture if it is for the greater good. 
2.8 Catholic attitudes towards the death penalty: the nature and purpose of capital 
punishment, Catholic teaching about capital punishment, divergent Christian 
teachings for and against capital punishment, including interpretations of  
Genesis 9:6, Exodus 21:8–13 and Matthew 5:38–48; non-religious (including 
atheist and Humanist) attitudes towards the use of capital punishment, including 
the application of ethical theories, such as situation ethics, and Catholic responses 
to them.  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
49 
2A Catholic Christianity  
Section 3: Living the Catholic Life 
Students should have an understanding of: 
3.1 The sacramental nature of reality: Catholic teachings about how the whole of 
creation manifests the presence of God; the meaning and effects of each of the 
seven sacraments, including Catechism of the Catholic Church 1210–1211; the 
practice and symbolism of each sacrament; how sacraments communicate the grace 
of God; divergent Christian attitudes to sacraments, including reference to Orthodox 
and Protestant Christianity. 
3.2* Liturgical worship within Catholic Christianity: the nature and significance of the 
Mass for Catholics, including its structure and the Eucharist as the ‘source and 
summit of Christian life’, with reference to Lumen Gentium paragraph 7; divergent 
Christian attitudes towards the practice and meaning of liturgical worship, including 
its significance for Catholics and the less structured worship in evangelical Christian 
denominations. 
3.3 The funeral rite as a liturgical celebration of the Church: practices associated with 
the funeral rite in the home, the church and the cemetery, including reference to 
'Preparing my funeral' by Vincent Nichols, Archbishop of Westminster; the aims of 
the funeral rite, including communion with the deceased; the communion of the 
community and the proclamation of eternal life to the community and its significance 
for Catholics. 
3.4 Prayer as the ‘raising of hearts and minds to God’: the nature and significance of 
different types of prayer; the Lord’s Prayer, including Matthew 6:5–14, set 
(formulaic) prayers and informal (extempore) prayer; when each type might be 
used and why; the importance of prayer and the importance for Catholics of having 
different types of worship. 
3.5 The role and importance of forms of popular piety: the nature and significance of of 
the Rosary, Eucharistic adoration and Stations of the Cross; how each of these 
might be used and why; the importance of having different types of worship for 
Catholics, including reference to Catechism of the Catholic Church 1674–1676; 
divergent Christian attitudes to these forms of piety.  
3.6 Pilgrimage: the nature, history and purpose of Catholic pilgrimage; the significance 
of the places people go on pilgrimage; divergent Christian understandings about 
whether pilgrimage is important for Christians today, with specific reference to 
Jerusalem, Lourdes, Rome, Walsingham and the Catechism of the Catholic Church 
2691–2696. 
3.7 Catholic Social Teaching: how Catholic Social Teaching reflects the teaching to show 
love of neighbour; Catholic teaching on justice, peace and reconciliation, Evangelii 
Gaudium paragraphs 182–237 – The inclusion of the poor in society; how these 
teachings might be reflected in the lives of individual Catholics, including reference 
to Matthew 25:31–46 (the Parable of the Sheep and Goats); the work of CAFOD, 
what it does and why. 
3.8 Catholic mission and evangelism: the history and significance of mission and 
evangelism for Catholics; divergent ways this is put into practice by the Church and 
individual Catholics locally, nationally and globally, and how this fulfils the 
commission of Jesus and teachings of the Church, including Evangelii Gaudium 
Chapter 5. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
50 
2A Catholic Christianity 
Section 4: Peace and Conflict 
Students should have an understanding of: 
4.1 Catholic attitudes towards peace: the nature and importance of peace for Catholics; 
Church teachings about peace; Jesus as a peacemaker, including interpretations of 
Luke 22:47–53 and as the ‘Prince of Peace’ Isaiah 9:6. 
4.2 The role of Catholics in peacemaking: Church teachings about the role of Catholics 
today as peacemakers; the importance of justice, forgiveness and reconciliation for 
Catholics in peacemaking; the work of one Catholic group working for peace today, 
what it does and why it tries to work for peace, including interpretations of  
Matthew 5:1–16. 
4.3 Catholic attitudes to conflict: Catholic teachings and responses to the nature and 
causes of conflict; Catholic responses to the problems conflict causes, including 
Matthew 26:47–56 and links to situation ethics; non-religious (including atheist and 
Humanist) attitudes about the role of religion in the causes of conflict and Catholic 
responses to them. 
4.4 Catholic attitudes to pacifism: Catholic teachings and responses to the nature and 
history of pacifism; Catholic teachings about passive resistance, including John 
14:22–31 and an example of its use, including Thomas Merton; divergent Christian 
attitudes to pacifism, including reference to Quakers and passive resistance and 
Catholic responses to them.  
4.5 Catholic attitudes to the Just War theory: Catholic teachings and responses to the 
nature, history and importance of the Just War theory; the conditions of a Just 
War; divergent Christian opinions about whether a Just War is possible with links to 
situation ethics; Catholic teachings on Just War, including interpretations of 
Romans 13:1–7; the application of ethical theories such as situation ethics. 
4.6 Catholic attitudes to Holy War: Catholic teachings and responses to the nature of a 
Holy War; the nature and meaning of Catholic teachings about war and peace, 
including interpretations of Matthew 10:34–40; divergent Christian teachings about 
war; non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) attitudes towards Holy War and 
Catholic responses to them.  
4.7 Catholic attitudes to weapons of mass destruction (WMD): Catholic teachings and 
responses to the problems and benefits of WMD; Catholic attitudes towards the use 
of such weapons, including interpretations of Deuteronomy 20; non-religious 
attitudes (including atheist and Humanist) and the application of ethical theories 
(such as utilitarianism) which support the acquisition of weapons of mass 
destruction, and Catholic responses to them.  
4.8 Catholic attitudes to issues surrounding conflict: Catholic teachings and responses 
to the nature and history of problems involved in conflict – violence, war and 
terrorism, including Luke 6:27–31; how Catholics, including Dorothy Day and Oscar 
Romero, have worked to overcome these issues. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
51 
Area of Study 2B – Christianity 
Overview 
This area of study comprises a study in depth of Christianity as a lived religion within the 
United Kingdom and throughout the world, and its beliefs and teachings on life, specifically 
about the issues of peace and conflict, and crime and punishment. 
There are four sections: Christian Beliefs, Crime and Punishment, Living the Christian Life 
and Peace and Conflict.  
The significance and importance of the various beliefs, issues and practices to Christians 
today should be explored throughout the sections. This should include reference to how the 
Bible informs a Christian’s understanding of the topics and how approaches to the issues are 
underpinned by philosophical arguments and ethical theory as applicable.  
Students will be expected to study Christianity within the context of the wider British society, 
the religious traditions of which are, in the main, Christian. Students should recognise that 
Christianity is one of the many religions and world views in Great Britain, which include 
Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism, Sikhism and non-religious views such as Humanism 
and atheism. This knowledge may be applied throughout the assessment of the specified 
content.  
Students should compare and contrast two areas of belief and practice within Christianity 
with one of either Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism, or Sikhism: 
● Beliefs about the afterlife and their significance (1.6)* 
● The practice and significance of worship (3.1)* 
Students should compare and contrast the areas of ethics and/or philosophy within 
Christianity with non-religious views as outlined in the content below. 
Students should also recognise that within Christianity there may be more than one 
perspective in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed. Common and 
divergent views within Christianity in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and 
expressed should be included throughout, including reference to Catholic, Orthodox, 
Protestant and other Christian traditions.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
52 
2B Christianity  
Section 1: Christian Beliefs  
Students should have an understanding of: 
1.1  The Trinity: the nature and significance of the Trinity as expressed in the Nicene 
Creed; the nature and significance of the oneness of God; the nature and 
significance of each of the Persons individually, including reference to Matthew 
3:13–17; how this is reflected in Christian worship and belief today. 
1.2 The creation of the universe and of humanity: the biblical account of creation and 
divergent ways in which it may be understood by Christians, including as literal and 
metaphorical; the role of the Word and Spirit in creation, including John 1:1–18 
and Genesis 1–3; the importance of creation for Christians today. 
1.3 The Incarnation: the nature and importance of the person of Jesus Christ as the 
incarnate Son of God; the biblical basis of this teaching, including John 1.1–18 and 
1 Timothy 3:16 and its significance for Christians today. 
1.4 The last days of Jesus’ life: the Last Supper, betrayal, arrest, trial, crucifixion, 
resurrection and ascension of Jesus; the accounts of these within the Bible, 
including Luke 22–24 and the significance of these events to understanding the 
person of Jesus Christ. 
1.5 The nature and significance of salvation and the role of Christ within salvation: law, 
sin, grace and Spirit, the role of Christ in salvation, including John 3:10–21 and 
Acts 4:8–12; the nature and significance of atonement within Christianity and its 
link to salvation. 
1.6* Christian eschatology: divergent Christian teachings about life after death, 
including the nature and significance of resurrection, judgement, heaven, and hell 
and purgatory with reference to the 39 Articles of Religion and Catholic teachings; 
how beliefs about life after death are shown in the Bible, including reference to  
2 Corinthians 5:1–10 and divergent understandings as to why they are important 
for Christians today. 
1.7 The problem of evil/suffering and a loving and righteous God: the problems it 
raises for Christians about the nature of God including reference to omnipotence 
and benevolence, including Psalm 103; how the problem may cause believers to 
question their faith or the existence of God; the nature and examples of natural 
suffering, moral suffering. 
1.8 Divergent solutions offered to the problem of evil/suffering and a loving and 
righteous God: biblical, theoretical and practical, including reference to Psalm 119, 
Job, free will, vale of soul-making, prayer, and charity; the success of solutions to 
the problem.  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
53 
2B Christianity  
Section 2: Crime and Punishment 
Students should have an understanding of: 
2.1 Christian attitudes towards justice: the nature of justice and why justice is 
important for Christians, including Micah 3 and 6; Christian responses to why 
justice is important for victims; non-religious attitudes (including atheist and 
Humanist) about why justice is important, regardless of religion and belief, and 
Christian responses to these attitudes. 
2.2 Christian attitudes towards crime: Christian teachings about and responses to the 
nature, causes and problem of crime, including John 8:1–11; what action is taken 
by Christian individuals and Christian groups to end crime, including Prison 
Fellowship and Street Pastors. 
2.3 Christian teachings about good, evil and suffering: Christian teachings about the 
nature of good actions and how they are rewarded, and teachings about the nature 
of evil actions; non-religious attitudes (including atheist and Humanist) about why 
people suffer, including believing in religion, and Christian responses to them; 
divergent Christian teachings about why people suffer, including the Parable of the 
Sheep and Goats (Matthew 25:31–46). 
2.4 Christian attitudes towards punishment: the nature of punishment; divergent 
Christian attitudes towards the use of punishment, the nature and meaning of 
biblical teachings about punishment, including Luke 12:35–48; Christian teachings 
on why punishment can be regarded as justice and why punishment might be 
needed in society.  
2.5 Christian attitudes towards the aims of punishment: Christian attitudes towards 
each of the aims of punishment (protection, retribution, deterrence and 
reformation); the nature and meaning of biblical examples of teaching about 
punishment, including Galatians 6:1–10. 
2.6 Christian teachings about forgiveness: Christian teachings and responses to the 
nature of forgiveness and biblical teachings about it; how offenders are forgiven by 
the community and why this is needed; Christian teachings about the nature of 
restorative justice, examples of its use by Christian organisations and why is it 
important for criminals, including Matthew 5:21–26. 
2.7 Christian teachings about the treatment of criminals: biblical teachings about the 
treatment of criminals, including Proverbs 31:8–9; divergent Christian attitudes 
towards the use of torture, human rights, fair trial and trial by jury; the application 
of ethical theories, such as situation ethics, which may accept the use of torture if it 
is for the greater good. 
2.8 Christian attitudes towards the death penalty: the nature and purpose of capital 
punishment; divergent Christian teachings about capital punishment, including 
interpretations of Genesis 9:6, Exodus 21:8–13 and Matthew 5:38–48;  
non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) attitudes towards the use of capital 
punishment, including the application of ethical theories, such as situation ethics, 
and Christian responses to them.  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
54 
2B Christianity  
Section 3: Living the Christian Life 
Students should have an understanding of:  
3.1 Christian worship: liturgical and non-liturgical forms of worship, including activities 
which are informal and individual, with reference to the Book of Common Prayer; 
when each form might be used and why; divergent Christian attitudes towards the 
practices, meaning and significance of liturgical and non-liturgical forms of worship 
in Christian life today, with reference to denominations which worship with less 
structure such as some Pentecostal churches. 
3.2 The role of the sacraments in Christian life and their practice in two denominations: 
the role of the sacraments/ordinance as a whole; the nature and importance of the 
meaning and celebration of baptism and the Eucharist in at least two denominations, 
including reference to the 39 Articles XXV–XXXVI; divergent Christian attitudes 
towards the use and number of sacraments in Orthodox, Catholic and Protestant 
traditions. 
3.3 The nature and purpose of prayer: the nature of and examples of the different types 
of prayer; set prayers; informal prayer and the Lord’s Prayer, including Matthew 
6:5–14; when each type might be used and why; divergent Christian attitudes 
towards the importance of each type of prayer for Christians today. 
3.4 Pilgrimage: the nature, history and purpose of pilgrimage, including interpretations 
of Luke 2:41–43; the significance of the places people go on pilgrimage; divergent 
Christian teachings about whether pilgrimage is important for Christians today, with 
specific reference to Catholic and Protestant understandings; the activities 
associated with, and significance of, Jerusalem, Iona, Taize and Walsingham. 
3.5 Christian religious celebrations: the nature and history of Christian festivals in the 
church year, including Christmas and Easter; the significance of celebrating Advent 
and Christmas; the significance of celebrating Holy Week and Easter, with reference 
to interpretations of 1 Corinthians 15:12–34.  
3.6 The future of the Christian Church: Church growth, the history and purpose of 
missionary and evangelical work, including reference to Mark 16:9–20 and  
John 20:21–22; divergent ways this is put into practice by the Church locally, 
nationally and globally; Christian attitudes of why evangelical work is important for 
the Church and for individual Christians. 
3.7 The role and importance of the local church in the local community: how and why it 
helps the individual believer and the local area; local parish activities, including 
interpretations of 1 Peter 5:1–4, ecumenism, outreach work, the centre of Christian 
identity and worship through living practices. 
3.8 The role and importance of the Church in the worldwide community: how and why it 
works for reconciliation and the problems faced by the persecuted Church; divergent 
Christian responses to teachings about charity, including 1 Corinthians 13 and 
Matthew 25:31–46; the work of Christian Aid, what it does and why. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
55 
2B Christianity  
Section 4: Peace and Conflict 
Students should have an understanding of: 
4.1 Christian attitudes towards peace: divergent Christian attitudes towards the nature 
and importance of peace for Christians; Church teachings about peace; Jesus as a 
peacemaker, including interpretations of Luke 22:47–53. 
4.2 The role of Christians in peacemaking: Christian teachings about peacemaking; the 
importance of justice, forgiveness and reconciliation for Christians in peacemaking; 
the work of one Christian group working for peace today, what it does and why it 
tries to work for peace, including Matthew 5:1–16. 
4.3 Christian attitudes to conflict: Christian teachings and responses to the nature and 
causes of conflict; Christian responses to the problems conflict causes, including 
Matthew 26:47–56 and links to situation ethics; non-religious (including atheist and 
Humanist) attitudes about the role of religion in the causes of conflict and Christian 
responses to them. 
4.4 Christian attitudes to pacifism: divergent Christian teachings and responses to the 
nature and history of pacifism, including reference to Quakers; divergent Christian 
teachings about passive resistance, including John 14:22–31 and an example of its 
use, including Martin Luther King.  
4.5 Christian attitudes to the Just War theory: Christian teachings and responses to the 
nature, history and importance of the Just War theory; the conditions of a Just War; 
divergent Christian opinions about whether a Just War is possible, including Romans 
13:1–7; the application of ethical theories such as situation ethics.  
4.6 Christian attitudes to Holy War: Christian teachings and responses to the nature of a 
Holy War; the nature and meaning of teachings about war and peace as shown in the 
Bible, including Matthew 10:34–40; divergent Christian teachings about war; non-
religious (including atheist and Humanist) attitudes towards Holy War and Christian 
responses to them. 
4.7 Christian attitudes to weapons of mass destruction (WMD): Christian teachings and 
responses to the problems and benefits of WMD; Christian attitudes towards the use 
of such weapons, including interpretations of Deuteronomy 20; non-religious 
attitudes (including atheist and Humanist) and the application of ethical theories 
(such as utilitarianism) which support the acquisition of weapons of mass destruction, 
and Christian responses to them.  
4.8 Christian attitudes to issues surrounding conflict: Christian teachings and responses 
to the nature and history of problems involved in conflict – violence, war and 
terrorism, including Luke 6:27–31; how Christians have worked to overcome these 
issues; non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) views towards the issues 
surrounding conflict and Christian responses to them. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
56 
Area of Study 2C – Islam 
Overview 
This area of study comprises a study in depth of Islam as a lived religion within the United 
Kingdom and throughout the world, and its beliefs and teachings on life, specifically about 
the issues of peace and conflict, and crime and punishment. 
There are four sections: Islamic Beliefs, Crime and Punishment, Living the Muslim Life and 
Peace and Conflict. 
The significance and importance of the various beliefs, issues and practices to Muslims today 
should be explored throughout the sections. This should include reference to how the Qur’an 
informs a Muslim’s understanding of the topics and how approaches to the issues are 
underpinned by philosophical arguments and ethical theory as applicable.  
Students will be expected to study Islam within the context of the wider British society, the 
religious traditions of which are, in the main, Christian. Students should compare and 
contrast the areas of belief and practice within Islam with Christianity as outlined in the 
content below. 
● Beliefs about the afterlife and their significance (1.8)* 
● The practice and significance of worship (3.3)* 
Students should recognise that Islam is one of the many religions and world views in Great 
Britain, which include Buddhism, Hinduism, Judaism, Sikhism and non-religious views such 
as Humanism and atheism. This knowledge may be applied throughout the assessment of 
the specified content. 
Students should compare and contrast the areas of ethics and/or philosophy within Islam 
and non-religious views as outlined in the content below. 
Students should also recognise that within Islam there may be more than one perspective in 
the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed. Common and divergent views 
within Islam in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed should be 
included throughout, including reference to Sunni and Shi’a traditions.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
57 
2C Islam 
Section 1: Muslim Beliefs  
Students should have an understanding of: 
1.1 The Six Beliefs of Islam: their nature, history and purpose, including Kitab  
al-iman 1:4; how they are understood and expressed in Sunni and Shi’a Muslim 
communities today; the importance of these principles for Muslims. 
1.2 The Five Roots of ‘Usul ad-Din in Shi’a Islam: Tawhid (oneness of Allah); 'Adl 
(Divine Justice); Nubuwwah (Prophethood); Imamah (Successors to Muhammad) 
and Mi'ad (The Day of Judgment and the Resurrection); the nature, history and 
purpose of the Five Roots with reference to their Qur’anic basis, including Surah 
112 (the oneness of Allah); the importance of these principles for different Shi’a 
communities today, including Sevener and Twelver. 
1.3 The nature of Allah: how the characteristics of Allah are shown in the Qur’an and 
why they are important; Tawhid (oneness), including Surah 16:35–36, immanence, 
transcendence, omnipotence, beneficence, mercy, fairness and justice, Adalat in 
Shi’a Islam. 
1.4 Risalah: the nature and importance of prophethood for Muslims, including  
Surah 2:136; what the roles of prophets teach Muslims, exemplified in the lives of 
Adam, Ibrahim, Isma’il, Musa, Dawud, Isa, and Muhammad. 
1.5 Muslim holy books (Kutub) – the nature, history, significance and purpose of 
Muslim holy books with reference to: the Qur’an; the Tawrat (Torah), including  
Surah 5:43–48; the Zabur (Psalms), including Surah 4:163–171; the Injil (Gospel), 
including Surah 57:27; and the Sahifah (Scrolls). Divergent Muslim views about the 
importance of the holy books in their lives today. 
1.6 Malaikah: the nature and importance of angels for Muslims; how angels Jibril, Izra’il 
and Mika’il are shown in the Quran, including Surah 32:11 and 2:97–98, and their 
significance for Muslims today. 
1.7 al-Qadr: the nature and importance of Predestination for Muslims; how al-Qadr and 
human freedom relates to the Day of Judgement, including reference to Sahih al-
Bukhari 78:685; divergent understandings of predestination in Sunni and Shi’a 
Islam; the implications of belief in al-Qadr for Muslims today.  
1.8* Akhirah: Muslim teachings about life after death; the nature of judgement, paradise 
and hell; how they are shown in the Qur’an, including Surah 17:49–72; divergent 
ways in which Muslim teachings about life after death affect the life of a Muslim 
today.  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
58 
2C Islam  
Section 2: Crime and Punishment 
Students should have an understanding of: 
2.1 Muslim attitudes towards justice: Muslim teachings about the nature of justice and 
why justice is important for Muslims, including Surah 4:135; Muslim responses to 
why justice is important for victims; non-religious attitudes (including atheist and 
Humanist) about why justice is important, regardless of religion and belief, and 
Muslim responses to these attitudes. 
2.2 Muslim attitudes towards crime: Muslim teachings about and responses to the 
nature, causes and problem of crime, including Surah 16:90–92 and about crime as 
a distraction from a focus on Allah; what action is taken by Muslim individuals and 
Muslim groups to end crime, including the Muslim Chaplains Association and the 
work of the Mosaic Community Trust. 
2.3 Muslim teachings about good, evil and suffering: Muslim teachings about the nature 
of good actions, how they are rewarded, and teachings about the nature of evil 
actions; non-religious attitudes (including atheist and Humanist) about why people 
suffer, including believing in religion, and Muslim responses to them; divergent 
Muslim teachings about why people suffer, including Surah 76. 
2.4 Muslim attitudes towards punishment: divergent Muslim teachings and attitudes 
towards the nature and use of punishment, including Surah 2:178 and 5:44–46 and 
links to situation ethics; Muslim teachings on why punishment can be regarded as 
justice and why punishment might be needed in society. 
2.5 Muslim attitudes towards the aims of punishment: divergent Muslim attitudes 
towards each of the aims of punishment (protection, retribution, deterrence and 
reformation); Qur’anic teachings about punishment, including Surah 4:26–32. 
2.6 Muslim teachings about forgiveness: Muslim teachings and responses about the 
nature and importance of forgiveness, including Surah 64:14; how offenders are 
forgiven by the community and why this is needed; Muslim responses to the nature 
and use of restorative justice, and why it is important for criminals. 
2.7 Muslim teachings about the treatment of criminals: Muslim teachings about the 
treatment of criminals, including interpretations of Surah 76:1–12; divergent 
Muslim attitudes towards the use of torture, human rights, fair trial and trial by 
jury; the application of ethical theories, such as situation ethics, which may accept 
the use of torture if it is for the greater good. 
2.8 Muslim attitudes towards the death penalty: the nature and purpose of capital 
punishment; divergent Muslim teachings about the nature, purpose and arguments 
surrounding the use of capital punishment, including Sahih Muslim Hadith 16:4152; 
non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) attitudes towards the use of capital 
punishment, including the application of ethical theories, such as situation ethics, 
and Muslim responses to them. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
59 
2C Islam  
Section 3: Living the Muslim Life 
Students should have an understanding of: 
3.1 Ten Obligatory Acts of Shi’a Islam: their nature, history and purpose of the Ten 
Obligatory Acts; the diversity of practice and importance of Ten Obligatory Acts  
for Shi’a Muslims today; their basis in the Qur’an, including reference to  
Surah 9:71–73; divergent understandings of these principles within Sunni Islam, 
including links with the Five Pillars. 
3.2 Shahadah as one of the Five Pillars: the nature, role and significance of Shahadah 
for Sunni and Shi’a Muslims, including reference to Surah 3:17–21; why reciting 
Shahadah is important for Muslims, and its place in Muslim practice today. 
3.3* Salah as one of the Five Pillars, including reference to Surah 15:98–99 and 29:45: 
the nature, history, significance and purpose of Salah for Sunni and Shi’a Muslims, 
including different ways of understanding them; how Salah is performed, including 
ablution, times, directions, movements and recitations, in the home and mosque 
and Jummah prayer. 
3.4 Sawm as one of the Five Pillars: the nature, role, significance and purpose of fasting 
during Ramadan, including Surah 2:183–185; those who are excused from fasting 
and why. The significance of the Night of Power: the nature, history and purpose of 
the Night of Power; why Laylat al-Qadr is important for Muslims today. 
3.5 Zakah as one of the Five Pillars and Khums: the nature, role, significance and 
purpose of Zakah and Khums, including Surah 9:58–60 and 8:36–42; why Zakah is 
important for Sunni Muslims; why Khums is important for Shi’a Muslims; the 
benefits of receiving Zakah or Khums. 
3.6 Hajj as one of the Five Pillars: the nature, role, origins and significance of Hajj, 
including Surah 2:124–130 and 22:25–30; how Hajj is performed and why Hajj is 
important for Muslims; benefits and challenges of performing Hajj for Muslims. 
3.7 Jihad: the origins, meaning and significance of Jihad in Islam; divergent 
understandings of Jihad within Islam, including the difference between lesser and 
greater Jihad; the conditions for declaration of lesser Jihad, including reference to 
Surah 2:190–194 and 22:39; the importance of Jihad in the life of Muslims. 
3.8 The nature, origins, activities, meaning and significance of the celebration/ 
commemoration of Id-ul-Adha, with reference to Surah 37:77–111, and Id-ul-Fitr in 
Sunni Islam, with reference to their place within Shi’a Islam; and Id-ul-Ghadeer, 
with reference to Hadith and the interpretation of Surah 5:3, and Ashura in Shi’a 
Islam, with reference to their place within Sunni Islam. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
60 
2C Islam  
Section 4: Peace and Conflict 
Students should have an understanding of: 
4.1 Muslim attitudes towards peace: Muslim teachings about the nature and importance 
of peace, including Surah 25:63; Muslim understandings about Islam as a religion 
of peace and how this may be understood in the life of a Muslim. 
4.2 The role of Muslims in peacemaking: Muslim teachings about peacemaking; the 
importance for Muslims of justice, forgiveness and reconciliation in peacemaking, 
including Surah 41:31–38; the work of Muslims working for peace today. 
4.3 Muslim attitudes to conflict: Muslim teachings and responses to the nature and 
causes of conflict; Muslim responses to the problems conflict causes within society, 
including Surah 2:190–195 and links to situation ethics; non-religious (including 
atheist and Humanist) attitudes about the role of religion in the causes of conflict 
and Muslim responses to them. 
4.4 Pacifism: divergent Muslim teachings and responses to the nature and history of 
pacifism, including interpretations of Surah 5:27–30; Muslim teachings about 
passive resistance and examples of its use within Islam, including elements of the 
Arab Spring. 
4.5 Just War theory: divergent Muslim teachings and responses to the nature and 
importance of the Just War theory, including reference to Sunni and Shi’a Islam; 
the conditions of a Just War within Islam, with specific reference to the lesser Jihad, 
including reference to Surah 4:69–110; divergent opinions on whether a Just War is 
possible for Muslims today, including the application of ethical theories such as 
situation ethics. 
4.6 Holy War: the nature of a Holy War (Harb al-Maqadis) within Islam; Muslim 
teachings about war and peace as shown in the Qur’an; divergent Muslim teachings 
about war, with specific reference to the lesser Jihad, including interpretations of 
Surah 8:61 and 9:1–14.  
4.7 Weapons of mass destruction (WMD): Muslim teaching and responses to the 
problems and benefits of WMD; Muslim attitudes towards the use of such weapons, 
including Surah 5:32; non-religious attitudes (including atheist and Humanist) and 
the application of ethical theories (such as utilitarianism) which support the 
acquisition of weapons of mass destruction, and Muslim responses  
to them.  
4.8 Issues surrounding conflict: divergent Muslim teachings and responses to the 
nature of problems involved in conflict – violence, war and terrorism; how Muslims 
have worked to overcome these issues, including Malik's Muwatta 21.3.10;  
non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) views towards the issues 
surrounding conflict and Muslim responses to them. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
61 
Area of Study 2D – Buddhism 
Overview 
This area of study comprises a study in depth of Buddhism as a lived religion within the 
United Kingdom and throughout the world, and its beliefs and teachings on life, specifically 
about the issues of peace and conflict, and crime and punishment. 
There are four sections: Buddhist Beliefs, Crime and Punishment, Living the Buddhist Life 
and Peace and Conflict. 
The significance and importance of the various beliefs, issues and practices to Buddhists 
today should be explored throughout the sections. This should include reference to how 
scripture informs a Buddhist’s understanding of the topics and how approaches to the issues 
are underpinned by philosophical arguments and ethical theory as applicable.  
Students will be expected to study Buddhism within the context of the wider British society, 
the religious traditions of which are, in the main, Christian. Students should compare and 
contrast the areas of belief and practice within Buddhism with Christianity as outlined in the 
content below. 
● Beliefs about the afterlife and their significance (1.5)* 
● The practice and significance of worship (3.6)* 
Students should recognise that Buddhism is one of the many religions and world views in 
Great Britain, which include Hinduism, Judaism, Islam, Sikhism and non-religious views such 
as Humanism and atheism. This knowledge may be applied throughout the assessment of 
the specified content. 
Students should compare and contrast the areas of ethics and/or philosophy within 
Buddhism and non-religious views as outlined in the content below. 
Students should also recognise that within Buddhism there may be more than one 
perspective in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed. Common and 
divergent views within Buddhism in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and 
expressed should be included throughout, including reference to Theravada and Mahayana 
traditions.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
62 
2D Buddhism  
Section 1: Buddhist Beliefs  
Students should have an understanding of: 
1.1 The life of the Buddha: the nature and history of the events in the life of the 
Buddha and why they are important to Buddhists today, including ancestry, birth, 
princely life, marriage and the Four Sights, with reference to Buddhavamsa XXVI; 
the enlightenment of the Buddha and founding of the Sangha. 
1.2 Dhamma: the nature and different meaning of dhamma (dependent origination 
/conditionality); the nature and importance of paticca-samuppada and the Three 
Marks of Existence, including reference to the Story of Nagasena and the Chariot in 
the Milinda Panha; suffering (dukkha), no fixed self (anicca) and soul or essence 
(anatta); the implications of belief in dhamma for Buddhists today. 
1.3 First Noble Truth, including reference to the Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta: the 
nature of dukkha; Buddhist teachings about suffering; the different types of 
suffering as pain, fabrication and change; the importance of suffering for Buddhists 
today. 
1.4 Second Noble Truth, including reference to Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta: the 
nature of samudaya (the root of suffering); Buddhist teachings about the causes of 
suffering, including the Sermon at Benares; the Three Poisons and how they are 
represented in the Wheel of Life; divergent understandings of the Wheel of Life, 
with reference to Theravada and Mahayana Buddhism. 
1.5* Third Noble Truth, including reference to the Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta: the 
nature of nirodha and the cessation of tanha; Buddhist teachings about the ending 
of desire; the nature of the cycle of samsara; different understandings of nibbana 
and enlightenment and their importance for Buddhists today. 
1.6 Fourth Noble Truth, including reference to the Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta: the 
nature of the Middle Way (magga); Buddhist teachings about the Eightfold Path 
leading to nibbana. The Threefold Way: the nature, purpose and importance of sila 
(ethics), samadhi (meditation) and panna (wisdom); divergent understandings of 
the importance Eightfold Path and the Threefold Way for Buddhist life today. 
1.7 Human life: divergent Buddhist understandings of the nature and importance of the 
Five Khandas (aggregates), including the Khandha Sutta; divergent Buddhist 
understandings of the nature and importance of sunnata and tathagatagarbha 
(Buddha-nature); divergent Buddhist understandings of the nature and importance 
of Arahant and Bodhisattva Ideals; divergent Buddhist understandings of the nature 
and history of Buddhahood and the Pure Land. 
1.8 Buddhist ethical teachings: divergent Buddhist understandings of the nature, 
purpose and importance of kamma, including Dhammapada 181–187 and the 
Khuddakapatha, merit and rebirth, karuna (compassion), metta (loving kindness), 
pancha sila (the Five Precepts) and the paramitas (Six Perfections); the divergent 
applications of each of these ethical teachings in Buddhist life today. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
63 
2D Buddhism 
Section 2: Crime and Punishment 
Students should have an understanding of: 
2.1 Buddhist attitudes towards justice: Buddhist teachings about the nature of justice 
and why justice is important for Buddhists, including Dhammapada 256–257; 
Buddhist teachings on why justice is important for the victim; non-religious 
attitudes (including atheist and Humanist) about why justice is important 
regardless of religion and belief, and Buddhist responses to them. 
2.2 Buddhist attitudes towards crime: Buddhist teachings about and responses to the 
nature, causes and problem of crime, including Dhammapada 160–165; what 
action is taken by Buddhist individuals and Buddhist groups to end crime, including 
the Prison Dharma Network/Prison Mindfulness. 
2.3 Buddhist teachings about good, evil and suffering: Buddhist teachings about the 
nature of good actions, how they are rewarded, and teachings about the nature of 
evil actions; non-religious attitudes (including atheist and Humanist) about why 
people suffer, including believing in religion and Buddhist responses to them; 
divergent Buddhist teachings about why people suffer, including the words of the 
XIV Dalai Lama’s Nobel acceptance speech (10 December 1989). 
2.4 Buddhist attitudes towards punishment: divergent Buddhist teachings and attitudes 
towards the nature and use of punishment, including Dhammapada 197–202 and 
links to situation ethics; Buddhist teachings on why punishment can be regarded as 
justice and why punishment might be needed in society. 
2.5 Buddhist attitudes towards the aims of punishment: divergent Buddhist attitudes 
towards each of the aims of punishment (protection, retribution, deterrence and 
reformation); Buddhist teachings about punishment, including Bhaddali Sutta. 
2.6 Buddhist teachings about forgiveness: Buddhist teachings and responses about the 
nature and importance of forgiveness, including Dhammapada 3–10, how offenders 
are forgiven by the community and why this is needed; Buddhist responses to the 
nature and use of restorative justice, and why it is important for criminals. 
2.7 Buddhist teachings about the treatment of criminals: Buddhist teachings about the 
treatment of criminals, including Dhammapada 129–140; divergent Buddhist 
attitudes towards the use of torture, human rights, fair trial and trial by jury; the 
application of ethical theories such as situation ethics and Buddhist responses to 
them. 
2.8 Buddhist attitudes towards the death penalty: the nature and purpose of capital 
punishment; divergent Buddhist teachings about the nature, purpose and 
arguments surrounding the use of capital punishment, including Brahmajala  
Sutta 1; non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) attitudes towards the use of 
capital punishment, including the application of ethical theories, such as situation 
ethics, and Buddhist responses to them. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
64 
2D Buddhism  
Section 3: Living the Buddhist Life 
Students should have an understanding of: 
3.1 Meditation: the nature, purpose and significance of meditation in Buddhism; the 
different types of meditation: samatha (concentration), metta bhavana (loving 
kindness) and vipassana (insight); meditative practices, including mindfulness 
breathing and zazen, divergent understanding of the nature and importance of 
visualisation of the Buddha and Bodhisattvas, including Amitāyus Meditation Sutra; 
how the different practices are used by Mahayana and Theravada Buddhists and 
the benefits from their use. 
3.2 Chanting: the nature, purpose and role of chanting in Buddhism as a devotional 
practice and to gain mental concentration, including Dhammapada 1–2, confidence 
and joy. The divergent understandings of the importance of chanting in Buddhist 
life today: Theravada Buddhism, including Tiratana Buddhism, with reference to 
Dhammapada 190, and Mahayana Buddhism, including Nam Myoho Renge Kyo. 
3.3 Mantra recitation: divergent understandings of the nature, purpose, role and 
importance of mantra recitation with reference to Theravada Buddhism, including 
Namo Buddhaya (‘Homage to the Buddha’), and Mahayana Buddhism; the nature 
and purpose of using sacred syllables, devotional articles, offerings and mala beads 
and why they are used in different schools of Buddhism. 
3.4 Features of Buddhist places of worship: the divergent nature, history and design of 
Buddhist places of worship, including temples, gompas, viharas, shrines in 
Theravada, Mahayana and Triratna Buddhism; how and why the places of worship 
are used, including reference to the shrine room, shrine facing east, and the 
library, showing the importance of learning with reference to the Kimsila Sutta.  
3.5 How and why objects of devotion are used within different Buddhist places of 
worship, buddharupas, including reference to Vakkali Sutta, shrine, Bodhi tree; 
divergent understandings of why devotional objects are important in Buddhism 
today. 
3.6* Puja: the nature and purpose of puja in the vihara and the home, including 
reference to Mangala Sutta; examples of the different types; when each type might 
be used and why; the importance of having different types of worship and their use 
in different Buddhist contexts. 
3.7 Death and mourning rituals and ceremonies: the divergent celebration and 
significance of the ceremonies in Buddhist communities and to Buddhists; the 
distinct significance of the rituals associated with death and mourning in Theravada 
communities and in Japan and Tibet, with reference to the Tibetan Book of the 
Dead. 
3.8 Festivals and retreats: the divergent nature, history, purpose and importance of 
festivals and retreats in Buddhism; divergent understandings of the origins, 
meaning and features of celebration of specific festivals and retreats, including 
Wesak, Vassa/Rain Retreat and Kathina, with reference to the Anapanasati Sutta, 
and Uposatha days in Theravada Buddhism; Hanamatsuri and Obon (Japanese), 
Parinibbana Day in Mahayana Buddhism, and Lama Tsong Khapa Day in Tibet. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
65 
2D Buddhism  
Section 4: Peace and Conflict 
Students should have an understanding of: 
4.1 Buddhist attitudes towards peace: Buddhist teachings about the nature and 
importance of peace, including Dhammapada 197–208; Buddhism as a religion of 
peace and how this may be understood differently in the life of a Buddhist. 
4.2 The role of Buddhists in peacemaking: Buddhist teachings about peacemaking; the 
importance for Buddhists of justice, forgiveness and reconciliation in peacemaking, 
including Dhammapada 1–8; the work of Buddhists working for peace today, the 
divergent approaches in what they do and why they try to work for peace, including 
the Buddhist Peace Fellowship. 
4.3 Buddhist attitudes to conflict: Buddhist teachings and responses to the nature and 
causes of conflict, including links to the Three Poisons and Itivuttaka 50; Buddhist 
responses to the problems conflict causes within society and links to situation 
ethics; non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) attitudes about the role of 
religion in the causes of conflict and Buddhist responses to them. 
4.4 Buddhist attitudes to pacifism: Buddhist teachings and responses to the nature and 
history of pacifism, including links to the Five Precepts and Cunda Kammaraputta 
Sutta; Buddhist teachings about passive resistance and examples of its use within 
Buddhism. 
4.5 Buddhist attitudes to the Just War theory: Buddhist teachings and responses to the 
nature and importance of the Just War theory; divergent opinions on whether the 
Just War theory should be rejected by Buddhists, including reference to War and 
Peace: A Buddhist Perspective by the Venerable Bhikkhu Bodhi; the application of 
ethical theories such as situation ethics. 
4.6 Buddhist attitudes to war: Buddhist teachings about war and peace, including 
teachings about skilfulness in the Sammaditthi Sutta, and fighting with reference to 
the Kakacupama Sutta; divergent applications of Buddhist principles and 
involvement on war. 
4.7 Buddhist attitudes to weapons of mass destruction (WMD): Buddhist teaching and 
responses to the problems and benefits of WMD; Buddhist attitudes towards the 
use of such weapons, including Dhammapada 129–145; non-religious attitudes 
(including atheist and Humanist) and the application of ethical theories (such as 
utilitarianism) which support the acquisition of weapons of mass destruction, and 
Buddhist responses to them. 
4.8 Buddhist responses to issues surrounding conflict: Buddhist teachings and 
responses to the nature of problems involved in conflict – violence, war and 
terrorism, including Karaniya Metta Sutta; how Buddhists have worked to overcome 
these issues, including Engaged Buddhism. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
66 
Area of Study 2E – Hinduism 
Overview 
This area of study comprises a study in depth of Hinduism as a lived religion within the 
United Kingdom and throughout the world, and its beliefs and teachings on life, specifically 
about the issues of peace and conflict, and crime and punishment. 
There are four sections: Hindu Beliefs, Crime and Punishment, Living the Hindu Life and 
Peace and Conflict. 
The significance and importance of the various beliefs, issues and practices to Hindus today 
should be explored throughout the sections. This should include reference to how scripture 
informs a Hindu’s understanding of the topics and how approaches to the issues are 
underpinned by philosophical arguments and ethical theory as applicable.  
Students will be expected to study Hinduism within the context of the wider British society, 
the religious traditions of which are, in the main, Christian. Students should compare and 
contrast the areas of belief and practice within Hinduism with Christianity as outlined in the 
content below. 
● Beliefs about the afterlife and their significance (1.5)* 
● The practice and significance of worship (3.4)* 
Students should recognise that Hinduism is one of the many religions and world views in 
Great Britain, which include Buddhism, Judaism, Islam, Sikhism and non-religious views such 
as Humanism and atheism. This knowledge may be applied throughout the assessment of 
the specified content. 
Students should compare and contrast the areas of ethics and/or philosophy within Hinduism 
and non-religious views as outlined in the content below. 
Students should also recognise that within Hinduism there may be more than one 
perspective in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed. Common and 
divergent views within Hinduism in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and 
expressed should be included throughout, including reference to Shaivism and Vaishnavism.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
67 
2E Hinduism  
Section 1: Hindu Beliefs  
Students should have an understanding of: 
1.1 The nature of Brahman: The nature of Brahman as spirit, ultimate reality or 
absolute truth; how the characteristics of Brahman are shown in Hindu scriptures, 
including Katha Upanishad 2.2.6–8. 
1.2 The nature and importance of understanding Brahman as Nirguna Brahman and 
Saguna Brahman: how Nirguna Brahman and Saguna Brahman are shown in 
Hindu scripture, for example Nirguna (Taittiriya Upanishad 2.7.1–2) and Saguna 
(Rig Veda 1.154.1–2); the nature and importance of Vaikuntha (spiritual worlds); 
divergent ways in which belief in each may be expressed in the life of Hindus 
today. 
1.3 Three aspects of the divine: Brahman, Antaryami and Bhagavan; the nature and 
significance of the divine as Brahman (everywhere and non-personal), Antaryami 
(within the heart) and Bhagavan (beyond, as a personal loving God); how the 
three aspects are shown in Hindu scriptures, including Mundaka Upanishad 2.1; 
why belief in the three aspects of the divine are important in Hindu life and for 
religious pluralism today. 
1.4 Manifestations of the Divine: the nature and importance of how the deities are 
shown in Hindu scriptures; avatars and murti; the nature and role of male deities: 
divergent understandings of the importance of Vishnu (including Rig Veda 1.22) 
and Shiva; the nature and role of the female force, Shakti, including Parvati and 
Lakshmi. 
1.5* The nature of the individual and life within Hinduism: the nature and importance 
of the atman (eternal self), karma, the cycle of samsara, moksha; divergent Hindu 
understandings of the nature of the individual and life, including interpretations of 
Brihadaranyaka Upanishad 4.4; why beliefs about the atman, karma, samsara and 
moksha are important for Hindus today. 
1.6 The purpose of human life for Hindus: the nature and significance of the four aims 
of life (Purusharthas) – dharma, artha, kama and moksha; the nature and 
significance of anatana dharma (eternal law), including Bhagavad Gita 3.35; the 
nature and significance of varnashrama dharma (duties according to materialistic 
situation in life). 
1.7 Hindu responses to suffering, knowledge and ignorance: Hindu teachings about 
suffering, knowledge and ignorance such as ahimsa, respect, empathy, 
mind/sense control, humility, and love, including Mahabharata 5.39; divergent 
Hindu understandings as to why there is suffering, knowledge and ignorance for 
Hindus today. 
1.8 Hindu cosmology: the nature of the Hindu cosmology as shown in Hindu 
scriptures, including Rig Veda 10.129; the nature and importance of the cycle of 
four ages (yugas), including descriptions of the Kali Yuga in the Mahabharata, 
many worlds and their diverse inhabitants; the nature and divergent 
understandings of the importance of the concepts of prakriti (matter/nature),  
tri-guna (three qualities) and maya (illusion). 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
68 
2E Hinduism  
Section 2: Crime and Punishment 
Students should have an understanding of: 
2.1 Hindu attitudes towards justice: the nature of justice and why justice is important 
for Hindus, including Brihadaranyaka Upanishad 5.2; Hindu teachings about why 
justice is important for the victim; non-religious attitudes (including atheist and 
Humanist) about why justice is important, regardless of religion and belief, and 
Hindu responses to them. 
2.2 Hindu attitudes towards crime: Hindu teachings about and responses to the nature, 
causes and problem of crime, including interpretations of Bhagavad Gita 14.16–18; 
what action is taken by Hindu individuals and Hindu groups to end the causes of 
crime, for example the work of BAPS charities.  
2.3 Hindu teachings about good, evil and suffering: Hindu teachings about the nature 
of good actions and how they are rewarded, and teachings about the nature of evil 
actions and how they are punished, including Bhagavata Purana 4; non-religious 
attitudes (including atheist and Humanist) about why people suffer, including 
believing in religion, and Hindu responses to them; divergent Hindu teachings 
about why people suffer.  
2.4 Hindu attitudes towards punishment: the nature of punishment; teachings about 
why punishment is important for Hindus, including reference to Manusmriti  
7.13–28, and about the nature and meaning of danda and prayascitta; Hindu 
teachings about why punishment can be regarded as justice, why punishment 
might be needed in society.  
2.5 Hindu attitudes towards the aims of punishment: divergent Hindu attitudes towards 
each of the aims of punishment (protection, retribution, deterrence and 
reformation); the nature and meaning of Hindu teachings about punishment, 
including Bhagavad Gita 4.35–37.  
2.6 Hindu teachings about forgiveness: Hindu teachings and responses about the 
nature of forgiveness; how offenders are forgiven by the community and why this is 
needed; Hindu teachings and responses to the nature and use of restorative justice 
and why it is important for criminals, including Mahabharata 3.29. 
2.7 Hindu teachings about the treatment of criminals: Hindu teachings about the 
treatment of criminals, including Mahabharata 13.117; divergent Hindu attitudes 
towards the use of torture, human rights, fair trial and trial by jury; the application 
of ethical theories, such as situation ethics, which may accept the use of torture if it 
is for the greater good. 
2.8 Hindu attitudes towards the death penalty: the nature and purpose of capital 
punishment; divergent Hindu attitudes and teachings about capital punishment, 
including interpretations of Padma Purana 1.31; non-religious (including atheist and 
Humanist) attitudes towards the use of capital punishment, including the 
application of ethical theories, such as situation ethics, and Hindu responses  
to them. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
69 
2E Hinduism  
Section 3: Living the Hindu Life 
Students should have an understanding of: 
3.1 The nature and purpose of Hindu yoga: the nature and purpose of different forms 
of yoga: karma yoga (action), jnana yoga (knowledge), astanga/raja yoga 
(meditation) and bhakti yoga (devotion); examples of when each form of yoga 
might be used, how and why; the importance of having different types of yoga; 
reference to Bhagavad Gita 6.44–47. 
3.2 Focuses of worship and representations of the divine: the nature, purpose and 
importance of different ways of worshipping, including worshipping one god 
(personal or non-personal) or many deities, gurus and holy places (land, hills, 
rivers and sacred plants and animals); the scriptural basis for the different focuses 
of worship and representations of the divine in worship, including interpretations of 
Bhagavad Gita 6.20–31. 
3.3 The importance of Hindu places of worship: the nature, features of, use, and 
purpose of worship in different places, including in the temple, in the home, 
outside, shrines and festival celebration and in the space of the heart, with 
reference to interpretations of Bhagavad Gita 9.13–27; the benefits for Hindus of 
having different places to worship in. 
3.4* The nature and purpose of prayer in the temple and the home: the nature, features 
of use and purpose of the different forms of worship, including meditation, puja, 
havan, darshan, arti, bhajan, kirtan and japa, with reference to interpretations of 
Bhagavad Gita 6.44–47; divergent understandings of the benefits for Hindus of 
having different forms of worship. 
3.5 Hindu sacred festivals: the nature, history, purpose and significance of Hindu 
sacred festivals; the origins and meaning of specific festivals, including Diwali, Holi, 
Navratri Dussehra, Ram Navami, Ratha-yatra, Janmashtami, and Raksha Bandhan, 
including interpretations of Brhadaranyaka Upanishad 1.3.28. 
3.6 Hindu pilgrimage: the nature, history and purpose of Hindu pilgrimages; the 
significance of the places Hindus go on pilgrimage; divergent understandings of 
why pilgrimage may, or may not be, important for Hindus today; the nature, 
features, history and importance of pilgrimage to the Ganges, including 
interpretations of Rig Veda 10.75, Vrindavana and Varanasi. 
3.7 Hindu environmental projects: divergent understandings of the nature, purpose 
and significance of environmental care for Hindus; the importance of care for rivers 
and sacred places for Hindus; how Hindus care for the environment, examples of 
what they do and why, including reference to cow protection and interpretations of 
Rig Veda 10.87.16–19. 
3.8 Hindu charity work: the nature and purpose of charity for Hindus; Hindu teachings 
about charity; the work of one named Hindu charity working to promote wellbeing, 
social inclusion and women’s rights, what it does and why, including interpretations 
of Bhagavad Gita 3.10–12. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
70 
2E Hinduism  
Section 4: Peace and Conflict 
Students should have an understanding of: 
4.1 Hindu attitudes towards peace: the nature of peace; divergent Hindu attitudes 
towards the importance of peace; Hindu teachings about peace, including Bhagavad 
Gita 1.65–67. 
4.2 The role of Hindus in peacemaking: Hindu teachings about peacemaking; the 
importance of justice, forgiveness and reconciliation for Hindus in peacemaking; the 
work of Hindus working for peace today, what they do and why they try to work for 
peace, including teachings on ahimsa in Artharva Veda 10.191.4 and the work of 
Mahatma Gandhi.  
4.3 Hindu attitudes to conflict: Hindu teachings and responses to the problems conflict 
causes within society; Hindu responses to the problems conflict causes, including 
Rig Veda 10.191; non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) attitudes about 
the role of religion in the causes of conflict and Hindu responses to them.  
4.4 Hindu attitudes to pacifism: Hindu teachings and responses to the nature and 
history of pacifism, including the ideas of Mahatma Gandhi; divergent Hindu 
teachings about passive resistance, including Rig Veda 10.191.4 and satyagraha 
and the example of Mahatma Gandhi. 
4.5 Hindu attitudes to the Just War theory: Hindu teachings and responses about the 
nature, history and importance of the Just War theory; the conditions of a Just 
War; divergent Hindu opinions about whether a Just War is possible, including 
Bhagavad Gita 2.31–38; the application of ethical theories such as situation ethics. 
4.6 Hindu attitudes to Holy War: Hindu teachings and responses about the nature of a 
Holy War; the nature and meaning of Hindu teachings about war and peace;Hindu 
teachings about not killing and when fighting is a person’s duty, including Bhagavad 
Gita 2.31–39. 
4.7 Hindu attitudes to weapons of mass destruction (WMD): Hindu teachings and 
responses to the problems and benefits of WMD; Hindu attitudes towards the use of 
such weapons, including Bhagavad Gita 13.26–33; non-religious attitudes 
(including atheist and Humanist) and the application of ethical theories (such as 
utilitarianism) which support the acquisition of weapons of mass destruction, and 
Hindu responses to them.  
4.8 Hindu attitudes to issues surrounding conflict: Hindu teachings and responses to 
the nature and history of problems involved in conflict – violence, war and 
terrorism, including Bhagavad Gita 11; how Hindus have worked to overcome these 
issues; non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) views towards the issues 
surrounding conflict and Hindu responses to them. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
71 
Area of Study 2F – Judaism 
Overview 
This area of study comprises a study in depth of Judaism as a lived religion within the United 
Kingdom and throughout the world, and its beliefs and teachings on life, specifically about 
the issues of peace and conflict, and crime and punishment. 
There are four sections: Jewish Beliefs, Crime and Punishment, Living the Jewish Life and 
Peace and Conflict. 
The significance and importance of the various beliefs, issues and practices to Jews today 
should be explored throughout the sections. This should include reference to how scripture 
informs a Jew’s understanding of the topics and how approaches to the issues are 
underpinned by philosophical arguments and ethical theory as applicable.  
Students will be expected to study Judaism within the context of the wider British society, 
the religious traditions of which are, in the main, Christian. Students should compare and 
contrast the areas of belief and practice within Judaism with Christianity as outlined in the 
content below. 
● Beliefs about the afterlife and their significance (1.8)* 
● The practice and significance of worship (3.4)* 
Students should recognise that Judaism is one of the many religions and world views in 
Great Britain, which include Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam, Sikhism and non-religious views 
such as Humanism and atheism. This knowledge may be applied throughout the assessment 
of the specified content. 
Students should compare and contrast the areas of ethics and/or philosophy within Judaism 
and non-religious views as outlined in the content below. 
Students should also recognise that within Judaism there may be more than one perspective 
in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed. Common and divergent 
views within Judaism in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed should 
be included throughout, including reference to Orthodox, Reform and Liberal traditions.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
72 
2F Judaism  
Section 1: Jewish Beliefs  
Students should have an understanding of: 
1.1 The nature of the Almighty: how the characteristics of the Almighty are shown in 
the Torah, and why they are important in Jewish life today, including One, Creator, 
Law-Giver and Judge, including reference to Genesis 2. 
1.2 The nature and importance of Shekhinah: how the divine presence is shown in the 
Torah and why it is important including interpretations of 2 Chronicles 7:1–3; the 
divergent understandings of Shekhinah found in different forms of Orthodox 
Judaism and the importance of them for Jews today. 
1.3 The nature and purpose of the Messiah: how messiahship is shown in the 
scriptures, including Jeremiah 23:5–8; the nature and significance of the Messianic 
Age and the Jewish responsibility to bring it about; divergent understandings of the 
Messiah in different forms of Orthodox and Reform Judaism and the importance of 
them for Jewish people today. 
1.4 The covenant with Abraham and his descendants: the nature and history of the 
Abrahamic covenant; the role of Abraham in the covenant, including Genesis 17; 
why the Promised Land covenanted to Abraham and his descendants is important 
for Jews today. 
1.5  The Covenant at Sinai: the nature and history of the Covenant at Sinai (the Ten 
Commandments), including Exodus 20; the role and significance of Moses in the 
Covenant at Sinai; divergent understandings of how and why the Decalogue is 
important in Jewish life today. 
1.6 Sanctity of life: why human life is holy for Jewish people; how life is shown as 
special. The nature and importance of Pikuach Nefesh (primacy of life): life takes 
precedence over everything, with reference to Talmud Yoma 83–84; divergent 
understandings of how and why the principle of Pikuach Nefesh is applied by Jews 
today. 
1.7 Moral principles and the Mitzvot: the nature and importance of the Mitzvot, 
including reference to the Mishneh Torah of Maimonides: Sefer Madda; the 
importance of the relationship between keeping the Mitzvot and free will; the 
Mitzvot between humans and the Almighty, and between humans; divergent 
understandings of the importance of the Mitzvot between the Almighty and 
humans, and between humans, for Jewish life today.  
1.8* Jewish beliefs about life after death: divergent Jewish understandings of the nature 
and significance of life after death including reference to different forms of 
Orthodox and Reform Judaism; Jewish teachings about life after death including 
interpretations of Ecclesiastes 12; the nature of resurrection and judgement; why 
belief in life after death may be important for Jews today. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
73 
2F Judaism  
Section 2: Crime and Punishment 
Students should have an understanding of: 
2.1 Jewish attitudes towards justice: the nature of justice and why justice is important 
for Jews, including Deuteronomy 19:19–21; Jewish responses to why justice is 
important for the victim; non-religious attitudes (including atheist and Humanist) 
about why justice is important, regardless of religion and belief, and Jewish 
responses to these attitudes. 
2.2 Jewish attitudes towards crime: Jewish teachings about and responses to the 
nature, causes and problem of crime, including Deuteronomy 11; what action is 
taken by Jewish individuals and Jewish groups to end the causes of crime, including 
Jewish Care and the work of synagogues.  
2.3 Jewish teachings about good, evil and suffering: Jewish teachings about the nature 
of good actions and how they are rewarded, including Exodus 33, and teachings 
about the nature of evil actions and how they are punished; non-religious attitudes 
(including atheist and Humanist) about why people suffer, including believing in 
religion, and Jewish responses to them; divergent Jewish teachings and responses 
to why people suffer.  
2.4 Jewish attitudes towards punishment: the nature of punishment, why punishment 
is important for Jews, Jewish teachings about punishment, including Leviticus 
24:19–23; why punishment can be regarded as justice, why punishment might be 
needed in society.  
2.5 Jewish attitudes towards the aims of punishment: divergent Jewish attitudes 
towards the use of punishment, the nature and meaning of Jewish teachings about 
punishment, with reference to Genesis 9:1–6; Jewish teachings on why punishment 
can be regarded as justice; why punishment might be needed in society.  
2.6 Jewish teachings about forgiveness: Jewish teachings and responses to the nature 
of forgiveness, including Psalm 130 and Isaiah 55:6–8, how offenders are forgiven 
by the community and why this is needed; Jewish teachings about the nature of 
restorative justice and why is it important for criminals, including Isaiah 55:6–8. 
2.7 Jewish teachings about the treatment of criminals: Jewish teachings about the 
treatment of criminals; divergent Jewish attitudes towards the use of torture, 
human rights, fair trial and trial by jury, including reference to Deuteronomy 19:9–
21; the application of ethical theories, such as situation ethics, which may accept 
use of torture if it is for the greater good. 
2.8 Jewish attitudes towards the death penalty: the nature and purpose of capital 
punishment; divergent Jewish attitudes and teachings for and against capital 
punishment, including Exodus 21:12–25 and Mishnah Makkot 1:10; non-religious 
(including atheist and Humanist) attitudes towards the use of capital punishment, 
including the application of ethical theories, such as situation ethics, and Jewish 
responses to them.  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
74 
2F Judaism  
Section 3: Living the Jewish Life 
Students should have an understanding of: 
3.1 The nature and purpose of Jewish public acts of worship: the nature, features and 
purpose of Jewish public worship, including interpretations of Psalms 116:12–19; 
the nature, features and importance of synagogue services for the Jewish 
community and the individual.  
3.2 The Tenakh and the Talmud: the nature, features, purpose and significance of the 
Tenakh (the written law) and Talmud (the oral law) for Jews in daily life today with 
reference to Perkei Avot 2; the nature and purpose of Jewish laws food laws, 
kashrut, including kosher and treifah and the separation of dairy and meat, 
including reference to Deuteronomy 14:3–10; the divergent implications of the 
Jewish food laws for Jews today. 
3.3 The nature and purpose of prayer in the home and of private prayer: the nature, 
features and purpose of prayer three times a day; the importance of having 
different forms of prayers, including interpretations of Psalms 55:16–23. 
3.4* The nature and importance of the Shema and the Amidah (the standing prayer); 
when the Shema and the Amidah might be used, how and why, including reference 
to the Mezuzah; the importance of having the Shema and the Amidah for Jews 
today, including reference to Deuteronomy 6:4. 
3.5 The importance of ritual for Jews today: the nature, features and purpose of birth 
rituals (including Brit Milah), Bar and Bat Mitzvahs, and marriage rituals, including 
interpretations of Genesis 21:1–8, Genesis 17 and Leviticus 12; the nature, 
purpose and importance of the mourning rituals of funeral, shiva, avelut and 
yahrzeit for Jews today; divergent understandings of the importance of each ritual 
for different forms of Orthodox and Reform Judaism today. 
3.6 The nature, features, history and purpose of celebrating Shabbat: the nature, 
features and purpose of the celebration of Shabbat in the home and in the 
synagogue, including interpretations of Exodus 31:12–18; why the celebration of 
Shabbat is important for the Jewish community and the individual today. 
3.7 Jewish festivals: the nature, history, purpose and significance of Jewish festivals; 
the origins and meaning of specific festivals, including Rosh Hashanah, Yom Kippur, 
Pesach, Shavuot and Sukkot, including interpretations of Leviticus 23 (Rosh 
Hashanah); divergent understandings of why festivals are important to different 
forms of Orthodox and Reform Judaism today. 
3.8 Features of the synagogue: the nature, history and purpose of the different design 
of the synagogues in Liberal, Reform and Orthodox Judaism, including facing 
Jerusalem, layout of seating the Ark and the bimah and with reference to Proverbs 
14:28; how and why the synagogue is used by the different communities, including 
reference to Exodus 27:20–21; how and why objects of devotion are used within 
the synagogues, including a yad, Torah Scroll, ner tamid and menorah. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
75 
2F Judaism  
Section 4: Peace and Conflict 
Students should have an understanding of: 
4.1 Jewish attitudes towards peace: divergent teachings about the the importance of 
peace for Jews; Jewish teachings about peace, including Deuteronomy 20:10–12. 
4.2 The role of Jews in peacemaking: Jewish teachings about peacemaking; the 
importance of justice, forgiveness and reconciliation for Jews in peacemaking, 
including Perkei Avot 1:18; the work of Jews working for peace today, what they do 
and why they try to work for peace.  
4.3 Jewish attitudes to conflict: Jewish teachings and responses to the nature and 
causes of conflict; Jewish responses to the causes, including Isaiah 2:1–5 and links 
to situation ethics; non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) attitudes about 
the role of religion in the causes of conflict and Jewish responses to them. 
4.4 Jewish attitudes to pacifism: Jewish teachings and responses to the nature and 
history of pacifism; divergent Jewish teachings about passive resistance, including 
interpretations of Micah 4:1–6 and an example of its use, including Emanuel 
Ringelblum. 
4.5 Jewish attitudes to the Just War theory: Jewish teachings and responses to the 
nature, history and importance of the Just War theory; the conditions of a Just War, 
including Milchemet reshut and the implications of Deuteronomy 20; divergent 
Jewish opinions on whether a Just War is possible, including the application of 
ethical theories such as situation ethics. 
4.6 Jewish attitudes to Holy War: Jewish teachings and responses to the nature of a 
Holy War; the nature and meaning of Jewish teachings about war and peace, 
including ideas about Milchemet mitzvah and 2 Samuel 22; divergent Jewish 
teachings about war; non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) attitudes 
towards Holy War and Jewish responses to them. 
4.7 Jewish attitudes to weapons of mass destruction (WMD): Jewish teachings and 
responses to the problems and benefits of WMD; Jewish attitudes towards the use 
of such weapons, including the concept of Purity of Arms and interpretations of 
Deuteronomy 20; non-religious attitudes (including atheist and Humanist) and the 
application of ethical theories (such as utilitarianism) which support the acquisition 
of weapons of mass destruction, and Jewish responses to them.  
4.8 Jewish attitudes to issues surrounding conflict: Jewish teachings and responses to 
the nature and history of problems involved in conflict – violence, war and 
terrorism, including interpretations of Psalm 10:12–18; how Jews have worked to 
overcome these issues; non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) views 
towards the issues surrounding conflict and Jewish responses to them. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
76 
Area of Study 2G – Sikhism 
Overview 
This area of study comprises a study in depth of Sikhism as a lived religion within the United 
Kingdom and throughout the world, and its beliefs and teachings on life, specifically about 
the issues of peace and conflict, and crime and punishment. 
There are four sections: Sikh Beliefs, Crime and Punishment, Living the Sikh Life and Peace 
and Conflict. 
The significance and importance of the various beliefs, issues and practices to Sikhs today 
should be explored throughout the sections. This should include reference to how scripture 
informs a Sikh’s understanding of the topics and how approaches to the issues are 
underpinned by philosophical arguments and ethical theory as applicable.  
Students will be expected to study Sikhism within the context of the wider British society, 
the religious traditions of which are, in the main, Christian. Students should compare and 
contrast the areas of belief and practice within Sikhism with Christianity as outlined in the 
content below. 
● Beliefs about the afterlife and their significance (1.4)* 
● The practice and significance of worship (3.5)* 
Students should recognise that Sikhism is one of the many religions and world views in Great 
Britain, which include Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism, Sikhism and non-religious views 
such as Humanism and atheism. This knowledge may be applied throughout the assessment 
of the specified content. 
Students should compare and contrast the areas of ethics and/or philosophy within Sikhism 
and non-religious views as outlined in the content below. 
Students should also recognise that within Sikhism there may be more than one perspective 
in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed. Common and divergent 
views within Sikhism in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed should 
be included throughout, including reference to Khalsa and non-Khalsa Sikhs.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
77 
2G Sikhism 
Section 1: Sikh Beliefs 
Students should have an understanding of: 
1.1 The nature of God: how the characteristics of God are shown in the Mool Mantar, 
Guru Granth Sahib 1, and why the characteristics are important and why the Mool 
Mantar is significant for Sikhs.  
1.2 God as Creator: the nature and importance of God as Creator (Karta Purakh) for 
Sikhs; Sikh teachings on God as Creator, including Guru Granth Sahib 12 and 94. 
1.3 The nature of human life: the purpose and significance of life as an opportunity to 
unite with God; Sikh understandings of why uniting with God is important; how 
uniting with God will affect their lives, including Guru Granth Sahib 12. 
1.4* Sikh beliefs about life after death: the nature of karma, rebirth and mukti 
(liberation); how they are shown in the Guru Granth Sahib, including reference to 
Guru Granth Sahib 2, 11 and 78; divergent understandings of how and why karma, 
rebirth and mukti are important for Sikh life today.  
1.5 Purpose of life: the nature and importance of being gurmukh (God-centred) not 
manmukh (self-centred) and the elimination of haumai (ego/pride), including 
reference to Guru Granth Sahib 125 and 226; what actions make a gurmukh Sikh; 
divergent understandings of why being gurmukh and eliminating haumai is 
important in Sikh life today. 
1.6 The oneness of humanity: how the equality of all humans is shown in the Guru 
Granth Sahib, including Guru Granth Sahib 349; how equality is shown in stories 
from the lives of the Gurus, including the example of Mai Bhago and the 
appointment of women as teachers; and how equality is shown in Sikh life today; 
how and why complete equality of men and women is important for Sikhs today. 
1.7 Sewa (service to others): the nature of sewa, including tan, man and dhan; the 
origins and purpose of sewa and its importance in the development of Sikhism, 
including Guru Granth Sahib 26; divergent understandings of the practice and 
importance of sewa in Sikh life today in reflecting the priority of service to others.  
1.8 Sangat: the nature and history of the sangat; divergent understandings of why the 
sangat is important for Sikhs, including Guru Granth Sahib 1316; the concept of Sat 
Sangat and divergent understandings of its significance for Sikhs; problems for 
Sikhs living without a sangat. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
78 
2G Sikhism  
Section 2: Crime and Punishment 
Students should have an understanding of: 
2.1 Sikh attitudes towards justice: the nature of justice and why justice is important for 
Sikhs, including Guru Granth Sahib 274; Sikh responses to why justice is important 
for the victim; non-religious attitudes (including atheist and Humanist) about why 
justice is important regardless of religion and belief and Sikh responses to these 
attitudes. 
2.2 Sikh attitudes towards crime: Sikh teachings about and responses to the nature, 
causes and problem of crime, including avoiding the Five Thieves, with reference to 
Guru Granth Sahib 61; what action is taken by Sikh individuals and Sikh groups to 
end crime, including the Sikh Welfare Awareness Team (SWAT). 
2.3 Sikh teachings about good, evil and suffering: Sikh teachings about the nature of 
good actions, how they are rewarded, and teachings about the nature of evil 
actions; non-religious attitudes (including atheist and Humanist) about why people 
suffer, including believing in religion and Sikh responses to them, including Guru 
Granth Sahib 767; divergent Sikh teachings about why people suffer, including 
reference to human responsibility in Guru Granth Sahib 1062. 
2.4 Sikh attitudes towards punishment: divergent Sikh teachings and attitudes to the 
nature and use of punishment, including reference to the Rahit Maryada Section 6 
Chapter 8 Article XXV and links to situation ethics; Sikh teachings on why 
punishment can be regarded as justice and why punishment might be needed in 
society. 
2.5 Sikh attitudes towards the aims of punishment: divergent Sikh attitudes towards 
each of the aims of punishment (protection, retribution, deterrence and 
reformation); Sikh teachings about punishment, including Guru Granth Sahib 148. 
2.6 Sikh teachings about forgiveness: Sikh teachings and responses about the nature 
and importance of forgiveness; how offenders are forgiven by the community and 
why this is needed, including Guru Granth Sahib 1378; Sikh responses to the nature 
and use of restorative justice, and why it is important for criminals. 
2.7 Sikh teachings about the treatment of criminals including the opportunity of 
reformation and the seeking of God in Guru Granth Sahib 245; divergent Sikh 
attitudes towards the use of torture, human rights, fair trial and trial by jury; the 
application of ethical theories, such as situation ethics, which may accept the use of 
torture if it is for the greater good. 
2.8 Sikh attitudes towards the death penalty: the nature and purpose of capital 
punishment; divergent Sikh teachings about the nature, purpose and arguments 
surrounding the use of capital punishment, including interpretations of God’s power 
of life and death in Guru Granth Sahib 7; non-religious (including atheist and 
Humanist) attitudes towards the use of capital punishment, including the application 
of ethical theories, such as situation ethics, and Sikh responses  
to them. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
79 
2G Sikhism  
Section 3: Living the Sikh Life 
Students should have an understanding of: 
3.1 Features of the gurdwara: the nature, history and purpose of the design of the 
Gurdwara as the ‘Door/Gate of the Guru’, including Rahit Maryada Chapters 4–6; 
how and why objects of devotion are used within the gurdwara: Guru Granth Sahib, 
takht, chanani, chaur, the langar hall, four doors, and the Nishan Sahib; divergent 
understandings of the importance of these features in Sikh life today. 
3.2 The gurdwara: the role and importance of the gurdwara within the Sikh community 
including reference to Guru Granth Sahib 1391; activities that take place within the 
gurdwara and why; the nature and importance of visiting Sikh historical gurdwaras: 
the Harmandir Sahib in Amritsar (the Golden Temple); divergent understandings of 
the importance of making such visits, including reference to Guru Granth Sahib 4. 
3.3 Langar: the history of langar including Guru Granth Sahib 967; the nature and 
purposes of langar; the significance of langar for Sikhs today, especially as an 
expression of sewa. 
3.4 Nam Japna – meditating on the name of God: the nature and significance of Nam 
Japna; diverse ways in which the Nam Japna is used in the gurdwara and in Sikh 
daily life, including Guru Granth Sahib 1142. 
3.5* Prayer, including reference to Guru Granth Sahib 305: the nature, role and purpose 
of prayer in the home; the different types of prayer; when prayer might take place 
and why; the importance of having different prayers. 
3.6 Akhand path (continuous 48-hour reading of the Guru Granth Sahib): the nature, 
history, role and purpose of the akhand path including reference Rahit Maryada 
Chapter 7; how and why Sikhs might take part in the akhand path: why the akhand 
path is important for the Sikh community and for individual Sikhs. 
3.7 Gurpurbs and commemorations: divergent understandings of the nature, history 
and purpose of gurpurbs and commemorations; why they are important for Sikhs 
today. The origins and meaning of gurpurbs, including Guru Nanak’s birthday, 
Vaisakhi, including reference to the account of the events found in Gurbilas 
Patshahi 10. Divali: the origins and meaning of commemorations, including the 
martyrdom of Guru Arjan and Guru Tagh Bahadur Ji. 
3.8 Birth and naming rituals and ceremonies: the celebration and significance of Naam 
Karan and Hukamnama; the significance of Amrit Sanskar (the initiation ceremony) 
for Sikh families, including reference to the Rahit Maryada Chapters 11 and 13; 
divergent understandings of these ceremonies between khalsa and non-khalsa 
Sikhs; the significance of the names Singh and Kaur in the naming and Amrit 
ceremonies, and for Sikh identity today. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
80 
2G Sikhism  
Section 4: Peace and Conflict 
Students should have an understanding of: 
4.1 Sikh attitudes towards peace: Sikh teachings about the nature and importance of 
peace, including Guru Granth Sahib 671; how these may be understood and 
applied differently in the life of a Sikh. 
4.2 The role of Sikhs in peacemaking: Sikh teachings about peacemaking; the 
importance for Sikhs of justice, forgiveness and reconciliation in peacemaking; how 
Sikhs work for peace today, the divergent approaches in what they do and why 
they try to work for peace, including Guru Granth Sahib 599 and links to situation 
ethics. 
4.3 Sikh attitudes to conflict: Sikh teachings and responses to the nature and causes of 
conflict; Sikh responses to the problems conflict causes within society, including 
Zafarnama 22 and links to situation ethics; non-religious (including atheist and 
Humanist) attitudes about the role of religion in the causes of conflict and Sikh 
responses to them. 
4.4 Sikh attitudes to pacifism: Sikh teachings and responses to the nature and history 
of pacifism, including the goal of peace in Guru Granth Sahib 831; Sikh teachings 
about passive resistance and examples of its use within Sikhism, including the Akali 
movement. 
4.5 Sikh attitudes to the Just War theory: Sikh teachings and responses to the nature 
and importance of the Just War theory; the conditions of a Just War within 
Sikhism, with specific reference to Dharam Yudh, including Dasam Granth 1133; 
divergent opinions on whether a Just War is possible for Sikhs today, including the 
application of ethical theories such as situation ethics. 
4.6 Sikh attitudes to Holy War: Sikh teachings about war and peace as shown in the 
Guru Granth Sahib; Sikh teachings about war with specific reference to the concept 
of the saint-soldier, including Bhai Nand’s Tankah Nama, and teachings about not 
killing and when fighting is a person’s duty; non-religious (including atheist and 
Humanist) attitudes towards Holy War and Sikh responses to them. 
4.7 Sikh attitudes to weapons of mass destruction (WMD): Sikh teaching and 
responses to the problems and benefits of WMD; Sikh attitudes towards the use of 
such weapons, including the possible damage to the earth and its importance in 
Guru Granth Sahib 146; non-religious attitudes (including atheist and Humanist) 
and the application of ethical theories (such as utilitarianism) which support the 
acquisition of weapons of mass destruction, and Sikh responses to them. 
4.8 Sikh responses to issues surrounding conflict: Sikh teachings and responses to the 
nature of problems involved in conflict – violence, war and terrorism, including 
links to the Five Thieves and Guru Granth Sahib 1330; how Sikhs have worked to 
overcome these issues; non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) views 
towards the issues surrounding conflict and Sikh responses to them. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
81 
Assessment information 
Paper 2: Area of Study 2 – Religion, Peace and Conflict 
● First assessment: May/June 2018.  
● The assessment is 1 hour and 45 minutes. 
● The assessment is out of 102 marks. 
● Students must answer all sections and all questions on the chosen religion. The religion 
must be different for each area of study. 
● The paper may include short open, open response and extended writing questions. 
● The paper will assess spelling, punctuation and grammar (SPaG) and use of specialist 
terminology and these will contribute a minimum of 5% of marks towards the overall 
weighting for this paper. 
Synoptic assessment 
Synoptic assessment requires students to work across different parts of a qualification and to 
show their accumulated knowledge and understanding of a topic or subject area. 
Synoptic assessment enables students to show their ability to combine their skills, knowledge 
and understanding with breadth and depth of the subject.  
Synopticity will be assessed where students are required to bring together their knowledge 
and understanding of religion from across the course of study. 
Sample assessment materials 
Sample papers and mark schemes can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE 
(9–1) in Religious Studies B Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
82 
Area of Study 3: Religion, Philosophy and 
Social Justice 
The focus of this area of study is on Religion, Philosophy and Social Justice; this is one of 
three areas of study of which students must complete two. 
For this area of study, students must study all four content sections in relation to one 
religion: 
1 Beliefs in God 
2 Philosophy of Religion 
3 Living the Religious Life 
4 Equality 
Students must study a different religion in their second area of study; students who study 
one area of study from the perspective of Catholic Christianity are prohibited from studying 
Christianity in their second area of study. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
83 
Area of Study 3A – Catholic Christianity 
Overview 
This area of study comprises a study in depth of Catholic Christianity as a lived religion 
within the United Kingdom and throughout the world, and its beliefs and teachings on life, 
with specific regard to philosophy of religion and issues of equality and social justice. 
There are four sections: Catholic Beliefs, Philosophy of Religion, Living the Catholic Life and 
Equality. 
The significance and importance of the various beliefs, issues and practices to Catholics 
today should be explored throughout the sections. This should include reference to how the 
Bible informs a Catholic’s understanding of the topics and how approaches to the issues are 
underpinned by philosophical arguments and ethical theory as applicable.  
Students will be expected to study Catholic Christianity within the context of the wider British 
society, the religious traditions of which are, in the main, Christian. Students should compare 
and contrast the areas of belief and practice within Catholic Christianity with wider Christian 
perspectives as outlined in the content below. 
● Beliefs about the afterlife and their significance (1.8)* 
● The practice and significance of worship (3.2)* 
Students should recognise that Catholic Christianity is one of the many religions and world 
views in Great Britain, which include Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism, Sikhism and non-
religious views such as Humanism and atheism. This knowledge may be applied throughout 
the assessment of the specified content. 
Students should compare and contrast the areas of ethics and/or philosophy within Catholic 
Christianity with wider Christian perspectives and non-religious views as outlined in the 
content below. 
Students should also recognise that within Catholic Christianity there may be more than one 
perspective in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed. Common and 
divergent views within the wider Christian tradition in the way beliefs and teachings are 
understood and expressed should be included throughout, including reference to Orthodox, 
Protestant and other Christian traditions.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
84 
3A Catholic Christianity  
Section 1: Catholic Beliefs 
Students should have an understanding of: 
1.1 The Trinity: the nature and significance of the Trinity as expressed in the Nicene 
Creed; the nature and significance of the oneness of God; the nature and 
significance of each of the Persons individually: God as the Father, Son and Holy 
Spirit; how this is reflected in worship and belief in the life of a Catholic today. 
1.2 Biblical understandings of God as a Trinity of Persons: the nature and significance 
of God as a Trinity of Persons, including reference to the baptism of Jesus 
(Matthew 3:13–17); the historical development of the doctrine of the Trinity, 
including reference to the First Council of Nicaea and the First Council of 
Constantinople. 
1.3 Creation: the nature and significance of the biblical account of Creation, including 
Genesis 1–3; and how it may be understood in divergent ways in Christianity, 
including reference to literal and metaphorical interpretations; the significance of 
the Creation account for Catholics in understanding the nature and characteristics 
of God, especially as Creator, benevolent, omnipotent and eternal. 
1.4 The significance of the Creation account in understanding the nature of humanity: 
the nature and significance of the nature of humanity being created in the image 
of God, including reference to Genesis 1–3 and divergent understandings of 
humanity’s relationship with Creation (dominion and stewardship); the 
implications of these beliefs for Catholics today. 
1.5 The Incarnation: Jesus as incarnate Son, the divine Word, both fully God and fully 
human; the scriptural origins of this belief, including John 1:1–18 and its 
importance for Catholics today. 
1.6 The events in the Paschal Mystery: Catholic teachings about the life, death, 
resurrection and ascension of Jesus, including reference to Luke 24; the 
redemptive efficacy of these events and their significance for Catholics today. 
1.7 The significance of the life, death, resurrection and ascension of Jesus for Catholic 
beliefs about salvation and grace, including John 3:10–21 and Acts 4:8–12; the 
implications and significance of these events for Catholic practice today.  
1.8* Catholic beliefs about eschatology: life after death; the nature of resurrection, 
judgement, heaven, hell and purgatory, including reference to John 11:17–27 and  
2 Corinthians 5:1–10; divergent Christian beliefs about life after death, with 
reference to purgatory and the nature of resurrection; why belief in life after 
death is important for Catholics today. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
85 
3A Catholic Christianity  
Section 2: Philosophy of Religion 
Students should have an understanding of: 
2.1 Revelation as proof of the existence of God: the significance of Jesus Christ as the 
culmination of God’s revelation; what the revelation of Jesus Christ shows about 
the nature of God for Catholics, including reference to Hebrews 1:1–4. 
2.2 Visions as proof of the existence of God: the nature and importance of visions for 
Catholics; biblical and non-biblical examples of visions, including Joan of Arc and 
Genesis 15 and Matthew 17:1–13; reasons why they might lead to belief in God, 
and Catholic responses to non-religious arguments (including atheist and 
Humanist) which maintain that visions are hallucinations and provide no proof that 
God exists; divergent understandings of what visions show about the nature of 
God for Catholics.  
2.3 
 
Miracles as proof of the existence of God: the nature and importance of miracles 
for Catholics; biblical and non-biblical examples of miracles including those at 
Lourdes and John 4:43–54; reasons why they might lead to belief in God and 
Catholic responses to non-religious arguments (including atheist and Humanist), 
which maintain that miracles can be scientifically explained and provide no proof 
that God exists; divergent understandings of what miracles show about the nature 
of God for Catholics. 
2.4 Catholic attitudes towards religious experiences and their use as philosophical 
arguments for the existence of God: the nature of religious experience and why 
not all religious experiences are approved by the Church, including reference to 
Catechism of the Catholic Church 66–67; Catholic responses to non-religious 
(including atheist and Humanist) arguments that religious experiences do not 
provide proof that God exists. 
2.5 Design argument: the classical design argument for the existence of God and its 
use by Catholics as a philosophical argument for the existence of God; divergent 
understandings about what the design argument shows about the nature of God 
for Catholics, including Romans 1:18–24; Catholic responses to non-religious 
(including atheist and Humanist) arguments against the design argument as 
evidence for the existence of God. 
2.6 Cosmological argument: the cosmological argument for the existence of God and 
its use by Catholics as a philosophical argument for the existence of God, including 
reference to Thomas Aquinas' First Three Ways of showing God's existence; 
divergent understandings of the nature and importance of what the cosmological 
argument shows about the nature of God for Catholics; Catholic responses to  
non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) arguments against the cosmological 
argument as evidence for the existence of God. 
2.7 Issues raised by the existence of suffering and God as all-loving: the issues it 
raises for Catholics about the nature of God, including Isaiah 45; how the problem 
and its basis as a philosophical argument may lead some to examine and others to 
reject their belief in God. 
2.8 The solutions offered to the problem of suffering and a loving and righteous God 
within Catholicism: biblical, theoretical and practical responses – Psalms, including 
reference to Psalm 119, Job, free will (St Augustine), as a way for humans to 
develop (St Irenaeus), prayer, and charity; divergent understandings within 
Christianity of their success in solving the problem. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
86 
3A Catholic Christianity  
Section 3: Living the Catholic Life 
Students should have an understanding of 
3.1 The sacramental nature of reality: Catholic teachings about how the whole of 
creation manifests the presence of God; the meaning and effects of each of the 
seven sacraments, including Catechism of the Catholic Church 1210–1211; the 
practice and symbolism of each sacrament; how sacraments communicate the 
grace of God; divergent Christian attitudes to sacraments, including reference to 
Orthodox and Protestant Christianity. 
3.2* Liturgical worship within Catholic Christianity: the nature and significance of the 
Mass for Catholics, including its structure and the Eucharist as the ‘source and 
summit of Christian life’ with reference to Lumen Gentium paragraph 7; divergent 
Christian attitudes towards the practice and meaning of liturgical worship, 
including its significance for Catholics and the less structured worship in 
evangelical Christian denominations. 
3.3 The funeral rite as a liturgical celebration of the Church: practices associated with 
the funeral rite in the home, the church and the cemetery, including reference to 
'Preparing my funeral' by Vincent Nichols, Archbishop of Westminster; the aims of 
the funeral rite, including communion with the deceased; the communion of the 
community and the proclamation of eternal life to the community and its 
significance for Catholics. 
3.4 Prayer as the ‘raising of hearts and minds to God’: the nature and significance of 
different types of prayer; the Lord’s Prayer, including Matthew 6:5–14, set 
(formulaic) prayers and informal (extempore) prayer; when each type might be 
used and why; the importance of prayer and the importance for Catholics of 
having different types of worship. 
3.5 The role and importance of forms of popular piety: the nature and significance of 
of the Rosary, Eucharistic adoration and Stations of the Cross; how each of these 
might be used and why; the importance of having different types of worship for 
Catholics, including reference to Catechism of the Catholic Church 1674–1676; 
divergent Christian attitudes to these forms of piety.  
3.6 Pilgrimage: the nature, history and purpose of Catholic pilgrimage; the significance 
of the places people go on pilgrimage; divergent Christian understandings about 
whether pilgrimage is important for Christians today, with specific reference to 
Jerusalem, Lourdes, Rome, Walsingham and the Catechism of the Catholic Church 
2691–2696. 
3.7 Catholic Social Teaching: how Catholic Social Teaching reflects the teaching to 
show love of neighbour; Catholic teaching on justice, peace and reconciliation, 
Evangelii Gaudium paragraphs 182–237 – The inclusion of the poor in society; how 
these teachings might be reflected in the lives of individual Catholics, including 
reference to Matthew 25:31–46 (the Parable of the Sheep and Goats); the work of 
CAFOD, what it does and why. 
3.8 Catholic mission and evangelism: the history and significance of mission and 
evangelism for Catholics; divergent ways this is put into practice by the Church 
and individual Catholics locally, nationally and globally, and how this fulfils the 
commission of Jesus and teachings of the Church, including Evangelii Gaudium 
Chapter 5. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
87 
3A Catholic Christianity  
Section 4: Equality 
Students should have an understanding of: 
4.1 Catholic teaching on human rights: Catholic teachings and responses to the nature, 
history and purpose of human rights; the importance of human rights and why 
Catholics might support them, including The Common Good and the Catholic 
Church's Social Teaching 36–37; divergent Christian responses to the need for and 
application of individual human rights, including the support offered by situation 
ethics; Catholic responses to non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) 
arguments about human rights. 
4.2 Catholic attitudes towards equality: Catholic teachings, responses and solutions to 
the causes of inequality and problems caused by inequality in the world; Catholic 
teachings about equality, including reference to interpretations of  
John 13:34. 
4.3 Catholic attitudes towards religious freedom: Catholic teachings and responses to 
the nature of religious freedom, including reference to the Catechism of the 
Catholic Church 1738 and 1747; the response of the Catholic Church to a  
multi-faith society; the benefits and challenges for Catholics living in a multi-faith 
society; Catholic responses to non-religious arguments (including atheist and 
Humanist) against aspects of religious freedom. 
4.4 Catholic attitudes to prejudice and discrimination: Catholic teachings and responses 
to the nature of prejudice and discrimination and the problems they cause, 
including links to situation ethics; Catholic teachings on why prejudice and 
discrimination against religions is wrong, including reference to Catechism of the 
Catholic Church 1934–1935. 
4.5 Catholic attitudes towards racial harmony: Catholic teachings and responses to the 
teachings of the Catholic Church about racial harmony and those that may reflect 
ethical theories, such as situation ethics; how and why Catholics have worked for 
racial harmony, including Galatians 3:23–29; the benefits for Catholics of living in a 
multi-ethnic society. 
4.6 Catholic attitudes towards racial discrimination: Catholic teachings and responses to 
racial discrimination, how and why racial discrimination causes problems in society, 
including reference to Acts 17:22–28. 
4.7 Catholic attitudes to social justice: Catholic teachings and responses to the nature 
and history of the distribution of wealth and opportunity in the UK and the world; 
Catholic teaching about social justice, and the way the Church works for social 
justice, including reference to Catechism of the Catholic Church 1928–1933; links 
to situation ethics and Catholic responses to them.  
4.8 Catholic attitudes towards wealth and poverty: Catholic teachings and responses to 
the nature and causes of poverty in the UK and in the world, including absolute and 
relative; Catholic teachings about wealth and poverty, including biblical examples 
such as Matthew 25:31–47 and links to virtue ethics. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
88 
Area of Study 3B – Christianity 
Overview 
This area of study comprises a study in depth of Christianity as a lived religion within the 
United Kingdom and throughout the world, and its beliefs and teachings on life, specifically 
about Philosophy of Religion and issues of equality and social justice. 
There are four sections: Christian Beliefs, Philosophy of Religion, Living the Christian Life and 
Equality.  
The significance and importance of the various beliefs, issues and practices to Christians 
today should be explored throughout the sections. This should include reference to how the 
Bible informs a Christian’s understanding of the topics and how approaches to the issues are 
underpinned by philosophical arguments and ethical theory as applicable.  
Students will be expected to study Christianity within the context of the wider British society, 
the religious traditions of which are, in the main, Christian. Students should recognise that 
Christianity is one of the many religions and world views in Great Britain, which include 
Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism, Sikhism and non-religious views such as Humanism 
and atheism. This knowledge may be applied throughout the assessment of the specified 
content.  
Students should compare and contrast two areas of belief and practice within Christianity 
with one of either Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism, or Sikhism: 
● Beliefs about the afterlife and their significance (1.6)* 
● The practice and significance of worship (3.1)* 
Students should compare and contrast the areas of ethics and/or philosophy within 
Christianity with non-religious views as outlined in the content below. 
Students should also recognise that within Christianity there may be more than one 
perspective in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed. Common and 
divergent views within Christianity in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and 
expressed should be included throughout, including reference to Catholic, Orthodox, 
Protestant and other Christian traditions.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
89 
3B Christianity  
Section 1: Christian Beliefs  
Students should have an understanding of: 
1.1  The Trinity: the nature and significance of the Trinity as expressed in the Nicene 
Creed; the nature and significance of the oneness of God; the nature and 
significance of each of the Persons individually: including reference to  
Matthew 3:13–17; how this is reflected in Christian worship and belief today. 
1.2 The creation of the universe and of humanity: the biblical account of creation and 
divergent ways in which it may be understood by Christians, including as literal 
and metaphorical; the role of the Word and Spirit in creation, including  
John 1:1–18 and Genesis 1–3; the importance of creation for Christians today. 
1.3 The Incarnation: the nature and importance of the person of Jesus Christ as the 
incarnate Son of God; the biblical basis of this teaching, including John 1:1–18 
and 1 Timothy 3:16 and its significance for Christians today. 
1.4 The last days of Jesus’ life: the Last Supper, betrayal, arrest, trial, crucifixion, 
resurrection and ascension of Jesus; the accounts of these within the Bible, 
including Luke 22–24 and the significance of these events to understanding the 
person of Jesus Christ. 
1.5 The nature and significance of salvation and the role of Christ within salvation: 
law, sin, grace and Spirit, the role of Christ in salvation, including John 3:10–21 
and Acts 4:8–12; the nature and significance of atonement within Christianity and 
its link to salvation. 
1.6* Christian eschatology: divergent Christian teachings about life after death, 
including the nature and significance of resurrection, judgement, heaven, and hell 
and purgatory, with reference to the 39 Articles of Religion and Catholic teachings; 
how beliefs about life after death are shown in the Bible, including reference to  
2 Corinthians 5:1–10 and divergent understandings as to why they are important 
for Christians today. 
1.7 The problem of evil/suffering and a loving and righteous God: the problems it 
raises for Christians about the nature of God, including reference to omnipotence 
and benevolence, including Psalm 103; how the problem may cause believers to 
question their faith or the existence of God; the nature and examples of natural 
suffering, moral suffering. 
1.8 Divergent solutions offered to the problem of evil/suffering and a loving and 
righteous God: biblical, theoretical and practical, including reference to Psalm 119, 
Job, free will, vale of soul-making, prayer, and charity; the success of solutions to 
the problem.  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
90 
3B Christianity 
Section 2: Philosophy of Religion 
Students should have an understanding of: 
2.1 Revelation as proof of the existence of God; revelation as shown in the Bible, 
including in the covenants with Noah and Abraham, and through Jesus, including 
Hebrews 1:1–4; divergent understandings of what revelation shows about the 
nature of God for Christians. 
2.2 Visions as proof of the existence of God: the nature and importance of visions for 
Christians; biblical and non-biblical examples of visions, including Genesis 15 and 
Matthew 17:1–13; reasons why they might lead to belief in the existence of God 
and Christian responses to non-religious arguments (including atheist and 
Humanist) which maintain that visions are hallucinations and provide no proof that 
God exists; divergent understandings of what visions show about the nature of 
God for Christians. 
2.3 Miracles as proof of the existence of God: the nature and importance of miracles 
for Christians; biblical examples of miracles, including John 4:43–54; reasons why 
they might lead to belief in the existence of God and Christian responses to  
non-religious arguments (including atheist and Humanist) which maintain that 
miracles can be scientifically explained and provide no proof that God exists; 
divergent understandings of what miracles show about the nature of God for 
Christians. 
2.4 Christian attitudes towards religious experiences and their use as philosophical 
arguments for the existence of God: the nature of a religious experience and why 
it might be regarded as revelation, including reference to Exodus 3; Christian 
responses to non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) arguments that 
religious experiences do not provide proof that God exists. 
2.5 Christian teaching about prayers: Christian teachings about the nature and 
importance of prayers; Christian teachings about reasons prayers that are 
answered in the way the person expects might lead to belief in God, including  
1 John 5:13–17. 
2.6 Design argument: the classical design argument for the existence of God and  
its use by Christians as a philosophical argument for the existence of God; 
divergent understandings about what the design argument may show about the 
nature of God for Christians, including Romans 1:18–24; Christian responses to 
non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) arguments against the design 
argument as evidence for the existence of God. 
2.7 Cosmological argument: the cosmological argument for the existence of God and 
its use by Christians as a philosophical argument for the existence of God; 
divergent understandings about what the cosmological argument shows about the 
nature of God for Christians, including Thomas Aquinas' First Three Ways of 
showing God's existence; Christian responses to non-religious (including atheist 
and Humanist) arguments against the cosmological argument as evidence for the 
existence of God. 
2.8 Religious upbringing: Christian teachings about raising children to believe in God, 
including reference to Proverbs 22:6; features of a Christian upbringing and why 
they may lead to belief in God; Christian responses to non-religious (including 
atheist and Humanist) arguments about why a religious upbringing may result in a 
rejection of God’s existence. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
91 
3B Christianity 
Section 3: Living the Christian Life 
Students should have an understanding of:  
3.1* Christian worship: liturgical and non-liturgical forms of worship, including activities 
which are informal and individual, including reference to the Book of Common 
Prayer; when each form might be used and why; divergent Christian attitudes 
towards the practices, meaning and significance of liturgical and non-liturgical 
forms of worship in Christian life today, with reference to denominations who 
worship with less structure such as some Pentecostal churches. 
3.2 The role of the sacraments in Christian life and their practice in two 
denominations: the role of the sacraments/ordinance as a whole; the nature and 
importance of the meaning and celebration of baptism and the Eucharist in at least 
two denominations, including reference to the 39 Articles XXV–XXXVI; divergent 
Christian attitudes towards the use and number of sacraments in Orthodox, 
Catholic and Protestant traditions. 
3.3 The nature and purpose of prayer: the nature of and examples of the different 
types of prayer; set prayers; informal prayer and the Lord’s Prayer, including 
Matthew 6:5–14; when each type might be used and why; divergent Christian 
attitudes towards the importance of each type of prayer for Christians today. 
3.4 Pilgrimage: the nature, history and purpose of pilgrimage, including interpretations 
Luke 2:41–43; the significance of the places people go on pilgrimage; divergent 
Christian teachings about whether pilgrimage is important for Christians today, 
with specific reference to Catholic and Protestant understandings; the activities 
associated with, and significance of, Jerusalem, Iona, Taize and Walsingham. 
3.5 Christian religious celebrations: the nature and history of Christian festivals in the 
church year, including Christmas and Easter; the significance of celebrating Advent 
and Christmas; the significance of celebrating Holy Week and Easter with reference 
to interpretations of 1 Corinthians 15:12–34.  
3.6 The future of the Christian Church: Church growth, the history and purpose of 
missionary and evangelical work, including reference to Mark 16:9–20 and  
John 20:21–22; divergent ways this is put into practice by the Church locally, 
nationally and globally; Christian attitudes to why evangelical work is important for 
the Church and for individual Christians. 
3.7 The role and importance of the local church in the local community: how and why 
it helps the individual believer and the local area; local parish activities, including 
interpretations of 1 Peter 5:1–4, ecumenism, outreach work, the centre of 
Christian identity and worship through living practices. 
3.8 The role and importance of the Church in the worldwide community: how and why 
it works for reconciliation and the problems faced by the persecuted Church; 
divergent Christian responses to teachings about charity, including 1 Corinthians 
13 and Matthew 25:31–46; the work of Christian Aid, what it does and why. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
92 
3B Christianity  
Section 4: Equality 
Students should have an understanding of: 
4.1 Christian teaching on human rights: Christian teachings and responses to the 
nature, history and purpose of human rights; the importance of human rights and 
why Christians might support them, including Proverbs 14:31; divergent Christian 
responses to the need for and application of individual human rights, including the 
support offered by situation ethics; Christian responses to non-religious (including 
atheist and Humanist) arguments about human rights. 
4.2 Christian attitudes towards equality: Christian teachings, responses and solutions 
to the causes of inequality and problems caused by inequality in the world; 
Christian teaching about equality, including Galatians 3:23–29. 
4.3 Christian attitudes towards religious freedom: Christian teachings and responses to 
the nature of religious freedom, including reference to the Catechism of the 
Catholic Church 1738 and 1747; the response of the Church to a multi-faith 
society; the benefits and challenges for Christians living in a multi-faith society; 
Christian responses to non-religious arguments (including atheist and Humanist) 
against aspects of religious freedom. 
4.4 Christian attitudes to prejudice and discrimination: Christian teachings and 
responses to the nature of prejudice and discrimination and the problems they 
cause; Christian teachings on why prejudice and discrimination against religions is 
wrong, including reference to Galatians 2:1–10. 
4.5 Christian attitudes towards racial harmony: Christian teachings and responses to 
racial harmony including interpretations of John 13:34, including links to situation 
ethics; how and why Christians have worked for racial harmony, including the work 
and teachings of Desmond Tutu; the benefits for Christians of living in a multi-
ethnic society. 
4.6 Christian attitudes towards racial discrimination: Christian teachings and responses 
to racial discrimination, how and why racial discrimination causes problems in 
society, including Acts 17:22–28. 
4.7 Christian attitudes to social justice: Christian teachings and responses to the 
nature and history of the distribution of wealth and opportunity in the UK and the 
world; Christian teaching about social justice, including reference to Matthew 
25:31–46, and the way the Church works for social justice, including links to 
situation ethics.  
4.8 Christian attitudes towards wealth and poverty: Christian teachings and responses 
to the nature and causes of poverty in the UK and in the world including absolute 
and relative; Christian teachings about wealth and poverty, including biblical 
examples such as Matthew 25:31–47 and links to virtue ethics. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
93 
Area of Study 3C – Islam 
Overview 
This area of study comprises a study in depth of Islam as a lived religion within the United 
Kingdom and throughout the world, and its beliefs and teachings on life, specifically about 
the issues of Philosophy of Religion, and issues of equality and social justice. 
There are four sections: Islamic Beliefs, Philosophy of Religion, Living the Muslim Life and 
Equality. 
The significance and importance of the various beliefs, issues and practices to Muslims today 
should be explored throughout the sections. This should include reference to how the Qur’an 
informs a Muslim’s understanding of the topics and how approaches to the issues are 
underpinned by philosophical arguments and ethical theory as applicable.  
Students will be expected to study Islam within the context of the wider British society, the 
religious traditions of which are, in the main, Christian. Students should compare and 
contrast the areas of belief and practice within Islam with Christianity as outlined in the 
content below. 
● Beliefs about the afterlife and their significance (1.8)* 
● The practice and significance of worship (3.3)* 
Students should recognise that Islam is one of the many religions and world views in Great 
Britain, which include Buddhism, Hinduism, Judaism, Sikhism and non-religious views such 
as Humanism and atheism. This knowledge may be applied throughout the assessment of 
the specified content. 
Students should compare and contrast the areas of ethics and/or philosophy within Islam 
and non-religious views as outlined in the content below. 
Students should also recognise that within Islam there may be more than one perspective in 
the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed. Common and divergent views 
within Islam in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed should be 
included throughout, including reference to Sunni and Shi’a traditions.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
94 
3C Islam  
Section 1: Muslim Beliefs  
Students should have an understanding of: 
1.1 The Six Beliefs of Islam: their nature, history and purpose, including Kitab  
al-iman 1:4; how they are understood and expressed in Sunni and Shi’a Muslim 
communities today; the importance of these principles for Muslims. 
1.2 The Five Roots of ‘Usul ad-Din in Shi’a Islam: Tawhid (oneness of Allah); 'Adl 
(Divine Justice); Nubuwwah (Prophethood); Imamah (Successors to Muhammad) 
and Mi'ad (The Day of Judgment and the Resurrection); the nature, history and 
purpose of the Five Roots with reference to their Qur’anic basis, including Surah 
112 (the oneness of Allah); the importance of these principles for different Shi’a 
communities today, including Sevener and Twelver. 
1.3 The nature of Allah: how the characteristics of Allah are shown in the Qur’an and 
why they are important; Tawhid (oneness), including Surah 16:35–36, immanence, 
transcendence, omnipotence, beneficence, mercy, fairness and justice, Adalat in 
Shi’a Islam. 
1.4 Risalah: the nature and importance of prophethood for Muslims, including  
Surah 2:136; what the roles of prophets teach Muslims, exemplified in the lives of 
Adam, Ibrahim, Isma’il, Musa, Dawud, Isa, and Muhammad. 
1.5 Muslim holy books (Kutub) – the nature, history, significance and purpose of 
Muslim holy books with reference to: the Qur’an; the Tawrat (Torah), including  
Surah 5:43–48; the Zabur (Psalms), including Surah 4:163–171; the Injil (Gospel), 
including Surah 57:27; and the Sahifah (Scrolls). Divergent Muslim views about the 
importance of the holy books in their lives today. 
1.6 Malaikah: the nature and importance of angels for Muslims; how angels Jibril, Izra’il 
and Mika’il are shown in the Quran, including Surah 32:11 and 2:97–98, and their 
significance for Muslims today. 
1.7 al-Qadr: the nature and importance of Predestination for Muslims; how al-Qadr and 
human freedom relates to the Day of Judgement, including reference to Sahih al-
Bukhari 78:685; divergent understandings of predestination in Sunni and Shi’a 
Islam; the implications of belief in al-Qadr for Muslims today.  
1.8* Akhirah: Muslim teachings about life after death; the nature of judgement, paradise 
and hell; how they are shown in the Qur’an, including Surah 17:49–72; divergent 
ways in which Muslim teachings about life after death affect the life of a Muslim 
today.  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
95 
3C Islam  
Section 2: Philosophy of Religion 
Students should have an understanding of: 
2.1 Revelation as proof of the existence of Allah; the Qur’an as revelation; revelation as 
shown in the Qur’an as direct (Surah 34:46–50) or through a messenger; divergent 
understandings of what revelation shows about the nature of Allah for Muslims. 
2.2 Visions as proof of the existence of Allah: the nature and importance of visions in 
Islam; Qur’anic examples of visions, including Surah 19:16–22; reasons why they 
might lead to belief in the existence of Allah, and Muslim responses to non-religious 
arguments (including atheist and Humanist) which maintain that visions are 
hallucinations and provide no proof that Allah exists; divergent understandings of 
what visions show about the nature of Allah for Muslims, with reference to Sunni, 
Shi’a and Sufi Islam. 
2.3 Miracles as proof of the existence of Allah: the nature and importance of miracles in 
Islam; the Qur’an as a miracle, including Surah 17:84–89; examples of miracles; 
reasons why they might lead to belief in the existence of Allah; Muslim responses to 
non-religious arguments (including atheist and Humanist) which maintain that 
miracles can be scientifically explained and provide no proof that Allah exists; 
divergent understandings of what miracles show about the nature of Allah for 
Muslims. 
2.4 Muslim attitudes towards religious experiences and their use as philosophical 
arguments for the existence of Allah: the nature of a religious experience;  
Surah 2:118; divergent understandings of the nature and importance of religious 
experiences in Islam, with reference to Sunni, Shi’a and Sufi Islam; Muslim responses 
to non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) arguments that religious 
experiences do not provide proof that Allah exists. 
2.5 Design argument: the design argument and its use in Islam as a philosophical 
argument for the existence of Allah and what it shows about the nature of Allah; 
divergent understandings of the nature and importance of the design argument for 
the existence of Allah in Islam, including reference to Surah 2:164; Muslim responses 
to non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) arguments against the design 
argument as evidence for the existence of Allah. 
2.6 Cosmological argument: the cosmological argument and its use in Islam as a 
philosophical argument for the existence of Allah, including reference to Surah 79:27–
33 and kalam in the writings of Al-Ghazali, including Kitab al-lqtisad fil’ltiqad; what 
the cosmological argument shows about the nature of Allah; divergent understandings 
of the strengths and challenges of the cosmological argument in Islam; Muslim 
responses to non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) arguments against the 
cosmological argument as evidence for the existence of Allah. 
2.7 Issues raised by existence of suffering and Allah as compassionate, including  
Surah 1: the problems the existence of suffering may raise for Muslims about the 
nature of Allah; how the problem and its basis as a philosophical argument may lead 
some people to reject belief in Allah or cause believers to question their belief. 
2.8 The different practical and philosophical solutions offered to the problem of suffering 
and Allah as compassionate within Islam: Qur’anic, including Surah 2:151–177; 
theoretical and practical responses, including life as a test, prayer and charity; 
divergent understandings within Islam of their success in solving the problem. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
96 
3C Islam 
Section 3: Living the Muslim Life 
Students should have an understanding of: 
3.1 Ten Obligatory Acts of Shi’a Islam: their nature, history and purpose of the Ten 
Obligatory Acts; the diversity of practice and importance of Ten Obligatory Acts  
for Shi’a Muslims today; their basis in the Qur’an, including reference to Surah 
9:71–73; divergent understandings of these principles within Sunni Islam, including 
links with the Five Pillars. 
3.2 Shahadah as one of the Five Pillars: the nature, role and significance of Shahadah 
for Sunni and Shi’a Muslims, including reference to Surah 3:17–21; why reciting 
Shahadah is important for Muslims, and its place in Muslim practice today. 
3.3* Salah as one of the Five Pillars, including reference to Surah 15:98–99 and 29:45: 
the nature, history, significance and purpose of Salah for Sunni and Shi’a Muslims, 
including different ways of understanding them; how Salah is performed, including 
ablution, times, directions, movements and recitations, in the home and mosque 
and Jummah prayer. 
3.4 Sawm as one of the Five Pillars: the nature, role, significance and purpose of fasting 
during Ramadan, including Surah 2:183–185; those who are excused from fasting 
and why. The significance of the Night of Power: the nature, history and purpose of 
the Night of Power; why Laylat al-Qadr is important for Muslims today. 
3.5 Zakah as one of the Five Pillars and Khums: the nature, role, significance and 
purpose of Zakah and Khums, including Surah 9:58–60 and 8:36–42; why Zakah is 
important for Sunni Muslims; why Khums is important for Shi’a Muslims; the 
benefits of receiving Zakah or Khums. 
3.6 Hajj as one of the Five Pillars: the nature, role, origins and significance of Hajj, 
including Surah 2:124–130 and 22:25–30; how Hajj is performed and why Hajj is 
important for Muslims; benefits and challenges of performing Hajj for Muslims. 
3.7 Jihad: the origins, meaning and significance of Jihad in Islam; divergent 
understandings of Jihad within Islam, including the difference between lesser and 
greater Jihad; the conditions for declaration of lesser Jihad, including reference to 
Surah 2:190–194 and 22:39; the importance of Jihad in the life of Muslims. 
3.8 The nature, origins, activities, meaning and significance of the celebration/ 
commemoration of Id-ul-Adha, with reference to Surah 37:77–111, and Id-ul-Fitr in 
Sunni Islam, with reference to their place within Shi’a Islam; and Id-ul-Ghadeer, 
with reference to Hadith and the interpretation of Surah 5:3, and Ashura in Shi’a 
Islam, with reference to their place within Sunni Islam. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
97 
3C Islam 
Section 4: Equality 
Students should have an understanding of: 
4.1 Muslim teaching on human rights: Muslim teachings and responses to the nature 
and purpose of human rights; why Muslims might support human rights as 
important, including Surah 5:8; divergent Muslim responses to the need for and 
application of individual human rights, including the support offered by situation 
ethics; the problems human rights might cause for Muslims; Muslim responses to 
non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) arguments about human rights. 
4.2 Muslim attitudes towards equality: Muslim teachings and responses to the causes of 
inequality and problems caused by inequality in the world with reference to 
examples from the Hadith, including Sahih al-Bukhari 56:681; divergent Muslim 
teachings and practices that reflect equality; possible Islamic solutions to inequality 
and why Muslims may support them. 
4.3 Muslim attitudes towards religious freedom: different Muslim teachings and 
responses to the nature and importance of religious freedom, including  
Surah 2:255–257; the divergent responses of Muslims to a multi-faith society; the 
benefits and challenges for Muslims living in a multi-faith society; Muslim responses 
to non-religious arguments (including atheist and Humanist) against aspects of 
religious freedom. 
4.4 Muslim attitudes to prejudice and discrimination: Muslim teachings and responses 
to the nature of prejudice and discrimination, including Surah 49:13, and the 
problems they cause, including links to situation ethics; Muslim teachings on why 
prejudice and discrimination against religions is wrong.  
4.5 Muslim attitudes towards racial harmony: Muslim teachings about racial harmony; 
different reasons and ways Muslims have worked for racial harmony, including 
teachings on racial harmony in the Final Sermon of Muhammad, and those that 
may reflect ethical theory; the benefits for Muslims of living in a multi-ethnic 
society. 
4.6 Muslim teachings and attitudes towards racial discrimination: Muslim teachings 
about why it causes problems in society, including Surah 49:13; divergent Muslim 
responses to racial discrimination as shown in the life and teachings of Malcolm X. 
4.7 Muslim attitudes to social justice: Muslim teachings and responses to and teachings 
about the nature of the distribution of wealth and opportunity in the UK and the 
world; Muslim teaching about social justice, including Surah 7:155–157; the 
different ways Muslims work for social justice; links to situation ethics and Muslim 
responses to them. 
4.8 Muslim attitudes towards wealth and poverty: Muslim teachings and responses to 
the nature and causes of poverty in the UK and in the world; Muslim teachings 
about wealth and poverty, including Surah 2:177. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
98 
Area of Study 3D – Buddhism 
Overview 
This area of study comprises a study in depth of Buddhism as a lived religion within the 
United Kingdom and throughout the world, and its beliefs and teachings on life, specifically 
about philosophy of religion and issues of equality and social justice. 
There are four sections: Buddhist Beliefs, Philosophy of Religion, Living the Buddhist Life and 
Equality. 
The significance and importance of the various beliefs, issues and practices to Buddhists 
today should be explored throughout the sections. This should include reference to how 
scripture informs a Buddhist’s understanding of the topics and how approaches to the issues 
are underpinned by philosophical arguments and ethical theory as applicable.  
Students will be expected to study Buddhism within the context of the wider British society, 
the religious traditions of which are, in the main, Christian. Students should compare and 
contrast the areas of belief and practice within Buddhism with Christianity as outlined in the 
content below. 
● Beliefs about the afterlife and their significance (1.5)* 
● The practice and significance of worship (3.6)* 
Students should recognise that Buddhism is one of the many religions and world views in 
Great Britain, which include Hinduism, Judaism, Islam, Sikhism and non-religious views such 
as Humanism and atheism. This knowledge may be applied throughout the assessment of 
the specified content. 
Students should compare and contrast the areas of ethics and/or philosophy within 
Buddhism and non-religious views as outlined in the content below. 
Students should also recognise that within Buddhism there may be more than one 
perspective in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed. Common and 
divergent views within Buddhism in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and 
expressed should be included throughout, including reference to Theravada and Mahayana 
traditions.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
99 
3D Buddhism  
Section 1: Buddhist Beliefs  
Students should have an understanding of: 
1.1 The life of the Buddha: the nature and history of the events in the life of the 
Buddha and why they are important to Buddhists today, including ancestry, birth, 
princely life, marriage and the Four Sights, with reference to Buddhavamsa XXVI; 
the enlightenment of the Buddha and founding of the Sangha. 
1.2 Dhamma: the nature and different meaning of dhamma (dependent origination 
/conditionality); the nature and importance of paticca-samuppada and the Three 
Marks of Existence, including reference to the Story of Nagasena and the Chariot in 
the Milinda Panha; suffering (dukkha), no fixed self (anicca) and soul or essence 
(anatta); the implications of belief in dhamma for Buddhists today. 
1.3 First Noble Truth, including reference to the Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta: the 
nature of dukkha; Buddhist teachings about suffering; the different types of 
suffering as pain, fabrication and change; the importance of suffering for Buddhists 
today. 
1.4 Second Noble Truth, including reference to Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta: the 
nature of samudaya (the root of suffering); Buddhist teachings about the causes of 
suffering, including the Sermon at Benares; the Three Poisons and how they are 
represented in the Wheel of Life; divergent understandings of the Wheel of Life, 
with reference to Theravada and Mahayana Buddhism. 
1.5* Third Noble Truth, including reference to the Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta: the 
nature of nirodha and the cessation of tanha; Buddhist teachings about the ending 
of desire; the nature of the cycle of samsara; different understandings of nibbana 
and enlightenment and their importance for Buddhists today. 
1.6 Fourth Noble Truth, including reference to the Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta: the 
nature of the Middle Way (magga); Buddhist teachings about the Eightfold Path 
leading to nibbana. The Threefold Way: the nature, purpose and importance of sila 
(ethics), samadhi (meditation) and panna (wisdom); divergent understandings of 
the importance Eightfold Path and the Threefold Way for Buddhist life today. 
1.7 Human life: divergent Buddhist understandings of the nature and importance of the 
Five Khandas (aggregates), including the Khandha Sutta; divergent Buddhist 
understandings of the nature and importance of sunnata and tathagatagarbha 
(Buddha-nature); divergent Buddhist understandings of the nature and importance 
of Arahant and Bodhisattva Ideals; divergent Buddhist understandings of the nature 
and history of Buddhahood and the Pure Land. 
1.8 Buddhist ethical teachings: divergent Buddhist understandings of the nature, 
purpose and importance of kamma, including Dhammapada 181–187 and the 
Khuddakapatha, merit and rebirth, karuna (compassion), metta (loving kindness), 
pancha sila (the Five Precepts) and the paramitas (Six Perfections); the divergent 
applications of each of these ethical teachings in Buddhist life today. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
100 
3D Buddhism  
Section 2: Philosophy of Religion 
Students should have an understanding of: 
2.1 Buddhist teachings about the non-existence of a personal God: Buddha’s teaching 
about the lack of need for God, including the Devadaha Sutta; the implications of 
lack of belief in a personal God for Buddhist life today. 
2.2 Buddhist teachings about the Realm of Gods: Buddhist understanding of the devas 
and differences between a personal God and the devas, including the Śūraṅgama 
Sūtra Section 9 Chapter 11; the nature and symbolism of the Wheel of Life; the 
divergent attitudes toward the importance of the Wheel of Life for Buddhists today, 
including reference to Theravada and Mahayana Buddhism. 
2.3 Enlightenment: Buddhist teachings about the nature of enlightenment in Theravada 
and Mahayana traditions; examples, including that of the Buddha in Maha-Saccaka 
Sutta; reasons why enlightenment might be regarded as important; the importance 
of enlightenment for Buddhists today; Buddhist responses to  
non-religious arguments (including atheist and Humanist) which maintain that 
enlightenment is illogical and can be scientifically explained. 
2.4 Buddhist teaching about miracles: divergent Buddhist teachings about the nature 
and importance of miracles, including the Buddha’s attitude to the use of 
supernatural powers in the Kevatta Sutta and their use as a philosophical argument 
for the nature of reality; reasons why miracles might be important to Buddhists and 
why they might not, including reference to Theravada and Mahayana Buddhism; 
Buddhist responses to non-religious arguments (including atheist and Humanist) 
which maintain that miracles can be scientifically explained.  
2.5 Prayers: Buddhist teaching about the nature and importance of prayers; examples 
of prayers, including Avalokitesvara mantra (Om padme hum); reasons why 
Buddhists pray, including metta, sharing merit, opening the mind to consciousness; 
divergent Buddhist teachings why prayers might be important to Buddhists and why 
they might not be. 
2.6 Visions: Buddhist teachings about the nature and importance of visions with 
reference to the Vajra Sutta and vision of Maitreya by Asanga and the giving of the 
‘Five Treatises of Maitreya’; Buddhist attitudes towards visions as emptiness/ 
illusions/ dreams as message dreams or as an indication of a person’s mental 
health; divergent Buddhist teachings on why visions might be important to 
Buddhists and why they might not be; Buddhist responses to non-religious 
arguments (including atheist and Humanist) which maintain that visions are 
hallucinations and provide no spiritual benefit. 
2.7 Buddhist attitudes towards religious experiences, including reference to the Kevatta 
Sutta: Buddhist teachings and responses to the nature of a religious experience and 
its use as a philosophical argument for the nature of reality; divergent Buddhist 
teachings about whether religious experiences are real or provide religious 
knowledge; Buddhist responses to non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) 
arguments that religious experiences are not real. 
2.8 Religious upbringing: how a Buddhist upbringing provides a basis for an 
understanding of reality; features of a Buddhist upbringing and why they may lead 
to belief, including the Sigalovada Sutta; Buddhist responses to non-religious 
(including atheist and Humanist) arguments about why a religious upbringing may 
result in a rejection of God’s existence. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
101 
3D Buddhism  
Section 3: Living the Buddhist Life 
Students should have an understanding of: 
3.1 Meditation: the nature, purpose and significance of meditation in Buddhism; the 
different types of meditation: samatha (concentration), metta bhavana (loving 
kindness) and vipassana (insight); meditative practices, including mindfulness 
breathing and zazen, divergent understanding of the nature and importance of 
visualisation of the Buddha and Bodhisattvas, including Amitāyus Meditation Sutra; 
how the different practices are used by Mahayana and Theravada Buddhists and 
the benefits from their use. 
3.2 Chanting: the nature, purpose and role of chanting in Buddhism as a devotional 
practice and to gain mental concentration, including Dhammapada 1–2, confidence 
and joy. The divergent understandings of the importance of chanting in Buddhist 
life today: Theravada Buddhism, including Tiratana Buddhism, with reference to 
Dhammapada 190, and Mahayana Buddhism, including Nam Myoho Renge Kyo. 
3.3 Mantra recitation: divergent understandings of the nature, purpose, role and 
importance of mantra recitation with reference to Theravada Buddhism, including 
Namo Buddhaya (‘Homage to the Buddha’), and Mahayana Buddhism; the nature 
and purpose of using sacred syllables, devotional articles, offerings and mala 
beads and why they are used in different schools of Buddhism. 
3.4 Features of Buddhist places of worship: the divergent nature, history and design of 
Buddhist places of worship, including temples, gompas, viharas, shrines in 
Theravada, Mahayana and Triratna Buddhism; how and why the places of worship 
are used, including reference to the shrine room, shrine facing east, and the 
library, showing the importance of learning with reference to the Kimsila Sutta.  
3.5 How and why objects of devotion are used within different Buddhist places of 
worship, buddharupas, including reference to Vakkali Sutta, shrine, Bodhi tree; 
divergent understandings of why devotional objects are important in Buddhism 
today. 
3.6* Puja: the nature and purpose of puja in the vihara and the home, including 
reference to Mangala Sutta; examples of the different types; when each type 
might be used and why; the importance of having different types of worship and 
their use in different Buddhist contexts. 
3.7 Death and mourning rituals and ceremonies: the divergent celebration and 
significance of the ceremonies in Buddhist communities and to Buddhists; the 
distinct significance of the rituals associated with death and mourning in 
Theravada communities and in Japan and Tibet, with reference to the Tibetan 
Book of the Dead. 
3.8 Festivals and retreats: the divergent nature, history, purpose and importance of 
festivals and retreats in Buddhism; divergent understandings of the origins, 
meaning and features of celebration of specific festivals and retreats, including 
Wesak, Vassa/Rain Retreat and Kathina, with reference to the Anapanasati Sutta, 
and Uposatha days in Theravada Buddhism; Hanamatsuri and Obon (Japanese), 
Parinibbana Day in Mahayana Buddhism, and Lama Tsong Khapa Day in Tibet. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
102 
3D Buddhism  
Section 4: Equality 
Students should have an understanding of: 
4.1 Buddhist teaching on human rights: Buddhist teachings and responses to the nature 
and purpose of human rights; why Buddhists might support human rights as 
important, including reference to upekkha and the Declaration of the International 
Network of Engaged Buddhists: Towards A Buddhist Culture of Non-Violence and 
Human Rights (May 1998); divergent Buddhist responses to the need for and 
application of individual human rights, including the support offered by situation 
ethics; the problems human rights might cause for Buddhists; non-religious 
(including atheist and Humanist) arguments about human rights and Buddhist 
responses to them. 
4.2 Buddhist attitudes towards equality: Buddhist teachings and responses to the causes 
of inequality and problems caused by inequality in the world; divergent Buddhist 
teachings about and practices that reflect equality, including reference to Lotus Sutra 
12; possible Buddhist solutions to inequality and why Buddhists may support them. 
4.3 Buddhist attitudes towards religious freedom: different Buddhist teachings and 
responses to the nature and importance of religious freedom, including Towards The 
True Kinship Of Faiths: How the World's Religions Can Come Together Chapter 9 by 
the XIV Dalai Lama; the divergent responses of Buddhists to a multi-faith society; 
the benefits and challenges for Buddhists living in a multi-faith society; Buddhist 
responses to non-religious arguments (including atheist and Humanist) against 
aspects of religious freedom. 
4.4 Buddhist attitudes to prejudice and discrimination: Buddhist teachings and responses 
to the nature of prejudice and discrimination, and the problems they cause, including 
links to situation ethics; Buddhist teachings on why prejudice and discrimination 
against religions is wrong, including Nipata Sutta. 
4.5 Buddhist teachings about racial harmony; different reasons and ways Buddhists have 
worked for racial harmony, including Vaca Sutta and how these may link to situation 
ethics; the benefits for Buddhists of living in a multi-ethnic society. 
4.6 Buddhist attitudes towards racial discrimination: Buddhist teachings about why it 
causes problems in society, including Dhammapada 129–140; Buddhist responses to 
racial discrimination as shown in the life and teachings of the XIV Dalai Lama. 
4.7 Buddhist attitudes to social justice: divergent Buddhist responses to and teachings 
about the nature of the distribution of wealth and opportunity in the UK and the 
world; Buddhist teaching about social justice, including Sikshasamuccaya 280–281; 
the different ways Buddhists work for social justice; links to situation ethics. 
4.8 Buddhist attitudes towards wealth and poverty: divergent Buddhist teachings and 
responses to the nature and causes of poverty in the UK and in the world; Buddhist 
teachings about wealth and poverty, including Cula Kammavibhanga Sutta, gaining 
merit and dana, and how these may link to situation ethics. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
103 
Area of Study 3E – Hinduism 
This area of study comprises a study in depth of Hinduism as a lived religion within the 
United Kingdom and throughout the world, and its beliefs and teachings on life specifically, 
about Philosophy of Religion and issues of equality and social justice. 
There are four sections: Hindu Beliefs, Philosophy of Religion, Living the Hindu Life and 
Equality. 
The significance and importance of the various beliefs, issues and practices to Hindus today 
should be explored throughout the sections. This should include reference to how scripture 
informs a Hindu’s understanding of the topics and how approaches to the issues are 
underpinned by philosophical arguments and ethical theory as applicable.  
Students will be expected to study Hinduism within the context of the wider British society, 
the religious traditions of which are, in the main, Christian. Students should compare and 
contrast the areas of belief and practice within Hinduism with Christianity as outlined in the 
content below. 
● Beliefs about the afterlife and their significance (1.5)* 
● The practice and significance of worship (3.4)* 
Students should recognise that Hinduism is one of the many religions and world views in 
Great Britain, which include Buddhism, Judaism, Islam, Sikhism and non-religious views such 
as Humanism and atheism. This knowledge may be applied throughout the assessment of 
the specified content. 
Students should compare and contrast the areas of ethics and/or philosophy within Hinduism 
and non-religious views as outlined in the content below. 
Students should also recognise that within Hinduism there may be more than one 
perspective in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed. Common and 
divergent views within Hinduism in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and 
expressed should be included throughout, including reference to Shaivism and Vaishnavism.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
104 
3E Hindusism  
Section 1: Beliefs and Teachings 
 
Students should have an understanding of: 
1.1 The nature of Brahman: The nature of Brahman as spirit, ultimate reality or 
absolute truth; how the characteristics of Brahman are shown in Hindu scriptures, 
including Katha Upanishad 2.2.6–8. 
1.2 The nature and importance of understanding Brahman as Nirguna Brahman and 
Saguna Brahman: how Nirguna Brahman and Saguna Brahman are shown in 
Hindu scripture, for example Nirguna (Taittiriya Upanishad 2.7.1–2) and Saguna 
(Rig Veda 1.154.1–2); the nature and importance of Vaikuntha (spiritual worlds); 
divergent ways in which belief in each may be expressed in the life of Hindus 
today. 
1.3 Three aspects of the divine: Brahman, Antaryami and Bhagavan; the nature and 
significance of the divine as Brahman (everywhere and non-personal), Antaryami 
(within the heart) and Bhagavan (beyond, as a personal loving God); how the 
three aspects are shown in Hindu scriptures, including Mundaka Upanishad 2.1; 
why belief in the three aspects of the divine are important in Hindu life and for 
religious pluralism today. 
1.4 Manifestations of the Divine: the nature and importance of how the deities are 
shown in Hindu scriptures; avatars and murti; the nature and role of male deities: 
divergent understandings of the importance of Vishnu (including Rig Veda 1.22) 
and Shiva; the nature and role of the female force, Shakti, including Parvati and 
Lakshmi. 
1.5* The nature of the individual and life within Hinduism: the nature and importance 
of the atman (eternal self), karma, the cycle of samsara, moksha; divergent Hindu 
understandings of the nature of the individual and life, including interpretations of 
Brihadaranyaka Upanishad 4.4; why beliefs about the atman, karma, samsara and 
moksha are important for Hindus today. 
1.6 The purpose of human life for Hindus: the nature and significance of the four aims 
of life (Purusharthas) – dharma, artha, kama and moksha; the nature and 
significance of anatana dharma (eternal law), including Bhagavad Gita 3.35; the 
nature and significance of varnashrama dharma (duties according to materialistic 
situation in life). 
1.7 Hindu responses to suffering, knowledge and ignorance: Hindu teachings about 
suffering, knowledge and ignorance such as ahimsa, respect, empathy, 
mind/sense control, humility, and love, including Mahabharata 5.39; divergent 
Hindu understandings as to why there is suffering, knowledge and ignorance for 
Hindus today. 
1.8 Hindu cosmology: the nature of the Hindu cosmology as shown in Hindu 
scriptures, including Rig Veda 10.129; the nature and importance of the cycle of 
four ages (yugas), including descriptions of the Kali Yuga in the Mahabharata, 
many worlds and their diverse inhabitants; the nature and divergent 
understandings of the importance of the concepts of prakriti (matter/nature),  
tri-guna (three qualities) and maya (illusion). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
105 
3E Hindusism  
Section 2: Philosophy of Religion 
Students should have an understanding of: 
2.1 Revelation as proof of the existence of God; revelation as shown in the scriptures 
including in the Vedas, Agamas and the Bhagavad Gita 13.26–33; reasons why 
revelation might be important to Hindus and why it might not be; what revelation 
shows about the nature of God for some Hindus. 
2.2 Visions as proof of the existence of God: the nature and importance of visions for 
Hindus; scriptural examples, including reference to Bhagavad Gita 11 and non-
religious examples of visions; reasons why they might lead to belief in the 
existence of God and Hindu responses to non-religious arguments (including atheist 
and Humanist) which maintain that visions are hallucinations and provide no proof 
that God exists; divergent understandings of what visions show about the nature of 
God for Hindus. 
2.3 Hindu attitudes towards numinous experiences: the nature and importance of 
numinous experiences for Hindus; scriptural examples with reference to Bhagavad 
Gita 12 and non-religious examples of numinous experiences; divergent 
understandings of why numinous experiences might lead Hindus to believe in the 
existence of God and reasons why they might not. 
2.4 Miracles as proof of the existence of God: the nature and importance of miracles for 
Hindus; scriptural examples and non-scriptural examples of miracles, including the 
milk miracles (1995) and the story of Ganesha in Puranic literature; reasons why 
they might lead to belief in the existence of God and Hindu responses to non-
religious arguments (including atheist and Humanist) which maintain that miracles 
can be scientifically explained and provide no proof that God exists; divergent 
understandings of what miracles show about the nature of God for some Hindus. 
2.5 Hindu teaching about prayers: the nature and importance of prayers for Hindus, 
including Rig Veda 3.62; Hindu teachings about reasons prayers that are answered 
in the way the person expects might lead to belief in God; Hindu responses to non-
religious (including atheist and Humanist) arguments surrounding unanswered 
prayers and loss of belief. 
2.6 Hindu teachings about the non-existence of a personal God: Hindu teachings which 
lead some Hindus to not believe in a personal God, including reference to Adi 
Shankara's Upadesa sahasri Chapter 1; the divergent implications of lack of belief 
in a personal God for Hindu life today. 
2.7 Hindu attitudes towards religious experiences and its use as a philosophical 
argument for the existence of God, including interpretations of Bhagavad Gita 
13.23–27: the nature of a religious experience for Hindus and why it might or 
might not be regarded as real; Hindu responses to non-religious (including atheist 
and Humanist) arguments that religious experiences do not provide proof that God 
exists.  
2.8 Religious upbringing: Hindu teachings about raising children to have a religious 
understanding of reality, including reference to Ramayan of Valmiki Canto 19; 
features of a Hindu upbringing and why they may lead to belief; Hindu responses to 
non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) arguments which maintain that a 
religious upbringing is not required. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
106 
3E Hindusism  
Section 3: Living the Hindu Life 
Students should have an understanding of: 
3.1 The nature and purpose of Hindu yoga: the nature and purpose of different forms 
of yoga, karma yoga (action), jnana yoga (knowledge), astanga/raja yoga 
(meditation) and bhakti yoga (devotion); examples of when each form of yoga 
might be used, how and why; the importance of having different types of yoga; 
reference to Bhagavad Gita 6.44–47. 
3.2 Focuses of worship and representations of the divine: the nature, purpose and 
importance of different ways of worshipping, including worshipping one god 
(personal or non-personal) or many deities, gurus and holy places (land, hills, 
rivers and sacred plants and animals); the scriptural basis for the different focuses 
of worship and representations of the divine in worship, including interpretations of 
Bhagavad Gita 6.20–31. 
3.3 The importance of Hindu places of worship: the nature, features of, use, and 
purpose of worship in different places, including in the temple, in the home, 
outside, shrines and festival celebration and in the space of the heart, with 
reference to interpretations of Bhagavad Gita 9.13–27; the benefits for Hindus of 
having different places to worship in. 
3.4* The nature and purpose of prayer in the temple and the home: the nature, features 
of use and purpose of the different forms of worship, including meditation, puja, 
havan, darshan, arti, bhajan, kirtan and japa, with reference to interpretations of 
Bhagavad Gita 6.44–47; divergent understandings of the benefits for Hindus of 
having different forms of worship. 
3.5 Hindu sacred festivals: the nature, history, purpose and significance of Hindu 
sacred festivals; the origins and meaning of specific festivals, including Diwali, Holi, 
Navratri Dussehra, Ram Navami, Ratha-yatra, Janmashtami, and Raksha Bandhan, 
including interpretations of Brihadaranyaka Upanishad 1.3.28. 
3.6 Hindu pilgrimage: the nature, history and purpose of Hindu pilgrimages; the 
significance of the places Hindus go on pilgrimage; divergent understandings of 
why pilgrimage may, or may not be, important for Hindus today; the nature, 
features, history and importance of pilgrimage to the Ganges including 
interpretations of Rig Veda 10.75, Vrindavana and Varanasi. 
3.7 Hindu environmental projects: divergent understandings of the nature, purpose 
and significance of environmental care for Hindus; the importance of care for rivers 
and sacred places for Hindus; how Hindus care for the environment, examples of 
what they do and why, including reference to cow protection and interpretations of 
Rig Veda 10.87.16–19. 
3.8 Hindu charity work: the nature and purpose of charity for Hindus; Hindu teachings 
about charity; the work of one named Hindu charity working to promote wellbeing, 
social inclusion and women’s rights, what it does and why, including interpretations 
of Bhagavad Gita 3.10–12. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
107 
3E Hindusism  
Section 4: Equality 
Students should have an understanding of: 
4.1 Hindu teaching on human rights: Hindu teachings and responses to the nature, 
history and purpose of human rights, including interpretation of Mahabharata 5.39, 
the importance of human rights and why Hindus might support them, including 
dharmic duty; the problems human rights might cause for Hindus. Humanist and 
atheistic arguments about human rights and Hindu responses to them. 
4.2 Hindu attitudes towards equality: Hindu teachings and responses to the causes of 
inequality and problems caused by inequality in the world, including Rig Veda 
10.90; Hindu teaching about equality, possible solutions and the reasons for them. 
4.3 Hindu attitudes towards religious freedom: Hindu teachings and responses to the 
nature of religious freedom, including reference to Rig Veda 1.164.46 and 
Bhagavad Gita 4.11; the response of Hindus to a multi-faith society; the benefits 
and challenges for Hindus living in a multi-faith society. 
4.4 Hindu attitudes to prejudice and discrimination: Hindu teachings and responses to 
the nature of prejudice and discrimination and the problems they cause, including 
links to situation ethics; Hindu teachings on why prejudice and discrimination 
against religions is wrong, including reference to interpretations of Bhagavad Gita 
4.9–11; Hindu responses to non-religious arguments (including atheist and 
Humanist) against aspects of religious freedom. 
4.5 Hindu attitudes towards racial harmony: Hindu teachings about racial harmony and 
those that may reflect ethical theories, such as situation ethics; how and why 
Hindus have worked for racial harmony, including Mahabharata 5.39 and the work 
of Mahatma Gandhi; the benefits of living in a multi-ethnic society. 
4.6 Hindu attitudes towards racial discrimination: Hindu teachings and responses to 
racial discrimination, how and why racial discrimination causes problems in society, 
including reference to Mahabharata 5.39. 
4.7 Hindu attitudes to social justice: Hindu teachings and responses to the nature and 
history of the distribution of wealth and opportunity in the UK and the world; Hindu 
teaching about social justice, including interpretations of Mahabharata, Book 9.60, 
and the way Hindus work for social justice; divergent Hindu, Humanist and atheist 
responses, including links to situation ethics.  
4.8 Hindu attitudes towards wealth and poverty: Hindu teachings and responses to the 
nature and causes of poverty in the UK and in the world, including absolute and 
relative; Hindu teachings about wealth and poverty, including reference to artha 
and Rig Veda 10.117. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
108 
Area of Study 3F – Judaism 
Overview 
This area of study comprises a study in depth of Judaism as a lived religion within the United 
Kingdom and throughout the world, and its beliefs and teachings on life, specifically about 
Philosophy of Religion and issues of equality and social justice. 
There are four sections: Jewish Beliefs, Philosophy of Religion, Living the Jewish Life and 
Equality. 
The significance and importance of the various beliefs, issues and practices to Jews today 
should be explored throughout the sections. This should include reference to how scripture 
informs a Jew’s understanding of the topics and how approaches to the issues are 
underpinned by philosophical arguments and ethical theory as applicable.  
Students will be expected to study Judaism within the context of the wider British society, 
the religious traditions of which are, in the main, Christian. Students should compare and 
contrast the areas of belief and practice within Judaism with Christianity as outlined in the 
content below. 
● Beliefs about the afterlife and their significance (1.8)* 
● The practice and significance of worship (3.4)* 
Students should recognise that Judaism is one of the many religions and world views in 
Great Britain, which include Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam, Sikhism and non-religious views 
such as Humanism and atheism. This knowledge may be applied throughout the assessment 
of the specified content. 
Students should compare and contrast the areas of ethics and/or philosophy within Judaism 
and non-religious views as outlined in the content below. 
Students should also recognise that within Judaism there may be more than one perspective 
in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed. Common and divergent 
views within Judaism in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed should 
be included throughout, including reference to Orthodox, Reform and Liberal traditions.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
109 
3F Judaism  
Section 1: Jewish Beliefs  
Students should have an understanding of: 
1.1 The nature of the Almighty: how the characteristics of the Almighty are shown in 
the Torah, and why they are important in Jewish life today, including One, Creator, 
Law-Giver and Judge, including reference to Genesis 2. 
1.2 The nature and importance of Shekhinah: how the divine presence is shown in the 
Torah and why it is important including interpretations of 2 Chronicles 7:1–3; the 
divergent understandings of Shekhinah found in different forms of Orthodox 
Judaism and the importance of them for Jews today. 
1.3 The nature and purpose of the Messiah: how messiahship is shown in the 
scriptures, including Jeremiah 23:5–8; the nature and significance of the Messianic 
Age and the Jewish responsibility to bring it about; divergent understandings of the 
Messiah in different forms of Orthodox and Reform Judaism and the importance of 
them for Jewish people today. 
1.4 The covenant with Abraham and his descendants: the nature and history of the 
Abrahamic covenant; the role of Abraham in the covenant, including Genesis 17; 
why the Promised Land covenanted to Abraham and his descendants is important 
for Jews today. 
1.5  The Covenant at Sinai: the nature and history of the Covenant at Sinai (the Ten 
Commandments), including Exodus 20; the role and significance of Moses in the 
Covenant at Sinai; divergent understandings of how and why the Decalogue is 
important in Jewish life today. 
1.6 Sanctity of life: why human life is holy for Jewish people; how life is shown as 
special. The nature and importance of Pikuach Nefesh (primacy of life): life takes 
precedence over everything, with reference to Talmud Yoma 83–84; divergent 
understandings of how and why the principle of Pikuach Nefesh is applied by Jews 
today. 
1.7 Moral principles and the Mitzvot: the nature and importance of the Mitzvot, 
including reference to the Mishneh Torah of Maimonides: Sefer Madda; the 
importance of the relationship between keeping the Mitzvot and free will; the 
Mitzvot between humans and the Almighty, and between humans; divergent 
understandings of the importance of the Mitzvot between the Almighty and 
humans, and between humans, for Jewish life today.  
1.8* Jewish beliefs about life after death: divergent Jewish understandings of the nature 
and significance of life after death including reference to different forms of 
Orthodox and Reform Judaism; Jewish teachings about life after death including 
interpretations of Ecclesiastes 12; the nature of resurrection and judgement; why 
belief in life after death may be important for Jews today. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
110 
3F Judaism  
Section 2: Religious Experience 
Students should have an understanding of: 
2.1 Revelation as proof of the existence of the Almighty; revelation as shown in the 
Tenakh, including direct revelation in 1 Samuel 2:27 and indirect/veiled revelation 
in Deuteronomy 31:14–30; reasons why revelation might lead to belief in the 
existence of the Almighty and reasons why it might not; what revelation shows 
about the nature of the Almighty for Jews. 
2.2 Visions as proof of the existence of the Almighty: the nature and importance of 
visions in Judaism; scriptural and non-scriptural examples, including Genesis 15; 
reasons why they might lead to belief in the existence of the Almighty and Jewish 
responses to non-religious arguments (including atheist and Humanist) which 
maintain that visions are hallucinations and provide no proof that the Almighty 
exists; divergent understandings of what visions show about the nature of the 
Almighty. 
2.3 Miracles as proof of the existence of the Almighty: the nature and importance of 
miracles in Judaism, including as ‘nes’; scriptural examples of miracles, including 
Exodus 16; reasons why they might lead to belief in the existence of the Almighty 
Jewish responses to non-religious arguments (including atheist and Humanist) 
which maintain that miracles can be scientifically explained and provide no proof 
that the Almighty exists; divergent understandings of what miracles show about the 
nature of the Almighty for Jews. 
2.4 Jewish attitudes towards religious experience and its use as a philosophical 
argument for the existence of God: the nature of a religious experience in Judaism 
and why some people might feel that religious experiences provide proof that the 
Almighty exists, including Exodus 3; Jewish responses to non-religious (including 
atheist and Humanist) arguments that religious experiences do not provide proof 
that God exists. 
2.5 Design argument: the classical design argument for the existence of the Almighty 
and its use by Jews as a philosophical argument for the existence of God; divergent 
understandings of the nature and importance of what the design argument shows 
about the nature of the Almighty, including interpretations of Genesis 1; Jewish 
responses to non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) arguments against the 
design argument as evidence for the existence of the Almighty. 
2.6 Cosmological argument: the cosmological argument for the existence of the 
Almighty and its use by Jews as a philosophical argument for the existence of God; 
divergent understandings of the nature and importance of what the cosmological 
argument shows about the nature of the Almighty, including interpretations of 
Psalm 33 and Isaiah 45; Jewish responses to non-religious (including atheist and 
Humanist) arguments against the cosmological argument as evidence for the 
existence of the Almighty. 
2.7 Issues raised by existence of suffering: the problems it raises for Jews about the 
nature of the Almighty, including Psalm 103; how the problem and its basis as a 
philosophical argument may lead some people to reject belief in the Almighty or 
cause believers to question their belief. 
2.8 The solutions offered to the problem of suffering within Judaism: theoretical and 
practical, including life as a test, Psalms including reference to Psalm 119, Job, 
prayer, and charity; and their success in solving the problem divergent 
understandings within Judaism of their success in solving the problem. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
111 
3F Judaism  
Section 3: Living the Jewish Life 
Students should have an understanding of: 
3.1 The nature and purpose of Jewish public acts of worship: the nature, features and 
purpose of Jewish public worship, including interpretations of Psalms 116:12–19; 
the nature, features and importance of synagogue services for the Jewish 
community and the individual.  
3.2 The Tenakh and the Talmud: the nature, features, purpose and significance of the 
Tenakh (the written law) and Talmud (the oral law) for Jews in daily life today with 
reference to Perkei Avot 2; the nature and purpose of Jewish laws food laws, 
kashrut, including kosher and treifah and the separation of dairy and meat, 
including reference to Deuteronomy 14:3–10; the divergent implications of the 
Jewish food laws for Jews today. 
3.3 The nature and purpose of prayer in the home and of private prayer: the nature, 
features and purpose of prayer three times a day; the importance of having 
different forms of prayers, including interpretations of Psalms 55:16–23. 
3.4* The nature and importance of the Shema and the Amidah (the standing prayer); 
when the Shema and the Amidah might be used, how and why, including reference 
to the Mezuzah; the importance of having the Shema and the Amidah for Jews 
today, including reference to Deuteronomy 6:4. 
3.5 The importance of ritual for Jews today: the nature, features and purpose of birth 
rituals (including Brit Milah), Bar and Bat Mitzvahs, and marriage rituals, including 
interpretations of Genesis 21:1–8, Genesis 17 and Leviticus 12; the nature, 
purpose and importance of the mourning rituals of funeral, shiva, avelut and 
yahrzeit for Jews today; divergent understandings of the importance of each ritual 
for different forms of Orthodox and Reform Judaism today. 
3.6 The nature, features, history and purpose of celebrating Shabbat: the nature, 
features and purpose of the celebration of Shabbat in the home and in the 
synagogue, including interpretations of Exodus 31:12–18; why the celebration of 
Shabbat is important for the Jewish community and the individual today. 
3.7 Jewish festivals: the nature, history, purpose and significance of Jewish festivals; 
the origins and meaning of specific festivals, including Rosh Hashanah, Yom Kippur, 
Pesach, Shavuot and Sukkot, including interpretations of Leviticus 23 (Rosh 
Hashanah); divergent understandings of why festivals are important to different 
forms of Orthodox and Reform Judaism today. 
3.8 Features of the synagogue: the nature, history and purpose of the different design 
of the synagogues in Liberal, Reform and Orthodox Judaism, including facing 
Jerusalem, layout of seating the Ark and the bimah and with reference to Proverbs 
14:28; how and why the synagogue is used by the different communities, including 
reference to Exodus 27:20–21; how and why objects of devotion are used within 
the synagogues, including a yad, Torah Scroll, ner tamid and menorah. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
112 
3F Judaism  
Section 4: Equality 
Students should have an understanding of: 
4.1 Jewish teaching on human rights: Jewish teachings and responses to the nature, 
history and purpose of human rights; the importance of human rights and why 
Jews might support them, including Proverbs 14:31; divergent Jewish responses to 
the need for and application of individual human rights, including the support 
offered by situation ethics; Jewish responses to non-religious (including atheist and 
Humanist) arguments about human rights. 
4.2 Jewish attitudes towards equality: Jewish teachings and responses to the causes of 
inequality and problems caused by inequality in the world; Jewish teaching about 
equality, including ahavat ha-beriot and Leviticus 19:13–18 possible solutions and 
the reasons for them. 
4.3 Jewish attitudes towards religious freedom: Jewish teachings and responses to the 
nature of religious freedom, including the story of Esther; the response of Jews to a 
multi-faith society; the benefits and challenges for Jews living in a multi-faith 
society; Jewish responses to non-religious arguments (including atheist and 
Humanist) against aspects of religious freedom. 
4.4 Jewish attitudes to prejudice and discrimination: Jewish teachings and responses to 
the nature of prejudice and discrimination and the problems they cause, including 
reference to Proverbs 24:23; links to situation ethics; Jewish teachings on why 
prejudice and discrimination against religions is wrong, including reference to anti-
Semitism and the Holocaust. 
4.5 Jewish attitudes towards racial harmony: Jewish teachings about racial harmony; 
how and why Jews have worked for racial harmony, including Leviticus 19:33–34 
and those that may reflect ethical theories such as situation ethics; the benefits for 
Jews of living in a multi-ethnic society. 
4.6 Jewish attitudes towards racial discrimination: Jewish teachings and responses to 
racial discrimination, including interpretations of Genesis 3:16–24, how and why 
racial discrimination causes problems in society. 
4.7 Jewish attitudes to social justice: Jewish teachings and responses to the nature and 
history of the distribution of wealth and opportunity in the UK and the world; 
Jewish teaching about social justice, including reference to Exodus 22:20–26, and 
the way Jews work for social justice, including links to situation ethics.  
4.8 Jewish attitudes towards wealth and poverty: Jewish teachings and responses to 
the nature and causes of poverty in the UK and in the world, including absolute and 
relative; Jewish teachings about wealth and poverty, including Deuteronomy 
14:22–29. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
113 
Area of Study 3G – Sikhism 
Overview 
This area of study comprises a study in depth of Sikhism as a lived religion within the United 
Kingdom and throughout the world, and its beliefs and teachings on life, specifically about 
Philosophy of Religion and issues of equality and social justice. 
There are four sections: Sikh Beliefs, Philosophy of Religion, Living the Sikh Life and Equality. 
The significance and importance of the various beliefs, issues and practices to Sikhs today 
should be explored throughout the sections. This should include reference to how scripture 
informs a Sikh’s understanding of the topics and how approaches to the issues are 
underpinned by philosophical arguments and ethical theory as applicable.  
Students will be expected to study Sikhism within the context of the wider British society, 
the religious traditions of which are, in the main, Christian. Students should compare and 
contrast the areas of belief and practice within Sikhism with Christianity as outlined in the 
content below. 
● Beliefs about the afterlife and their significance (1.4)* 
● The practice and significance of worship (3.5)* 
Students should recognise that Sikhism is one of the many religions and world views in Great 
Britain, which include Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism, Sikhism and non-religious views 
such as Humanism and atheism. This knowledge may be applied throughout the assessment 
of the specified content. 
Students should compare and contrast the areas of ethics and/or philosophy within Sikhism 
and non-religious views as outlined in the content below. 
Students should also recognise that within Sikhism there may be more than one perspective 
in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed. Common and divergent 
views within Sikhism in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed should 
be included throughout, including reference to Khalsa and non-Khalsa Sikhs.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
114 
3G Sikhism  
Section 1: Sikh Beliefs  
Students should have an understanding of: 
1.1 The nature of God: how the characteristics of God are shown in the Mool Mantar, 
Guru Granth Sahib 1, and why the characteristics are important and why the Mool 
Mantar is significant for Sikhs.  
1.2 God as Creator: the nature and importance of God as Creator (Karta Purakh) for 
Sikhs; Sikh teachings on God as Creator, including Guru Granth Sahib 12 and 94. 
1.3 The nature of human life: the purpose and significance of life as an opportunity to 
unite with God; Sikh understandings of why uniting with God is important; how 
uniting with God will affect their lives, including Guru Granth Sahib 12. 
1.4* Sikh beliefs about life after death: the nature of karma, rebirth and mukti 
(liberation); how they are shown in the Guru Granth Sahib, including reference to 
Guru Granth Sahib 2, 11 and 78; divergent understandings of how and why karma, 
rebirth and mukti are important for Sikh life today.  
1.5 Purpose of life: the nature and importance of being gurmukh (God-centred) not 
manmukh (self-centred) and the elimination of haumai (ego/pride), including 
reference to Guru Granth Sahib 125 and 226; what actions make a gurmukh Sikh; 
divergent understandings of why being gurmukh and eliminating haumai is 
important in Sikh life today. 
1.6 The oneness of humanity: how the equality of all humans is shown in the Guru 
Granth Sahib, including Guru Granth Sahib 349; how equality is shown in stories 
from the lives of the Gurus, including the example of Mai Bhago and the 
appointment of women as teachers; and how equality is shown in Sikh life today; 
how and why complete equality of men and women is important for Sikhs today. 
1.7 Sewa (service to others): the nature of sewa, including tan, man and dhan; the 
origins and purpose of sewa and its importance in the development of Sikhism, 
including Guru Granth Sahib 26; divergent understandings of the practice and 
importance of sewa in Sikh life today in reflecting the priority of service to others.  
1.8 Sangat: the nature and history of the sangat; divergent understandings of why the 
sangat is important for Sikhs, including Guru Granth Sahib 1316; the concept of 
Sat Sangat and divergent understandings of its significance for Sikhs; problems for 
Sikhs living without a sangat. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
115 
3G Sikhism  
Section 2: Philosophy of Religion 
Students should have an understanding of: 
2.1 Revelation as proof of the existence of God: the meaning of the word Gurbani and 
the revelation to Guru Nanak during the River Experience as narrated in the 
Janamsakhis and Guru Granth Sahib 1; reasons why revelation might be important 
to Sikhs and why it might not be; what revelation shows about the nature of God for 
Sikhs. 
2.2 Visions/mystical experiences as proof of the existence of God: the nature and 
importance of visions/mystical experiences in Sikhism and their use as a 
philosophical argument for the existence of God; scriptural examples, including Guru 
Granth Sahib 263; reasons why they might lead to belief in the existence of God for 
Sikhs and Sikh responses to non-religious arguments (including atheist and 
Humanist) which maintain that visions are hallucinations and provide no proof that 
God exists; what visions show about the nature of God for Sikhs. 
2.3 Sikh attitudes towards numinous experiences and enlightenment: Sikh teachings 
and responses to the nature and importance of numinous experiences and 
enlightenment; scriptural examples, including Guru Granth Sahib 448–1–7 and non-
religious examples of numinous experiences; reasons why they might lead to belief 
in the existence of God for Sikhs; Humanist and atheist responses to numinous 
experiences and enlightenment and Sikh responses to them. 
2.4 Miracles as proof of the existence of God: the nature and importance of miracles in 
Sikhism, including why Guru Nanak did not work them on demand, with reference to 
Guru Granth Sahib 14; examples of miracles; reasons why they might lead to belief 
in the existence of God and Sikh responses to non-religious arguments (including 
atheist and Humanist) which maintain that miracles can be scientifically explained 
and provide no proof that God exists; divergent understandings of what miracles 
show about the nature of God for Sikhs. 
2.5 Sikh attitudes towards religious experiences: Sikh attitudes towards religious 
experiences and its use as a philosophical argument for the existence of God: the 
nature of a religious experience within Sikhism, including Guru Granth Sahib 1402; 
divergent understandings of the nature and importance of religious experiences in 
Sikhism; Sikh responses to non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) 
arguments that religious experiences do not provide proof that God exists. 
2.6 Design argument: the design argument and its use in Sikhism as a philosophical 
argument for the existence of God and what it shows about the nature of God; 
divergent understandings of the nature and importance of the design argument for 
the existence of God in Sikhism, including reference to Guru Granth Sahib 463; Sikh 
responses to non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) arguments against the 
design argument as evidence for the existence of God. 
2.7 Cosmological argument: the cosmological argument for the existence of God and its 
use in Sikhism as a philosophical argument for the existence of God; what the 
cosmological argument shows about the nature of God in Sikhism, including Guru 
Granth Sahib 1; divergent understandings of the strengths and challenges of the 
cosmological argument in Sikhism; Sikh responses to non-religious (including atheist 
and Humanist) arguments against the cosmological argument as evidence for the 
existence of God. 
2.8 Religious upbringing: how a Sikh upbringing provides a basis for belief in God, 
including reference to Guru Granth Sahib 1246; features of a Sikh upbringing and 
why they may lead to belief in God. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
116 
3G Sikhism  
Section 3: Living the Sikh Life 
Students should have an understanding of: 
3.1 Features of the gurdwara: the nature, history and purpose of the design of the 
Gurdwara as the ‘Door/Gate of the Guru’, including Rahit Maryada Chapters 4–6; 
how and why objects of devotion are used within the gurdwara: Guru Granth Sahib, 
takht, chanani, chaur, the langar hall, four doors, and the Nishan Sahib; divergent 
understandings of the importance of these features in Sikh life today. 
3.2 The gurdwara: the role and importance of the gurdwara within the Sikh community 
including reference to Guru Granth Sahib 1391; activities that take place within the 
gurdwara and why; the nature and importance of visiting Sikh historical gurdwaras: 
the Harmandir Sahib in Amritsar (the Golden Temple); divergent understandings of 
the importance of making such visits, including reference to Guru Granth Sahib 4. 
3.3 Langar: the history of langar including Guru Granth Sahib 967; the nature and 
purposes of langar; the significance of langar for Sikhs today, especially as an 
expression of sewa. 
3.4 Nam Japna – meditating on the name of God: the nature and significance of Nam 
Japna; diverse ways in which the Nam Japna is used in the gurdwara and in Sikh 
daily life, including Guru Granth Sahib 1142. 
3.5* Prayer, including reference to Guru Granth Sahib 305: the nature, role and purpose 
of prayer in the home; the different types of prayer; when prayer might take place 
and why; the importance of having different prayers. 
3.6 Akhand path (continuous 48-hour reading of the Guru Granth Sahib): the nature, 
history, role and purpose of the akhand path including reference Rahit Maryada 
Chapter 7; how and why Sikhs might take part in the akhand path: why the akhand 
path is important for the Sikh community and for individual Sikhs. 
3.7 Gurpurbs and commemorations: divergent understandings of the nature, history and 
purpose of gurpurbs and commemorations; why they are important for Sikhs today. 
The origins and meaning of gurpurbs, including Guru Nanak’s birthday, Vaisakhi, 
including reference to the account of the events found in Gurbilas Patshahi 10. 
Divali: the origins and meaning of commemorations, including the martyrdom of 
Guru Arjan and Guru Tagh Bahadur Ji. 
3.8 Birth and naming rituals and ceremonies: the celebration and significance of Naam 
Karan and Hukamnama; the significance of Amrit Sanskar (the initiation ceremony) 
for Sikh families, including reference to the Rahit Maryada Chapters 11 and 13; 
divergent understandings of these ceremonies between khalsa and  
non-khalsa Sikhs; the significance of the names Singh and Kaur in the naming and 
Amrit ceremonies, and for Sikh identity today. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
117 
3G Sikhism  
Section 4: Equality 
Students should have an understanding of: 
4.1 Sikh teaching on human rights: Sikh teachings and responses to the nature and 
purpose of human rights; why Sikhs might support human rights as important, 
including Guru Granth Sahib 300; divergent Sikh responses to the need for and 
application of individual human rights, including the support offered by situation 
ethics; the problems human rights might cause for Sikhs; non-religious (including 
atheist and Humanist) arguments and Sikh responses to them. 
4.2 Sikh attitudes towards equality: Sikh teachings and responses to the causes of 
inequality and problems caused by inequality in the world with reference to 
examples; Sikh teachings and practices that reflect equality, including Guru Granth 
Sahib 349; possible Sikh solutions to inequality and why Sikhs may support them. 
4.3 Sikh attitudes towards religious freedom: different Sikh teachings and responses to 
the nature and importance of religious freedom, including Guru Gobind Singh, 
Dasam Granth 51; the divergent responses of Sikhs to a multi-faith society; the 
benefits and challenges for Sikhs living in a multi-faith society; Sikh responses to 
non-religious arguments (including atheist and Humanist) against aspects of 
religious freedom. 
4.4 Sikh attitudes to prejudice and discrimination: Sikh teachings and responses to the 
nature of prejudice and discrimination, and the problems they cause, including links 
to situation ethics; Sikh teachings on why prejudice and discrimination against 
religions is wrong, including Guru Arjan, Asa 385. 
4.5 Sikh attitudes towards racial harmony: Sikh teachings about racial harmony; 
different reasons and ways Sikhs have worked for racial harmony, including 
teachings on racial harmony, including Guru Granth Sahib 345, and those that may 
reflect situation ethics; the benefits for Sikhs of living in a multi-ethnic society. 
4.6 Sikh teachings and attitudes towards racial discrimination: Sikh teachings about 
why it causes problems in society, including Guru Granth Sahib 300; Sikh 
responses to racial discrimination as shown in the life and teachings of Guru Nanak 
and those teachings that may reflect ethical theories such as situation ethics; 
Humanist and atheistic responses to racial discrimination. 
4.7 Sikh attitudes to social justice: divergent Sikh responses to and teachings about 
the nature of the distribution of wealth and opportunity in the UK and the world; 
Sikh teaching about social justice, including the concepts supporting ‘Deg Tegh 
Fateh’ for khalsa and non-khalsa Sikhs and how these concepts are expressed in 
the Rahit Maryada Chapter 12; the different ways Sikhs work for social justice and 
how these may link to situation ethics. 
4.8 Sikh attitudes towards wealth and poverty: divergent Sikh teachings and responses 
to the nature and causes of poverty in the UK and in the world; Sikh teachings 
about wealth and poverty, including Guru Granth Sahib 1159, and how these may 
link to ethical theory. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
118 
Assessment information 
Paper 3: Area of Study 3 – Religion, Philosophy and Social Justice 
● First assessment: May/June 2018.  
● The assessment is 1 hour and 45 minutes. 
● The assessment is out of 102 marks. 
● Students must answer all sections and all questions on the chosen religion. The religion 
must be different for each area of study. 
● The paper may include short open, open response and extended writing questions. 
● The paper will assess spelling, punctuation and grammar (SPaG) and use of specialist 
terminology and these will contribute a minimum of 5% of marks towards the overall 
weighting for this paper. 
Synoptic assessment 
Synoptic assessment requires students to work across different parts of a qualification and to 
show their accumulated knowledge and understanding of a topic or subject area. 
Synoptic assessment enables students to show their ability to combine their skills, knowledge 
and understanding with breadth and depth of the subject.  
Synopticity will be assessed where students are required to bring together their knowledge 
and understanding of religion from across the course of study. 
Sample assessment materials 
Sample papers and mark schemes can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE 
(9–1) in Religious Studies B Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
119 
Assessment Objectives 
 
Students must: % in 
GCSE 
AO1 Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of religion and belief, 
including:  
● Beliefs, practices and sources of authority  
● Influence on individuals, communities and societies  
● Similarities and differences within and/or between religions and 
beliefs. 
50 
AO2 Analyse and evaluate aspects of religion and belief, including their 
significance and influence. 
50 
Total 100% 
 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
Paper* Assessment Objectives Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives AO1 % AO2% 
Paper 1: Area of Study 1 – 
Religion and Ethics 
25 25 50 
Paper 2: Area of Study 2 – 
Religion, Peace and Conflict 
25 25 50 
Paper 3: Area of Study 3 – 
Religion, Philosophy and 
Social Justice 
25 25 50 
Total for GCSE 50% 50% 100% 
 
*Students select two papers from three depending upon their chosen Areas of Study. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
120 
3 Administration and general information 
Entries 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for this qualification can be found in 
our UK Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations officers and is 
available on our website: qualifications.pearson.com 
Discount code and performance tables 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more than one GCSE, or other Level 2 
qualifications with the same discount code, will have only the grade for their 'first entry' 
counted for the purpose of the school and college performance tables (please see 
Appendix 4: Codes). For further information about what constitutes 'first entry' and full 
details of how this policy is applied, please refer to the DfE website: 
www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-education 
Students should be advised that if they take two GCSEs with the same discount code, 
schools and colleges they wish to progress to are likely to take the view that this 
achievement is equivalent to only one GCSE. The same view may be taken if students take 
two GCSEs or other Level 2 qualifications that have different discount codes but have 
significant overlap of content. Students or their advisers who have any doubts about their 
subject combinations should check with the institution they wish to progress to before 
embarking on their programmes.  
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special 
consideration and malpractice 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality policy requires all students to 
have equal opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our qualifications 
to be awarded in a way that is fair to every student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the Equality Act 2010) are not, 
when they are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in comparison to 
students who do not share that characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification and that 
this achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their peers. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be available in English. All student work must be in 
English.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
121 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with special 
educational needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to:  
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the assessment.  
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an individual 
student with a disability, without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding bodies comply with the duty under the 
Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students will 
then know what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for assessment.  
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable adjustments 
where a person with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in undertaking an 
assessment. The awarding organisation is required to take reasonable steps to overcome 
that disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be unique to that individual and 
therefore might not be in the list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of factors, 
which will include: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding 
organisation, timeframes or affects the security or integrity of the assessment. This is 
because the adjustment is not ‘reasonable’. 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student's mark or grade to 
reflect temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the examination/ 
assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a material effect on a 
candidate’s ability to take an assessment or demonstrate their level of attainment in  
an assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to apply for access arrangements 
and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special 
consideration, please refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
122 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that compromises or seeks to 
compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in examinations must be reported to Pearson using a JCQ Form M1 
(available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form should be emailed to 
candidatemalpractice@pearson.com. Please provide as much information and supporting 
documentation as possible. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies 
with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice constitutes staff or centre malpractice. 
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and maladministration of 
our qualifications. As with candidate malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is any act that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the 
integrity of the qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported 
immediately, before any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson on  
a JCQ Form M2(a) (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form, 
supporting documentation and as much information as possible should be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com. Note that the final decision regarding  
appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More-detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the document 
General and Vocational Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice. 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to comply with the requirements of 
Ofqual's General Conditions of Recognition. 
This GCSE qualification will be graded and certificated on a nine-grade scale from 9 to 1 
using the total subject mark where 9 is the highest grade. Individual papers are not graded. 
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum judged by Pearson to be of 
sufficient standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U result. 
The first certification opportunity for this qualification will be 2018. 
Student recruitment and progression 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
123 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this qualification. 
Progression 
Students can progress from this qualification to:  
● AS and A Levels in Religious Studies and other subjects.  
● vocational qualifications, such as BTEC Nationals. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
124 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
125 
 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: The context for the development of this qualification 127 
Appendix 2: Transferable skills 129 
Appendix 3: Command Words 130 
Appendix 4: Codes 131 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
126 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
127 
Appendix 1: The context for the 
development of this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] and our 
ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
● reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with those 
taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
● consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including learned bodies, 
subject associations, higher-education academics and teachers to ensure this qualification 
is suitable for a UK context 
● reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in their 
documents GCSE (9 to 1) Qualification Level Conditions and Requirements and GCSE Subject 
Level Conditions and Requirements for Religious Studies published in June 2014. 
 
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification Principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
● demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning and 
measuring higher-order skills 
● rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and valid 
assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in end users of the knowledge, skills 
and competencies of certified students 
● inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students develop at 
different rates and have different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
● empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills, see Appendix 2. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
128 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
 
“ The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important change to the 
education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications will assist them in 
helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an ‘Expert 
Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or because of 
our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the world as diverse as 
Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification development 
process that has included: 
● extensive international comparability of subject content against the highest-performing 
jurisdictions in the world 
● benchmarking assessments against UK and overseas providers to ensure that they are at 
the right level of demand 
● establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-specific 
expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
● subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future oriented. The 
design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, meaning learner outcomes 
have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a learner’s 
success in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident that we have 
supported the development of qualifications that are outstanding for their coherence, 
thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as representing world-class best 
practice. ”  
  
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Lee Sing Kong 
Director, National Institute of Education, 
Singapore 
  
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
  
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
129 
Appendix 2: Transferable skills 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently flagged the 
need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable them to respond with 
confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines skills, or 
competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that can be learned and 
that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform an activity or task and can be 
built upon and extended through learning.’ [1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected and 
evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this process, we 
identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the most evidence-based and 
robust skills framework. We adapted the framework slightly to include the Program for 
International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT Literacy and Collaborative Problem Solving 
(CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves: [2]  
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve general 
cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and communicate. [3]  
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, oral communication, written communication, assertive 
communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, service 
orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared understanding, 
taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team organisation. 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work stress, 
adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, and physical 
adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual teams, 
work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and able to acquire 
new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher education, 
as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the teaching and learning of 
this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning materials, developed with 
stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
 
[1]  OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012) 
[2]  Koenig J A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop (National 
Academies Press, 2011) 
[3] PISA – The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy (2011) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
130 
Appendix 3: Command Words 
The following command words will be used in the assessment of students across all papers. 
 
Command 
word 
Meaning Number 
of marks 
Assessment 
objectives 
State Provide knowledge of religion and belief by 
recalling factual information 3 AO1 
Outline Provide knowledge of religion and belief by 
recalling factual information 3 AO1 
Describe Provide an understanding of religion and belief 
and contrast with that of another. 4 AO1 
Explain There are two ways this command word will 
be used: 
1. (4 marks) Provide understanding of an 
aspect of religion and belief and developing 
this beyond a habitual response.  
2. (5 marks) Provide understanding of an 
aspect of religion and belief and developing 
this beyond a habitual response. In 
addition, students will be required to 
reference one source of wisdom or 
authority in support of their explanation. 
4 or 5 AO1 
*Evaluate Analyse the statement provided, considering 
different points of view and creating logical 
chains of reasoning that are underpinned by 
understanding of religion and belief. Reasoned 
judgements should be made, supported by 
the appraisal of arguments and leading to a 
justified conclusion.  
12 AO2 
 
* All GCSEs must provide opportunities for students to write responses which are of sufficient 
length to allow students to demonstrate the ability to construct and develop a sustained line 
of reasoning which is coherent, relevant, substantiated and logically structured. In this 
GCSE, these abilities are rewarded in the mark schemes of questions that are assessed using 
the command word ‘Evaluate’.  
Additional instructions are provided to students for all ‘Evaluate’ questions. These 
instructions reflect the additional requirements of the question. Please refer to the Sample 
Assessment Materials for further details. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies B 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
131 
Appendix 4: Codes 
 
Type of code Use of code Code 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for performance 
tables is assigned a discount code 
indicating the subject area to which it 
belongs. 
Discount codes are published by DfE.) 
DD1 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an 
Ofqual Regulated Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) code. 
The RQF code is known as a Qualification 
Number (QN). This is the code that 
features in the DfE Section 96 and on the 
LARA as being eligible for 16–18 and 19+ 
funding, and is to be used for all 
qualification funding purposes. The QN will 
appear on students’ final certification 
documentation. 
The QN for this 
qualification is: 
603/0063/2 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to 
enter students for a qualification.  
1RB0 
Paper codes These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be 
entered for individual papers. 
Paper 1: 1RB0/1A–1G 
Paper 2: 1RB0/2A–2G 
Paper 3: 1RB0/3A–3G 
 
 
 
DB040124 9781446927847_GCSE2016_L12_RELIGSTD_B_ISS2.DOC.1–138/0 
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office:  80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121