GCSE (9-1)
Physical Education
Specification
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9 - 1) in Physical Education (1PE0)
First teaching from September 2016
First certification from 2018 Issue 5
 
About Pearson 
We are the world’s leading learning company operating in countries all around the world. We 
provide content, assessment and digital services to schools, colleges and universities, as well as 
professional and vocational education to learners to help increase their skills and lifelong 
employability prospects. We believe that wherever learning flourishes so do people.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References to third party materials made in this document are made in good faith. Pearson does 
not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may be subject to 
change, or any opinions expressed therein. (Materials may include textbooks, journals, magazines 
and other publications and websites.) 
 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
 
ISBN 978 1 446 94188 1 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2024 
 
 
Summary of Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical 
Education Specification Issue 5 changes  
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this current issue  Page 
number  
The forward slash between inline and roller hockey has been removed 22 
 
Earlier issue(s) show(s) previous changes. 
If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, contact us via our website at: 
qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/contact-us.html. 
 
 
 
Contents 
1 Introduction 2 
Why choose Pearson GCSE in Physical Education? 2 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this qualification 3 
Qualification at a glance 4 
2 Subject content and assessment information 7 
Component 1: Fitness and Body Systems 8 
Component 2: Health and Performance 15 
Component 3: Practical Performance 20 
Component 4: Personal Exercise Programme (PEP) 30 
Assessment Objectives 39 
3 Administration and general information 40 
Entries 40 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special consideration and 
malpractice 40 
Student recruitment and progression 43 
Appendix 1: Practical performance authentication sheet 47 
Appendix 2: Personal exercise programme (PEP) authentication 
sheet 48 
Appendix 3: Personal exercise programme training record form 49 
Appendix 4: Recording practical performances 50 
Appendix 5: Glossary of key terms 55 
Appendix 6: Command word taxonomy 58 
Appendix 7: Calculators 60 
Appendix 8: The context for the development of this qualification 61 
Appendix 9: Transferable skills 63 
Appendix 10: Codes 64 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
2 
1 Introduction 
Why choose Pearson GCSE in Physical Education? 
We have listened to feedback from all parts of the physical education and sport subject 
community, including higher education. We have used this opportunity of curriculum change 
to redesign qualifications that reflect the demands of a truly modern and evolving physical 
education and sporting environment – qualifications that enable your students to apply 
themselves and give them the skills to succeed in their chosen pathway. 
Clear and coherent structure – our qualification has a straightforward structure with four 
engaging and up-to-date components that are assessed through externally examined papers 
and internally assessed components.  
Clear question papers – we have focused on ensuring that our question papers are clear 
and accessible for students and that mark schemes are straightforward in making the 
requirements clear. 
Provides a real applied focus – the new specification content encourages students to 
contextualise theory and to develop and apply their knowledge, understanding and quality of 
performances in practical assessments. 
Reflects today’s global world – students will engage with key issues and themes relating 
to contemporary global influences on physical education and sport.  
Develops transferable skills – students will develop a multitude of skills, including 
numeracy, communication and an understanding of practical performances in order to 
support progression to the next level of study. The blend of scientific and social knowledge 
positions students to access a range of qualifications.  
Develops a holistic understanding of physical education – stimulating content is at the 
heart of this engaging qualification. Students will receive a well-rounded and full introduction 
to the world of PE, sport and sport science through the combination of physical performance 
and academic challenges.  
Supports progression to A Level – we planned our GCSE and A Level specifications 
together. This ensures sensible progression of content from GCSE to A Level and similar 
approaches to assessment, so that students will have a coherent and diverse experience of 
physical education if they take both a Pearson Edexcel GCSE and A Level in Physical 
Education. 
Supports progression from Key Stage 3 – we have designed the GCSE to build on and 
embed the physical development and skills learned in key stage 3, encouraging learners to 
become more competent, confident and expert in their techniques, and apply them across 
different sports and physical activities whilst deepening their knowledge of content studied 
previously. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
3 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this 
qualification 
Planning  
● Our Getting Started guide gives you an overview of the new GCSE Physical Education 
qualification to help you to get to grips with the changes to content and assessment and 
to help you understand what these changes mean for you and your students. 
● We will provide an editable course planner and scheme of work that you can adapt to 
suit your department.  
● Our mapping documents highlight key differences between the new and the 2009 
qualification.  
Teaching and learning  
There will be a range of free teaching and learning support to help you deliver the new 
qualifications, including: 
● topic booklets, with background information about the topic and resource/further 
reading lists  
● guidance on teaching approaches to deliver the content in a practical way. 
Preparing for exams and NEA 
We will also provide a range of resources to help you prepare your students for the 
assessments, including: 
● specimen papers to support formative assessments and mock exams  
● levelled exemplars of student work with examiner commentaries for both the external 
and internal assessments. 
ResultsPlus  
ResutsPlus provides the most detailed analysis available of your students’ exam 
performance. It can help you identify the topics and skills where further learning would 
benefit your students.  
Exam Wizard 
ExamWizard provides a huge bank of past paper questions, mark schemes and examiners' 
reports to help create your own mock exams, topic-based tests with the easy-to-use, 
intuitive question search.  
Get help and support 
Our subject advisor service, led by Penny Lewis, and online community will ensure you 
receive help and guidance from us and that you can share ideas and information with other 
teachers. You can sign up to receive e-newsletters from Penny Lewis to keep up to date with 
qualification updates and product and service news. To contact the PE and Sport team, email 
TeachingPEandSport@pearson.com or phone UK: 0207 010 2188 
Learn more at qualifications.pearson.com  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
4 
Qualification at a glance 
Content and assessment overview 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Physical Education consists of two 
externally-examined papers and two non-examined assessment components. 
Components 1 and 2 will be assessed in May/June in any single year. Components 3 and 4 
may be assessed at any point during the course, with marks submitted by the centre prior to 
moderation. Moderation will take place in the same year as the written examinations. 
 
Component 1: Fitness and Body Systems (*Component code: 1PE0/01)  
Written examination: 80 marks  – 1 hour 30 mins 
36% of the qualification 
80 marks 
Content overview 
● Topic 1: Applied anatomy and physiology 
● Topic 2: Movement analysis 
● Topic 3: Physical training 
● Topic 4: Use of data 
Assessment overview 
The assessment consists of multiple-choice, short-answer, long-answer and one extended 
writing question. 
Section A 
Questions are focused on Topic 1: Applied anatomy and physiology and Topic 2: Movement 
analysis.  
Section B  
Questions are focused on Topic 3: Physical Training.  
Section C  
One extended-response questions related to Topic 3 Physical Training. 
Topic 4: Use of data is embedded throughout the paper where appropriate. 
Students must answer all questions.  
Calculators may be used in the examination. Information on the use of calculators during the 
examinations for this qualification can be found in Appendix 7: Calculators. 
*See Appendix 10: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to this 
qualification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
5 
 
Component 2: Health and Performance (*Component code: 1PE0/02)  
Written examination: 1 hour and 15 minutes 
24% of the qualification 
60 marks 
Content overview 
● Topic 1: Health, fitness and wellbeing 
● Topic 2: Sport psychology 
● Topic 3: Socio-cultural influences 
● Topic 4: Use of data 
Assessment overview 
The assessment consists of multiple-choice, short-answer, long-answer and one extended 
writing questions. 
Section A 
Questions are focused on Topic 1: Health, fitness and well-being. 
Section B 
Questions are focused on Topic 2: Sport psychology and Topic 3: Socio-cultural influences.  
Section C 
One extended-response question related to Topic 2: Sport psychology and Topic 3: Socio-cultural 
influences.  
Topic 4: Use of data is embedded throughout the paper where appropriate.  
Students must answer all questions.  
Calculators may be used in the examination. Information on the use of calculators during the 
examinations for this qualification can be found in Appendix 7: Calculators. 
 
Component 3: Practical Performance (*Component code: 1PE0/03)  
Non-examined assessment: internally marked and externally moderated 
30% of the qualification  
105 marks (35 marks per activity) 
Content overview 
● Skills during individual and team activities 
● General performance skills 
Assessment overview 
The assessment consists of students completing three physical activities from a set list. 
One must be a team activity. 
One must be an individual activity. 
The final activity can be a free choice. 
Students must participate in three separate activities.  
Students will be assessed against set assessment criteria found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Physical Education practical performance assessment criteria 
document on our website. 
Each activity can last up to 12 hours. These will be assessed by the teacher and moderated 
by Pearson. 
*See Appendix 10: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to this 
qualification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
6 
 
Component 4: Personal Exercise Programme (PEP) (*Component code: 1PE0/04) 
Non-examined assessment: internally marked and externally moderated 
10% of the qualification  
20 marks 
Content overview 
● Aim and planning analysis 
● Carrying out and monitoring the PEP 
● Evaluation of the PEP 
Assessment overview 
The assessment consists of students producing a Personal Exercise Programme (PEP), and 
will require students to analyse and evaluate their performance. 
These will be assessed by the teacher and moderated by Pearson. 
*See Appendix 10: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to this 
qualification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
7 
2 Subject content and assessment 
information 
This GCSE in Physical Education will equip students with the knowledge, understanding, skills 
and values they need to be able to develop and maintain their performance in physical 
activities. Students will also gain understanding of how physical activities benefit health, 
fitness and wellbeing. 
Qualification aims and objectives 
The aims and objectives of this qualification are to enable students to: 
● develop theoretical knowledge and understanding of the factors that underpin physical 
activity and sport and use this knowledge and understanding to improve performance 
● understand how the physiological and psychological state affects performance in physical 
activity and sport 
● perform effectively in different physical activities by developing skills and techniques and 
selecting and using tactics, strategies and/or compositional ideas 
● develop their ability to analyse and evaluate to improve performance in physical activity 
and sport 
● understand the contribution that physical activity and sport make to health, fitness and 
wellbeing 
● understand the key socio-cultural influences that can affect people’s involvement in 
physical activity and sport. 
Key 
  
   Links to NEA: Physical training links to PEP 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
8 
Component 1: Fitness and Body Systems 
Overview 
This component assesses students’ knowledge and understanding of the factors underpinning 
physical activity and sport performance. Students will develop their theoretical knowledge 
and understanding of applied anatomy and physiology, movement analysis and physical 
training so that they can use this knowledge to analyse and evaluate performance and devise 
informed strategies for improving/optimising their own practical performance. 
Questions in the examination paper may be contextualised by reference to any of the 
activities in the activity list (as well as gym/fitness activities) in Component 3: Practical 
Performance. 
A glossary of key terms for the content of this component is found in Appendix 5: Glossary of 
key terms (pages 53–55). 
Content 
Topic 1: Applied anatomy and physiology 
Subject content What students need to learn  
In this topic students will develop knowledge and understanding of the key body systems and 
how they impact on health, fitness and performance in physical activity and sport through the 
following content. 
1.1 T he structure 
and functions 
of the musculo-
skeletal system 
1.1.1 The functions of the skeleton applied to performance in 
physical activities and sports: protection of vital organs, 
muscle attachment, joints for movement, platelets, red and 
white blood cell production, storage of calcium and 
phosphorus 
1.1.2 Classification of bones: long (leverage), short (weight 
bearing), flat (protection, broad surface for muscle 
attachment), irregular (protection and muscle attachment) 
applied to performance in physical activities and sports 
1.1.3 Structure: cranium, clavicle, scapula, five regions of the 
vertebral column (cervical, thoracic, lumbar, sacrum, 
coccyx), ribs, sternum, humerus, radius, ulna, carpals, 
metacarpals, phalanges (in the hand), pelvis, femur, patella, 
tibia, fibula, tarsals, metatarsals, phalanges (in the foot), 
and their classification and use applied to performance in 
physical activities and sports 
1.1.4 Classification of joints: pivot (neck – atlas and axis), hinge 
(elbow, knee and ankle), ball and socket (hip and shoulder), 
condyloid (wrist), and their impact on the range of possible 
movements 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
9 
 
Subject content What students need to learn  
 1.1.5 Movement possibilities at joints dependant on joint 
classification: flexion, extension, adduction, abduction, 
rotation, circumduction, plantar-flexion, dorsi-flexion and 
examples of physical activity and sporting skills and 
techniques that utilise these movements in different 
sporting contexts 
1.1.6 The role of ligaments and tendons, and their relevance to 
participation in physical activity and sport 
1.1.7 Classification and characteristics of muscle types: voluntary 
muscles of the skeletal system, involuntary muscles in blood 
vessels, cardiac muscle forming the heart, and their roles 
when participating in physical activity and sport 
1.1.8 Location and role of the voluntary muscular system to work 
with the skeleton to bring about specific movement during 
physical activity and sport, and the specific function of each 
muscle (deltoid, biceps, triceps, pectoralis major, latissimus 
dorsi, external obliques, hip flexors, gluteus maximus, 
quadriceps, hamstrings, gastrocnemius and tibialis anterior) 
1.1.9 Antagonistic pairs of muscles (agonist and antagonist) to 
create opposing movement at joints to allow physical 
activities (e.g. gastrocnemius and tibialis anterior acting at 
the ankle -plantar flexion to dorsi flexion; and quadriceps 
and hamstrings acting at the knee, biceps and triceps acting 
at the elbow, and hip flexors and gluteus maximus acting at 
the hip – all flexion to extension) 
1.1.10 Characteristics of fast and slow twitch muscle fibre types 
(type I, type IIa and type IIx) and how this impacts on their 
use in physical activities 
1.1.11 How the skeletal and muscular systems work together to 
allow participation in physical activity and sport 
1.2 T he structure 
and functions 
of the cardio-
respiratory 
system 
1.2.1 Functions of the cardiovascular system applied to 
performance in physical activities: transport of oxygen, 
carbon dioxide and nutrients, clotting of open wounds, 
regulation of body temperature 
1.2.2 Structure of the cardiovascular system: atria, ventricles, 
septum, tricuspid, bicuspid and semi-lunar valves, aorta, 
vena cava, pulmonary artery, pulmonary vein, and their role 
in maintaining blood circulation during performance in 
physical activity and sport 
1.2.3 Structure of arteries, capillaries and veins and how this 
relates to function and importance during physical activity 
and sport in terms of blood pressure, oxygenated, 
deoxygenated blood and changes due to physical exercise 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
10 
 
Subject content What students need to learn 
 1.2.4 The mechanisms required (vasoconstriction, vasodilation) and 
the need for redistribution of blood flow (vascular shunting) 
during physical activities compared to when resting 
1.2.5 Function and importance of red and white blood cells, 
platelets and plasma for physical activity and sport 
1.2.6 Composition of inhaled and exhaled air and the impact of 
physical activity and sport on this composition 
1.2.7 Vital capacity and tidal volume, and change in tidal volume 
due to physical activity and sport, and the reasons that 
make the change in tidal volume necessary 
1.2.8 Location of main components of respiratory system (lungs, 
bronchi, bronchioles, alveoli, diaphragm) and their role in 
movement of oxygen and carbon dioxide into and out of the 
body 
1.2.9 Structure of alveoli to enable gas exchange and the process 
of gas exchange to meet the demands of varying intensities 
of exercise (aerobic and anaerobic) 
1.2.10 How the cardiovascular and respiratory systems work 
together to allow participation in physical activity and sport 
1.3 A naerobic and 
aerobic 
exercise 
1.3.1 Energy: the use of glucose and oxygen to release energy 
aerobically with the production of carbon dioxide and water, 
the impact of insufficient oxygen on energy release, the by-
product of anaerobic respiration (lactic acid) 
1.3.2 Energy sources: fats as a fuel source for aerobic activity, 
carbohydrates as a fuel source for aerobic and anaerobic 
activity 
1.4 T he short- and 
long-term 
effects of 
exercise 
1.4.1 Short- term effects of physical activity and sport on lactate 
accumulation, muscle fatigue, and the relevance of this to 
the player/performer 
1.4.2 Short- term effects of physical activity and sport on heart 
rate, stroke volume and cardiac output, and the importance 
of this to the player/performer 
1.4.3 Short- term effects of physical activity and sport on depth 
and rate of breathing, and the importance of this to the 
player/performer 
1.4.4 How the respiratory and cardiovascular systems work 
together to allow participation in, and recovery from, physical 
activity and sport: oxygen intake into lungs, transfer to blood 
and transport to muscles, and removal of carbon dioxide 
1.4.5 Long- term effects of exercise on the body systems –  
see 3.4.1–3.4.4 
1.4.6 Interpretation of graphical representations of heart rate, 
stroke volume and cardiac output values at rest and during 
exercise 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
11 
Topic 2: Movement analysis 
Subject content What students need to learn 
In this topic students will develop knowledge and understanding of the basic principles of 
movement and their effect on performance in physical activity and sport through the 
following content. 
2.1 L ever systems, 
examples of 
their use in 
activity and the 
mechanical 
advantage they 
provide in 
movement 
2.1.1 First, second and third class levers and their use in physical 
activity and sport 
2.1.2 Mechanical advantage and disadvantage (in relation to 
loads, efforts and range of movement) of the body’s lever 
systems and the impact on sporting performance 
2.2 Planes and 
axes of 
movement 
2.2.1 M ovement patterns using body planes and axes: sagittal, 
frontal and transverse plane and frontal, sagittal, vertical 
axes applied to physical activities and sporting actions 
2.2.2 Movement in the sagittal plane about the frontal axis when 
performing front and back tucked or piked somersaults 
2.2.3 Movement in the frontal plane about the sagittal axis when 
performing cartwheels 
2.2.4 Movement in the transverse plane about the vertical axis 
when performing a full twist jump in trampolining 
Topic 3: Physical training 
Subject content What students need to learn 
In this topic students will develop knowledge and understanding of the principles of 
training and different training methods in order to plan, carry out, monitor and 
evaluate personal exercise and training programmes, through the following content. 
3.1 T he 
relationship 
between health 
and fitness and 
the role that 
exercise plays 
in both 
3.1.1 Definitions of fitness, health, exercise and performance and 
the relationship between them 
3.2 T he 
components of 
fitness, 
benefits for 
sport and how 
fitness is 
measured and 
improved 
3.2.1 Components of fitness and the relative importance of these 
components in physical activity and sport: cardiovascular 
fitness (aerobic endurance), strength, muscular endurance, 
flexibility, body composition, agility, balance, coordination, 
power, reaction time, and speed 
 
 

 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
12 
 
Subject content What students need to learn 
 3.2.2 Fitness tests: the value of fitness testing, the purpose of 
specific fitness tests, the test protocols, the selection of the 
appropriate fitness test for components of fitness and the 
rationale for selection 
3.2.3 Collection and interpretation of data from fitness test results 
and analysis and evaluation of these against normative data 
tables 
3.2.4 Fitness tests for specific components of fitness: 
cardiovascular fitness – Cooper 12-minute tests (run, 
swim), Harvard Step Test; agility – Illinois agility run test; 
strength – grip dynamometer; muscular endurance – one-
minute sit-up, one-minute press-up; speed – 30 m sprint; 
power – vertical jump; flexibility – sit and reach 
3.2.5 How fitness is improved – see section 3.3.1–3.3.3 
3.3 T he principles 
of training and 
their 
application to 
personal 
exercise/ 
training 
programmes  
3.3.1 Planning training using the principles of training: individual 
needs, specificity, progressive overload, FITT (frequency, 
intensity, time, type), overtraining, reversibility, thresholds 
of training (aerobic target zone: 60–80% and anaerobic 
target zone: 80%–90% calculated using simplified Karvonen 
formula, i.e. (220) – (your age) = MaxHR;  
(MaxHR) х (60% to 80%) = aerobic training zone;  
(MaxHR) x (80% to 90%) = anaerobic training zone) 
3.3.2 Factors to consider when deciding the most appropriate 
training methods and training intensities for different 
physical activities and sports (fitness/sport requirements, 
facilities available, current level of fitness) 
3.3.3 The use of different training methods for specific 
components of fitness, physical activity and sport: 
continuous, Fartlek, circuit, interval, plyometrics, 
weight/resistance. Fitness classes for specific components of 
fitness, physical activity and sport (body pump, aerobics, 
Pilates, yoga, spinning). The advantages and disadvantages 
of different training methods 
3.4 The long-term 
effects of 
exercise 
3.4.1 Long- term effects of aerobic and anaerobic training and 
exercise and the benefits to the muscular-skeletal and 
cardio-respiratory systems and performance 
3.4.2 Long- term training effects: able to train for longer and more 
intensely 
3.4.3 Long- term training effects and benefits: for performance of 
the muscular-skeletal system: increased bone density, 
increased strength of ligaments and tendons, muscle 
hypertrophy, the importance of rest for adaptations to take 
place, and time to recover before the next training session 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
13 
 
Subject content What students need to learn 
 3.4.4 Long- term training effects and benefits: for performance of 
the cardio-respiratory system: decreased resting heart rate, 
faster recovery, increased resting stroke volume and 
maximum cardiac output, increased size/strength of heart, 
increased capilliarisation, increase in number of red blood 
cells, drop in resting blood pressure due to more elastic 
muscular wall of veins and arteries, increased lung 
capacity/volume and vital capacity, increased number of 
alveoli, increased strength of diaphragm and external 
intercostal muscles 
3.5 H ow to 
optimise 
training and 
prevent injury 
3.5.1 The use of a PARQ to assess personal readiness for training 
and recommendations for amendment to training based on 
PARQ 
3.5.2 Injury prevention through: correct application of the 
principles of training to avoid overuse injuries; correct 
application and adherence to the rules of an activity during 
play/participation; use of appropriate protective clothing and 
equipment; checking of equipment and facilities before use, 
all as applied to a range of physical activities and sports 
3.5.3 Injuries that can occur in physical activity and sport: 
concussion, fractures, dislocation, sprain, torn cartilage and 
soft tissue injury (strain, tennis elbow, golfers elbow, 
abrasions) 
3.5.4 RICE (rest, ice, compression, elevation) 
3.5.5 Performance- enhancing drugs (PEDs) and their positive and 
negative effects on sporting performance and performer 
lifestyle, including anabolic steroids, beta blockers, diuretics, 
narcotic analgesics, peptide hormones (erythropoietin 
(EPO), growth hormones (GH)), stimulants, blood doping 
3.6 E ffective use of 
warm up and 
cool down 
3.6.1 The purpose and importance of warm-ups and cool downs to 
effective training sessions and physical activity and sport 
3.6.2 Phases of a warm-up and their significance in preparation 
for physical activity and sport 
3.6.3 Activities included in warm-ups and cool downs 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
14 
Topic 4: Use of data 
Subject content What students need to learn 
In this topic students will develop knowledge and understanding of data analysis in relation to 
key areas of physical activity and sport, through this content and linking it to other topics. 
4.1 Use of data 4.1.1 Develop knowledge and understanding of data analysis in 
relation to key areas of physical activity and sport 
4.1.2 Demonstrate an understanding of how data is collected in 
fitness, physical and sport activities – using both qualitative 
and quantitative methods 
4.1.3 Present data (including tables and graphs) 
4.1.4 Interpret data accurately 
4.1.5 Analyse and evaluate statistical data from their own results 
and interpret against normative data in physical activity and 
sport 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2018. 
● The assessment is 1 hours and 30 minutes. 
● The assessment is out of 80 marks. 
● Students must answer all questions. 
● The assessment consists of multiple-choice, short-answer, and one extended writing 
question. 
● For the nine-mark extended writing question, students will be expected to draw on their 
knowledge and understanding in relation to the question, apply their knowledge and 
understanding and come to a reasoned judgement in order to answer the specific 
requirement of the question. 
● Calculators may be used in the examination. Information on the use of calculators during 
the examinations for this qualification can be found in Appendix 7: Calculators. 
Sample assessment materials  
A sample paper and mark scheme for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Physical Education Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) 
document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
15 
Component 2: Health and Performance 
Overview 
This component assesses students’ knowledge and understanding of the factors underpinning 
participation and performance in physical activity and sport. Students will develop their 
theoretical knowledge and understanding of the contribution that physical activity and sport 
make to health, fitness and wellbeing and how these can impact on their own performance. 
Sports psychology will be introduced, with a focus on skill development, through relevant 
practice, guidance and feedback, as well as knowledge that learners can then apply to their 
own learning in practical situations in order to improve their performance. Key socio-cultural 
influences that can affect people’s involvement in physical activity and sport will also be 
considered. 
Questions in the examination paper may be contextualised by reference to any of the 
activities in the activity list (as well as gym/fitness activities) in Component 3: Practical 
Performance. 
A glossary of key terms for the content of this component is found in Appendix 5: Glossary of 
key terms (pages 53–55). 
Content 
Topic 1: Health, fitness and wellbeing 
Subject content What students need to learn 
In this topic students will develop knowledge and understanding of the benefits of participating 
in physical activity and sport to health, fitness and wellbeing through the following content. 
1.1 Physical, 
emotional and 
social health, 
fitness and  
wellbeing 
1.1.1 Physical health: how increasing physical ability, through 
improving components of fitness can improve health/reduce 
health risks and how these benefits are achieved 
1.1.2 Emotional health: how participation in physical activity and 
sport can improve emotional/psychological health and how 
these benefits are achieved 
1.1.3 Social health: how participation in physical activity and sport 
can improve social health and how these benefits are 
achieved 
1.1.4 Impact of fitness on wellbeing: positive and negative health 
effects 
1.1.5 How to promote personal health through an understanding of 
the importance of designing, developing, monitoring and 
evaluating a personal exercise programme to meet the 
specific needs of the individual 
1.1.6 Lifestyle choices in relation to: diet, activity level, work/ 
rest/sleep balance, and recreational drugs (alcohol, nicotine) 
1.1.7 Positive and negative impact of lifestyle choices on health, 
fitness and wellbeing, e.g. the negative effects of smoking 
(bronchitis, lung cancer)  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
16 
 
Subject content What students need to learn 
1.2 T he 
consequences 
of a sedentary 
lifestyle 
1.2.1  A sedentary lifestyle and its consequences: overweight, 
overfat, obese, increased risk to long-term health,  
e.g. depression, coronary heart disease, high blood 
pressure, diabetes, increased risk of osteoporosis, loss of 
muscle tone, posture, impact on components of fitness 
1.2.2 Interpretation and analysis of graphical representation of 
data associated with trends in physical health issues 
1.3 E nergy use, 
diet, nutrition 
and hydration 
1.3.1 The nutritional requirements and ratio of nutrients for a 
balanced diet to maintain a healthy lifestyle and optimise 
specific performances in physical activity and sport 
1.3.2 The role and importance of macronutrients (carbohydrates, 
proteins and fats) for performers/players in physical 
activities and sports, carbohydrate loading for endurance 
athletes, and timing of protein intake for power athletes 
1.3.3 The role and importance of micronutrients (vitamins and 
minerals), water and fibre for performers/players in physical 
activities and sports 
1.3.4 The factors affecting optimum weight: sex, height, bone 
structure and muscle girth 
1.3.5 The variation in optimum weight according to roles in 
specific physical activities and sports 
1.3.6 The correct energy balance to maintain a healthy weight 
1.3.7 Hydration for physical activity and sport: why it is 
important, and how correct levels can be maintained during 
physical activity and sport 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
17 
Topic 2: Sport psychology 
Subject content What students need to learn 
In this topic students will develop knowledge and understanding of the psychological factors 
that can affect performers and their performance in physical activity and sport through the 
following content. 
2.1 C lassification of 
skills  
(basic/ 
complex, 
open/closed) 
2.1.1 Classification of a range of sports skills using the  
open-closed, basic (simple)-complex, and low  
organisation-high organisation continua 
2.1.2 Practice structures: massed, distributed, fixed and variable 
2.1.3 Application of knowledge of practice and skill classification 
to select the most relevant practice to develop a range of 
skills 
2.2 T he use of goal 
setting and 
SMART targets 
to improve 
and/or 
optimise 
performance  
 
2.2.1 The use of goal setting to improve and/or optimise 
performance 
2.2.2 Principles of SMART targets (specific, measureable, 
achievable, realistic, time-bound) and the value of each 
principle in improving and/or optimising performance 
2.2.3 Setting and reviewing targets to improve and/or optimise 
performance 
2.3 G uidance and 
feedback on 
performance 
2.3.1 Types of guidance to optimise performance: visual, verbal, 
manual and mechanical 
2.3.2 Advantages and disadvantages of each type of guidance and 
its appropriateness in a variety of sporting contexts when 
used with performers of different skill levels 
2.3.3 Types of feedback to optimise performance: intrinsic, 
extrinsic, concurrent, terminal 
2.3.4 Interpretation and analysis of graphical representation of 
data associated with feedback on performance 
2.4  Mental 
preparation for 
performance 
2.4.1 Mental preparation for performance: warm up, mental 
rehearsal 

 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
18 
Topic 3: Socio-cultural influences 
Subject content What students need to learn 
In this topic students will develop knowledge and understanding of the socio-cultural factors 
that impact on physical activity and sport, and the impact of sport on society, through the 
following content. 
3.1 E ngagement 
patterns of 
different social 
groups in 
physical 
activity and 
sport 
3.1.1 Participation rates in physical activity and sports and the 
impact on participation rates considering the following 
personal factors: gender, age, socio-economic group, 
ethnicity, disability 
3.1.2 Interpretation and analysis of graphical representation of 
data associated with trends in participation rates 
3.2 C ommercial-
isation of 
physical 
activity and 
sport 
3.2.1 The relationship between commercialisation, the media and 
physical activity and sport 
3.2.2 The advantages and disadvantages of commercialisation and 
the media for: the sponsor, the sport, the player/performer, 
the spectator 
3.2.3 Interpretation and analysis of graphical representation of 
data associated with trends in the commercialisation of 
physical activity and sport 
3.3 E thical and 
socio-cultural 
issues in 
physical 
activity and 
sport 
3.3.1 The different types of sporting behaviour: sportsmanship, 
gamesmanship, and the reasons for, and consequences of, 
deviance at elite level 
3.3.2 Interpretation and analysis of graphical representation of 
data associated with trends in ethical and socio-cultural 
issues in physical activity and sport 
Topic 4: Use of data 
Subject content What students need to learn 
In this topic students will develop knowledge and understanding of data analysis in relation to 
key areas of physical activity and sport, through this content and linking it to other topics. 
4.1 Use of data 4.1.1 Develop knowledge and understanding of data analysis in 
relation to key areas of physical activity and sport 
4.1.2 Demonstrate an understanding of how data is collected in 
fitness, physical and sport activities – using both qualitative 
and quantitative methods 
4.1.3 Present data (including tables and graphs) 
4.1.4 Interpret data accurately 
4.1.5 Analyse and evaluate statistical data from their own results 
and interpret against normative data in physical activity and 
sport 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
19 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2018. 
● The assessment is 1 hours and 15 minutes. 
● The assessment is out of 60 marks. 
● Students must answer all questions. 
● The assessment consists of multiple-choice, short-answer, and one extended writing 
question. 
● For the nine-mark extended writing question, students will be expected to draw on their 
knowledge and understanding in relation to the question, apply their knowledge and 
understanding and come to a reasoned judgement in order to answer the specific 
requirement of the question. 
● Calculators may be used in the examination. Information on the use of calculators during 
the examinations for this qualification can be found in Appendix 7: Calculators. 
Sample assessment materials  
A sample paper and mark scheme for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Physical Education Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) 
document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
20 
Component 3: Practical Performance 
Overview 
The purpose of this component is to test students’ skills in a range of practical performances. 
Students will be required to perform in three different physical activities in the role of  
player/performer. They will be required to demonstrate their skills in isolation/unopposed 
situations and demonstrate their skills in a formal/competitive situation while under 
pressure.  
Students must choose and perform three different physical activities from the list found on 
pages 21–23: 
● one team activity 
● one individual activity 
● one activity of their choice, either a team or individual activity. 
Students must participate in three separate activities. 
Content 
Skills during individual and team activities 
Students will be required to perform in three different physical activities in the role of 
player/performer. For each physical activity, students will be required to demonstrate their 
skills in isolation/unopposed situations and demonstrate their skills in a competitive/formal 
(e.g. full-sided game where appropriate) situation while under pressure. 
Students should be taught to make relevant and appropriate links between their learning in 
Components 1 and 2 and use this to benefit their performances in the physical activities. 
Students should develop their ability and aptitude in physical activities, demonstrating the 
skills and techniques outlined below. Students must: 
● demonstrate skills in physical activity and sport, applying appropriate technique(s) 
● demonstrate and apply appropriate decision-making skills, strategies and/or compositional 
ideas within physical activity and sport, taking into account personal strengths and 
weaknesses 
● demonstrate ideas and problem-solving solutions in spontaneous and/or pre-determined 
ways whilst under pressure in physical activity and sport 
● use appropriate physical characteristics/attributes (for example strength, stamina, speed, 
agility, flexibility, coordination) to achieve successful performance in physical activity and 
sport 
● demonstrate psychological control (for example arousal, anxiety, aggression) to achieve 
successful performance (and fair play) in physical activity and sport 
● adhere to ‘rules’, health and safety guidelines, and consider appropriate risk management 
strategies in physical activity and sport 
● analyse and evaluate performance to bring about personal improvement in physical 
activity and sport. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
21 
Students must demonstrate their ability in team sports and activities by: 
● applying team strategies and/or compositional ideas, taking account of the strengths and 
weaknesses of fellow team member(s), as appropriate 
● showing awareness of, and responding to, the actions of other player(s)/performer(s) 
● communicating effectively with other player(s)/performer(s) 
● demonstrating their individual role in achieving the collective outcome. 
General performance skills 
Students should focus on the three phases of preparation, execution and recovery for each 
skill relevant for their chosen activity; demonstrating a level of technical accuracy to reflect 
an established ‘perfect model’. The skills for each physical activity are found in the document 
Pearson Edexcel Level1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Physical Education practical performance 
assessment criteria on our website. 
The three phases will be assessed (where appropriate to each activity) through the technical 
accuracy of: 
● the body positions 
● hand positioning and movements 
● feet positioning and movements 
● head carriage 
● alignment and timing 
● power distribution 
● effective results/recovery. 
Students should be aware of, and apply, appropriate and relevant physical attributes and 
psychological elements to the demands of their chosen activities. 
Students must demonstrate appropriate levels of fitness in order to perform adequately. 
Students must be aware of, and apply, appropriate and relevant rules/laws of the 
game/activity that they are performing. Students must perform their chosen activities safely. 
If they do not, then the teacher must intervene. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
22 
Physical activities 
The list below contains the permitted team and individual activities that students must select 
from. This list has been set by the Department for Education. Any changes or additions to 
the activities will in the first instance be indicated on our website. The right-hand column 
lists forbidden combinations and provides further clarity regarding the scope of the activity, 
where applicable. 
Team activities 
Activity Forbidden combinations and rules 
Acrobatic gymnastics* Cannot be assessed with gymnastics. 
Association football Cannot be five-a-side. Cannot be assessed with futsal. 
Badminton Cannot be assessed with singles/individual activity badminton 
Basketball Cannot be ‘street basketball’ 
Camogie Cannot be assessed with hurling 
Cricket  
Dance Acceptable dances include: ballet, ballroom, contemporary/modern, 
cultural (includes hip-hop, Irish, Indian, jazz, Latin), folk and street 
This can only be used for one activity 
Note: Dance - Any form of dance will be acceptable providing 
the candidate is able to meet the requirements of the whole assessment 
criteria. If you would like to offer a form of dance and are not sure if it is 
acceptable, please do not hesitate to contact us. 
Field hockey  
Figure skating* This activity is available for first teaching from September 2020, and first 
certification from Summer 2021 for the GCSE Short Course and Summer 
2022 
for the GCSE. It cannot be assessed with the dance activity. Only one 
discipline of Figure Skating is allowed to be assessed. Students should 
refer to British Ice Skating for technical requirements for national pairs,  
ice dance and synchronised competitions. 
Futsal*  
Gaelic football  
Handball  
Hurling Cannot be assessed with camogie 
Ice hockey*  
Inline Roller hockey*  
Lacrosse  
Netball  
Rowing Cannot be assessed with sculling, canoeing, kayaking or a rowing machine. 
This can only be used for one activity 
Rugby league Cannot be assessed with rugby union or rugby sevens; cannot be tag 
rugby 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
23 
Team activities 
Activity Forbidden combinations and rules 
Rugby union Can be assessed as sevens or fifteen-a-side. Cannot be assessed with 
rugby league; cannot be tag rugby. This can only be used for one activity 
Sailing* Cannot be assessed with singles/individual activity sailing. Royal Yachting 
Association recognised sailing-boat classes only. Students must perform as 
helmsman 
Sculling* Cannot be assessed with canoeing, kayaking or rowing 
Squash  Cannot be assessed with singles/individual activity squash 
Table tennis  Cannot be assessed with singles/individual activity table tennis 
Tennis  Cannot be assessed with singles/individual activity tennis 
Volleyball   
Water polo*  
Specialist activity**  
Blind cricket  
Goalball  
Powerchair football  
Table cricket  
Wheelchair basketball  
Wheelchair rugby  
 
Individual activities 
Activity Forbidden combinations and rules 
Amateur boxing  
Athletics Can be assessed in one event from the disciplines of either Track or Field 
(including cross country*) 
Race walking is not a permitted Athletics event 
Long distance track running must not exceed 5000 metres. Cross country 
running must not exceed 6000 metres. 
Badminton Cannot be assessed with doubles 
BMX cycling* Racing only, not tricks 
Canoeing Cannot be assessed with kayaking, rowing or sculling 
Cycling Track or road cycling 
Dance This can only be used for one activity 
Diving Platform diving 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
24 
Individual activities 
Figure skating* This activity is available for first teaching from September 2020, and first 
certification from Summer 2021 for the GCSE Short Course and Summer 
2022 
for the GCSE. It cannot be assessed with the dance activity. Only one 
discipline of Figure Skating is allowed to be assessed. Students should 
refer to British Ice Skating for technical requirements for national pairs, ice 
dance and synchronised competitions. 
Golf  
Gymnastics Floor routines and apparatus 
Equestrian Can be assessed in either show jumping, cross country or dressage 
Kayaking Cannot be assessed with canoeing, rowing or sculling 
Rock climbing Can be indoor or outdoor 
Sailing* Cannot be assessed with sailing as a team activity. Royal Yachting 
Association recognised sailing-boat classes only 
Sculling Cannot be assessed with rowing, canoeing or kayaking 
Skiing Outdoor/indoor on snow. Cannot be assessed with snowboarding.  
Must not be on dry slopes 
Snowboarding Outdoor/indoor on snow. Cannot be assessed with skiing.  
Must not be on dry slopes 
Squash Cannot be assessed with doubles 
Swimming Not synchronised swimming 
Table tennis Cannot be assessed with doubles 
Tennis Cannot be assessed with doubles 
Trampolining   
Windsurfing*  
Specialist activity**  
Boccia  
Polybat  
*These activities are available for first teaching from September 2020 and first certification 
from Summer 2022. 
**The specialist activities are available only to those students with a physical disability, and 
in line with entry criteria set out by that activity’s National Governing Body. 
If a student is classified as eligible, then they should be assessed in the classification based 
on the relevant activity’s National Governing Body classification criteria. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
25 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2018. 
● The assessment for each physical activity and sport may take place over multiple sessions 
up to a combined duration of 12 hours. 
● The practical performance consists of 105 marks (35 marks per physical activity, which 
are added together to give the total mark for this component). 
● The physical activities will be marked by the teacher and moderated by Pearson. 
● Marks must be submitted at the end of the course and prior to moderation. 
● Centres must ensure that marks for each performance submitted are valid for the series in 
which they are submitted. 
● The activities with a single asterisk in the physical activities tables on pages 21–23 are 
available for first teaching from September 2020 and first certification from Summer 2022. 
Practical performance setting, taking and marking 
Practical performance setting 
Students should choose their physical activities with the support and advice of their teacher. The 
activities must allow students opportunities to demonstrate effective and suitable skills and 
techniques both in isolation/unopposed situations and during competitive/formal situations. 
When assessing students with physical disabilities, centres need to apply necessary 
amendments and adaptations to the practical activities to ensure that the individual student 
is neither advantaged nor disadvantaged within the assessment because of their disability. 
Students with physical disabilities must fulfil the requirements of the assessment and cover 
the required content of this component. As with all students, the overall assessment must be 
in a ‘like v like’ situation. 
Assessing the physical activities 
Teachers must design the physical activities to enable all students to demonstrate their skills 
and techniques in both isolation/unopposed practices, and in conditioned practices and in 
formal/competitive activities in order to meet the assessment criteria. Formal/competitive 
activities are defined as, for example and where appropriate, performances in a full-sided 
game and performances in front of an audience/judges.  
If students are participating in a team game, then a full-sided game must be demonstrated 
in the assessment of the activity. If after the game it has been identified that a student has 
not been able to demonstrate a skill required in the assessment criteria through no fault of 
their own, for example, the ball was never passed to the student, then an opportunity for the 
student to demonstrate that skill is allowed. In this situation, at the end of the game, the 
teacher assessing would be able to set up a conditioned practice to give the student the 
opportunity to demonstrate their skill at receiving a passed ball, for example. Alternatively 
they could switch the defenders in a game. This condition applies only to team game 
activities (such as football, rugby union, rugby league, hockey, lacrosse, basketball, 
camogie, hurling, handball, netball, volleyball, Gaelic football, cricket).  
Each activity can last up to a maximum of 12 hours (combining preparation and the assessed 
performances). 
The ideal model would be for this time to be a block, with one activity being followed, leading 
up to the assessed performance/performances. The duration of assessed performances in 
each activity should be based on an appropriate time to allow students to demonstrate the 
requirements of a player/participant in the selected physical activity and sport, for example 
the duration of competitive situations will differ for each selected activity. 
Formal assessments of activities may take place at any point during the course. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
26 
Practical performance preparation 
Teaching and learning 
Teachers should give students a course of study that covers: 
● the role of the player/performer in the chosen physical activities 
● how to develop the students’ skills, techniques and attributes to perform successfully in 
their chosen activity 
● the rules and laws of the chosen physical activity. 
Resources  
Students should have access to a range of resources/equipment to enable them to meet the 
practical demands of their chosen activities. Resources and equipment used should follow 
governing body guidelines/rules, for example ESAA (English Schools Athletics Association) 
rules for athletics events. 
Practical performance taking 
Students must choose and perform three activities from the activity list (set by the 
Department for Education) found on pages 21–23: 
● one team activity 
● one individual activity 
● one activity of their choice, either an individual or team activity. 
Centres can only offer the activities on this list. Students must participate in three separate 
activities.  
Authenticity and collaboration 
Students and teachers must sign the Practical performance authentication sheet, please see 
Appendix 1. This is to ensure that the practical performance is the student’s own work. 
Feedback 
Teacher support is a permitted, and important, part of the preparation for each assessed 
performance. Teachers can help students to understand rules/laws of the activities and the 
assessment criteria. However, feedback is not permitted in the assessed performances, 
unless it is required for health and safety reasons, for example to reduce the risk of injury. 
During the assessed performances teachers are not allowed to coach their students. Any 
additional feedback must be recorded on the Practical performance authentication sheet, 
please see Appendix 1. 
Time control 
It is suggested that the maximum duration for each student activity is approximately 
12 hours (combining preparation and the assessed performances). 
The ideal model would be for this time to be a block, with one activity being followed, leading 
up to the assessed performance/performances. The duration of assessed performances in 
each activity should be based on an appropriate time to allow students to demonstrate the 
requirements of a player/participant in the selected physical activity, for example the 
duration of competitive situations will differ for each selected activity. 
Formal assessments of activities may take place at any point during the course. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
27 
Safety 
All activities submitted will need to comply with all the appropriate recommendations related 
to the safety of students as recognised by the Association for Physical Education in their 
publication, Safe Practice in Physical Education & School Sport 2020. 
Marking, standardisation and moderation 
Teachers should mark the practical performances using the assessment criteria in the 
document Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Physical Education Practical 
performance assessment criteria. This document is on our website. Teachers may include 
any comments on the Practical performance authentication sheet in Appendix 1 to justify the 
marks awarded. 
Teachers should mark each of the three activities separately, and add the marks together to 
provide a total mark out of 105 for this component. These marks should then be submitted 
to Pearson.  
Where marking has been carried out by more than one teacher in a centre, there must be a 
process of internal standardisation carried out to ensure that there is a consistent application 
of the assessment criteria. 
Marks awarded by the centre will be subject to external moderation by Pearson. Moderation 
will ensure consistency with national standards and will include a review of marking to 
ensure that the rules have been correctly applied by centres. Pearson/moderators, in 
consultation with the centre, will select a representative sample of students of different 
abilities, and in a range of activities, and taking cohort size into account. For activities that 
cannot be assessed live on moderation day, centres must video record the evidence of the 
assessment. This evidence will be used to support the marks awarded and must be provided 
if requested by Pearson for moderation purposes.  
If the moderation indicates that centre assessment does not reflect national standards, an 
adjustment will be made to students’ final marks to compensate for this. 
For further information please refer to the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ) Instructions 
for conducting non-examination assessments (new GCE and GCSE specifications) on the JCQ 
website www.jcq.org.uk. The assessment of this qualification must comply with these 
instructions. 
Sample size and selection 
Overview 
Moderation will be undertaken at activity level. The moderator will select the sample 
candidates from across the full range of marks awarded by the teacher-assessor(s). A 
minimum of 60% of the activities offered by the centre must be included in the moderation 
sample. 
Range 
From the marks submitted to the moderator, the moderator chooses a sample of candidates 
and activities to be seen on the day. This will be done prior to the assessment day. A range 
of marks within the activities will be selected for moderation. A range of activities will also be 
selected so as to ensure that the moderation of teacher marking covers both a range of 
ability and activity. Work of the highest and lowest performing candidate will be included in 
the sample.  
In this way, JCQ sampling arrangements will be replicated in ensuring that the moderated 
sample is both random and unpredictable.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
28 
Selecting the sample 
A form with the list of candidates for all activities must be emailed to the moderator by an 
agreed date before the moderation visit date. 
● The moderator selects the sample based on the final activity marks on the form. 
The normal sample size, for a centre, will be 30 candidate-activities selected from across the 
full range of marks awarded by the teacher-assessors. 
o The sample should include candidate-activities that were awarded the highest and the 
lowest marks by the teacher-assessor(s). 
o The sample should include candidate-activities from at least 60% of the activities 
offered for assessment by the centre. 
The final candidates’ marks for the practical component will be based on the outcome of the 
activity level moderation.  If an adjustment is required, it will be applied, at candidate level, 
to the aggregate mark, submitted by the centre, across all three activities. 
Practicalities of selection 
When the moderator has selected the sample and informed the centre, the moderator will 
work with the centre to take into account, for example, factors such as seasonal activities 
where a field is used for different purposes at different times of year (e.g. where a rugby 
field has since been converted for use as a cricket pitch during the summer). 
 
Group size and mixed ability 
When selecting the sample, the moderator will decide, based on the size of the group and 
the nature of the activity, to determine how many candidates are assessed, in a team game, 
for example. This is to ensure that the assessment, moderation and captured video evidence 
are all optimal and take into account the number of players and ability range.  
Activities that are not viewed or recorded 
For activities that cannot be viewed and/or recorded by the moderator, the centre marks will 
either be confirmed or regressed depending on the moderator judgements on the other 
activities witnessed.  
There is a risk that marking over time in such activities could become inaccurate as teacher 
marking is not directly checked. To ensure that the marking of these activities does not 
become inaccurate over time, statistical reviews of the marking of these activities over time 
will be conducted. 
Videoing practical performances on moderation day 
Centres must video the students in the sample on moderation day. This is to support an EAR 
if requested. Centres that do not record on moderation day cannot request an EAR. Please 
see Appendix 4: Recording practical performances for full advice and guidance on how best 
to video performances. Centres must submit to Pearson the video evidence collected on 
moderation day.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
29 
Practical performance assessment criteria 
Teachers must mark students’ work using the assessment criteria for each specific activity 
found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) Practical performance assessment 
criteria. This document is on our website. 
This document includes information on how to mark students’ performances. 
Each of the three physical activities is marked out of 35. The three marks are added together 
to give a total for this component out of 105 marks. 
Students will be assessed on their ability to: 
1 perform their activity’s skills/techniques (as described in the content/skills section of the 
assessment grid) in isolation/unopposed situations. This is assessed out of 10 marks. 
2 apply their activity’s skills/techniques in formal/competitive (and where appropriate to the 
specific activity, full-sided games) situations with the motivation to win the game/succeed 
against a time/distance target or achieve a score/rating. This is assessed out of 25 marks.  
For team games where it becomes apparent to the assessor that the students are not being 
given the opportunity to demonstrate their full range of skills in a game, assessors may 
intervene to create an opportunity (for example permitting defenders to switch sides) or use 
a conditioned practice (for example a one-on-one, or drill with additional instructions) to 
allow students to demonstrate their appropriate skills. For the relevant activities, this is 
clearly indicated in the Practical performance assessment criteria. 
This caveat applies to team game activities (such as football, rugby union, rugby league, 
hockey, lacrosse, basketball, camogie, hurling, handball, netball, volleyball) but may also 
apply to other activities where necessary. 
The difference in marks between the two columns indicates the different emphasis, with the 
player/performers activity in a conditioned practice and competitive situation having more 
weight than their skills and techniques in isolation/unopposed situations. 
Further information 
For up-to-date advice on teacher involvement and administration of non-examination 
assessments, please refer to the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ) document Instructions 
for conducting non-examination assessments (new GCE and GCSE specifications) available 
on the JCQ website www.jcq.org.uk 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
30 
Component 4: Personal Exercise Programme (PEP) 
Overview 
The purpose of this component is to assess students’ skills in analysing and evaluating 
performance through a personal exercise programme (PEP) in order to improve/optimise 
performance in a chosen physical activity. 
Students will develop knowledge and understanding of the principles of training, relevant 
methods of training and use of data in order to analyse and evaluate their PEP. The PEP will 
cover a six- to eight-week period, and can relate to any physical activity of their choice from 
the activities list given in Component 3: Practical Performance. 
Content 
The areas of content covered are: 
● aim and planning analysis 
● carrying out and monitoring their PEP 
● evaluation of fitness data and programme. 
Students are required to select one physical activity and sport on which to plan a PEP to 
optimise/improve their performance in that activity. Students may choose one of the three 
physical activities that they are performing/playing in from the activity list in Component 3: 
Practical Performance, or they may choose another activity from the same list. The list of 
activities is given on pages 21–23. 
Students should be taught to make links between their learning from Components 1 and 2 
and their PEP when analysing and evaluating it. Some relevant content sections may include, 
but are not restricted to, the following: 1.1–1.4, 3.1–3.6 from Component 1, and 1.1–1.3 
from Component 2. 
Aim and planning analysis 
The aim of the PEP is for students to develop their ability to analyse and evaluate their 
personal fitness to improve/optimise performance in physical activity and sport. 
Aim and Planning analysis  
The aim of the PEP is 
for students to develop 
their ability to analyse 
and evaluate their 
personal fitness to 
improve/optimise 
performance in 
physical activity and 
sport.  
Students will be required to demonstrate their planning of a PEP 
which will include:  
● Understand the physiological/fitness requirements for the 
sporting activity  
● Conduct an analyse of performance or part of a performance 
e.g., time/distance, pass completion in each time limit, serves 
into a given part of the court, accuracy of throwing, etc  
● Undertake a battery of fitness tests specific to the sporting 
activity  
● Analyse pre-PEP test results  
● Construct an appropriate aim based on developing performance 
through improving a component of fitness (see list below)  
● Select and justify the use of appropriate SMART targets, 
method(s) of training and principles of training  
● Complete a PAR-Q  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
31 
● The component of fitness should be selected from: 
● identification of the component of fitness the student wants to improve, with a suitable 
justification in relation to the impact on their performance. The component of fitness 
should be selected from: 
o cardiovascular fitness (aerobic endurance) 
o strength 
o muscular endurance 
o flexibility 
o body composition 
o agility 
o balance 
o coordination 
o power 
o reaction time 
o speed 
● a record of fitness levels at the beginning of the PEP, using a battery of recognised fitness 
tests from those most common listed below or any other recognised tests of your choice 
relevant to your chosen physical activity: 
o Cooper’s 12-minute run 
o Cooper’s 12-minute swim test 
o Harvard Step Test 
o Illinois agility run test 
o grip dynamometer 
o one-minute sit-up test 
o one-minute press-up test 
o vertical jump 
o wall sit, sit and reach. 
The methods of training include: 
● continuous 
● Fartlek 
● circuit 
● interval 
● plyometrics 
● weight/resistance. 
The principles of training include: 
● individual needs 
● specificity 
● progressive overload 
● FITT (frequency, intensity, time, type) 
● rest and recovery 
● reversibility 
● thresholds of training (aerobic target zone, 60–80% MHR; anaerobic target zone,  
80–90% MHR). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
32 
Students will be assessed only on the quality of their analysis and evaluation, and not on the 
quantity of evidence/data gathered. While we recommend the use of one test and/or one 
method of training, students may choose to use more than one fitness test and/or more than 
one method of training if they feel this is appropriate to fulfil their PEP and to generate 
adequate quantities of data to analyse and evaluate. Students will be assessed on the 
coherence and conciseness of their aim and planning analysis.  
Carrying out and monitoring the PEP 
Carrying out and monitoring the PEP  
Students must carry out 
their chosen method(s) of 
training over 6-8 weeks, 
using appropriate 
principles of training to 
improve/optimise their 
performance. 
Students will be required to evidence their training within the 
PEP which will include: 
● Students must record all training sessions, plus any other 
relevant data as appropriate, for later analysis and 
evaluation e.g. GPS data, repetitions & sets, rest periods, 
work:rest ratios, pre-exercise, working and recovery heart 
rates  
● Training record forms can be found in Appendix 3, or a 
centre-devised form can be used  
● Though this is not mandatory, students could carry out mid-
PEP testing. Students should be encouraged to adapt their 
PEP as appropriate, as it progresses, for example increase 
training intensity and duration. Any adaptations to the PEP 
should be noted and explained on the training record form(s) 
and analysed and evaluated for their impact on performance 
and effectiveness  
● Students should compare pre-PEP fitness test data with data 
collected after completion of  their PEP, using the data to 
justify reasons for changed levels in performance.  
● Training logs can either be included in the appendix or after 
the planning section and before the evaluation (training logs 
do not form part of the word count). 
Evaluation of the PEP 
Evaluation of the PEP  
Students will be required 
to analyse the data from 
their PEP and evaluate it to 
show how their 
performance could improve 
in their chosen activity.  
They need to make 
recommendations for 
further 
improvements/optimisation 
to their performance.   
Students will be assessed 
on the coherence and 
conciseness of their 
evaluation of their PEP, 
and not exceed the 1500-
word limit. 
Students will be required to evaluate their PEP which will 
include: 
● Compare pre-PEP fitness data with data collected during and 
after completion of the PEP  
● Analyse the data to justify reasons for changed levels in 
performance  
● Students must gather data from (same criterion in the 
planning) to evaluate and explain the impact on their 
performance.  
● Analyse the data gathered from fitness programme. Analysis 
could include:  
● plotting raw data from appropriate test results graphically  
● the use of graphs, charts, tables, and diagrams/flow charts 
to show evidence to support their analysis and evaluation  
● If their performance has not improved, students should give 
reasons why, for example injury.   
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
33 
Evaluation of the PEP  
● Students must also recommend strategies to further 
improve their level of fitness based on the effectiveness of 
their PEP, with the intention of ensuring their continuing 
success/improvement/optimisation in physical activity and 
sport.  
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2018. 
● Carrying out and producing the PEP may take place over multiple sessions up to a 
combined duration of 12 hours. 
● The PEP consists of 20 marks. 
● The PEP will be marked by the teacher and moderated by Pearson. 
● Marks must be submitted at the end of the course prior to moderation. 
Students are assessed only on their analysis and evaluation of the PEP. They are not 
assessed on whether or not any improvement occurs in their performance, or on the actual 
carrying out of their PEP. 
PEP setting and writing 
PEP setting 
Students must carry out their PEP on either one of their three chosen activities from 
Component 3: Practical Performance, or another activity from the activities list in that 
component. They should choose their physical activity and their PEP with the support and 
advice of their teacher. 
If a student is injured during the period in which they would be performing their PEP, they 
could carry out their PEP on their rehabilitation. 
PEP research 
Teaching and learning 
Teachers should give students a course of study that covers the content of this component: 
● aim and planning analysis 
● carrying out and monitoring their PEP 
● evaluation of fitness data and programme. 
Resources 
Students must have equal access to IT resources. They should also have access to a range of 
resources and equipment to enable them to fulfil the requirements of their PEP. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
34 
PEP writing 
Students will be required to submit their PEP in one of two formats: written or verbal. 
1 Written analysis and evaluation (word processed or hand written) 
Written/word-processed text (maximum 1500 words). Students will only be assessed on the 
analysis and evaluation of their written words. Students should be advised that if they 
exceed the word count it is likely that they will not be able to satisfy the requirement of 
producing a concise and coherently structured PEP. 
The use of PARQ, graphs, charts, tables, diagrams/flow charts, and training record forms 
does not count towards the word count. 
Training record forms for each training session (or appropriate alternative evidence) must be 
submitted, they may form an appendix to the PEP. 
2 Verbal presentation 
Submitted via video evidence. Maximum presenting time is 15 minutes. 
The student is being assessed on their verbal analysis and evaluation of their PEP. 
During the recording of the student’s verbal presentation there must not be any prompting 
or intervention from the teacher.  
The use of presenting tools (e.g. PowerPoint, cue cards) is optional. The slides will not be 
assessed. If slides are used, they are solely for reference/illustrative purposes to support the 
verbal analysis and evaluation that the student is presenting. The text on the slides must not 
be analytical or evaluative in nature, but must only be factual statements. 
Training record forms for each training session (or appropriate alternative evidence) must be 
submitted. The presentation slides (if used) must also be submitted. 
Authenticity and collaboration 
Students and teachers must sign the Personal exercise programme authentication sheet, 
please see Appendix 2. This is to ensure that the work is the student’s own. 
Feedback 
Teachers can help students to understand instructions and assessment criteria for the PEP. 
Teachers must not provide students with solutions for their PEP. Any additional feedback 
must be recorded on the Personal exercise programme authentication sheet, please see 
Appendix 2. 
Resources 
Students must have equal access to IT resources. They should also have access to a range of 
resources and equipment to enable them to fulfil the requirements of their PEP. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
35 
Marking, standardisation and moderation 
Teachers should mark the PEP using the assessment criteria on the following pages. 
Teachers may annotate students’ work but should also include any comments on the 
Personal exercise programme authentication sheet in Appendix 2 to justify the marks 
awarded. These marks should then be submitted to Pearson.  
Where marking has been carried out by more than one teacher in a centre, there must be a 
process of internal standardisation carried out to ensure that there is a consistent application 
of the assessment criteria. 
Marks awarded by the centre will be subject to external moderation by Pearson. Moderation 
will ensure consistency with national standards and will include a review of PEPs to ensure 
that the rules have been correctly applied by centres. Pearson will notify centres of the 
students whose work has been selected for moderation. This sample will take cohort size into 
account. 
If the moderation indicates that centre assessment does not reflect national standards, an 
adjustment will be made to students’ final marks to compensate.  
For further information please refer to the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ) Instructions 
for conducting non-examination assessments (new GCE and GCSE specifications) on the JCQ 
website www.jcq.org.uk. The assessment of this qualification must comply with these 
instructions. 
Personal exercise programme (PEP) assessment criteria 
Teachers must mark students’ work using the assessment criteria on the next pages. 
Each level relates to the quality of the work produced by the student. 
The first two bullet points in each level relate to the student’s initial analysis and evaluation 
of their current fitness, and justification of their decision to pursue a particular method of 
training in their PEP. 
The third and fourth bullet points relate to the student’s post-PEP analysis and evaluation, 
and their recommendation for further training to improve their performance. 
The final bullet point relates to the overall coherence and conciseness of the students PEP. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
36 
 
Component 4: Personal exercise programme (PEP) assessment criteria 
Level Marks Descriptor 
 0 No rewardable material 
1 1–4 ● Limited or little interpretation of fitness test results using some data. 
● Limited evaluation (mainly descriptive) resulting in inappropriate selection of 
training method(s) and little application of SMART targets and principles of 
training to meet performance goal(s). 
● Limited comparison, interpretation and/or analysis of differences and/or 
similarities between fitness test results and little/no supporting evidence used, 
with many significant errors of judgement/inaccuracies. 
● Limited evaluation of the application of the method(s) of training, SMART goals 
and principles of training, and no recommendation for improving future 
training and performance. 
● Lack of coherence and structure, with inappropriate and inaccurate 
terminology throughout. 
2 5–8 ● Some attempt at interpretation and analysis of fitness test results using some 
data, but with errors that may impact analysis. 
● Some attempts at evaluation, with weak justification for training method(s) 
chosen, and attempts at applying SMART targets and principles of training to 
meet performance goal(s), with errors of judgement affecting the quality of 
the evaluation. 
● Attempts to compare and interpret the fitness test results, with some 
differences and/or similarities analysed in places and some supporting 
evidence used, but with many errors of judgement/inaccuracies. 
● Some attempts at evaluation of the application of the method(s) of training, 
SMART goals and principles of training, with some attempt at recommendation 
for improving future training and performance, but with significant errors. 
● Attempts at coherence and structure, with use of appropriate terminology in 
places but inconsistent and with some errors of judgement. 
3 9–12 ● Good interpretation and analysis of fitness test results using appropriate data, 
with some errors that have insignificant impact on the analysis. 
● Good evaluation with appropriate training method(s) selected and explained, 
and application of SMART targets and principles of training to meet 
performance goal(s), with some errors of judgement that have insignificant 
impact on the evaluation. 
● Fitness test results are compared and interpreted, and the differences and/or 
similarities are analysed and sufficient supporting evidence used, but with 
some errors of judgement/inaccuracies. 
● Good evaluation of the application of the method(s) of training, SMART goals 
and principles of training, with sufficient detail/depth, and appropriate 
recommendation(s) to improve future training and performance. 
● Good coherence and structure, with appropriate terminology used, but some 
errors of judgement/accuracy with no significant impact on the piece. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
37 
 
Component 4: Personal exercise programme (PEP) assessment criteria 
continued 
Level Marks Descriptor 
4 13–16 ● Very good interpretation and analysis of fitness test results using appropriate 
data, with one or two minor errors not significantly affecting the analysis. 
● Evaluation with appropriate training method(s) selected and explained, and 
application of SMART targets and principles of training to meet performance 
goal(s), with few errors of judgement not significantly affecting the evaluation. 
● Fitness test results are compared and interpreted, and the differences and/or 
similarities are analysed with satisfactory supporting evidence, but with some 
minor errors of judgment/inaccuracies. 
● Well-argued evaluation of the application of the method(s) of training, SMART 
goals and principles of training, in satisfactory detail and depth, with justified 
recommendations to improve future training and performance. 
● Very good coherence and structure, with appropriate terminology used 
throughout, but with a few minor errors. 
5 17–20 ● Excellent and thorough interpretation and analysis of fitness test results using 
appropriate data. 
● Evaluation with appropriate training method(s) selected and justified, and 
application of SMART targets and principles of training to meet performance 
goal(s). 
● Fitness tests results are compared and interpreted, and the differences and/or 
similarities identified and analysed, and reasons for them justified, with ample 
supporting evidence. 
● Sophisticated evaluation of the application of the method(s) of training, 
SMART goals and principles of training, in good detail and depth, with well 
justified recommendations to improve future training and performance. 
● Excellent coherence and structure, with appropriate terminology used 
consistently, with few minor, if any, errors. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
38 
Security and backups 
It is the centre’s responsibility to keep the work that students have submitted for 
assessment secure. 
Secure storage is defined as a securely-locked cabinet or cupboard. Where students are 
producing artefacts, secure storage is defined as a classroom studio or workshop that is 
locked or supervised from the end of one session to the start of the next. 
The rules on storage also apply to electronic data. For example, centres should collect 
memory sticks for secure storage between sessions or restrict student access to specific 
areas of the centre’s IT network. 
For materials stored electronically, centres are strongly advised to utilise firewall protection 
and virus-checking software, and to employ an effective backup strategy, so that an  
up-to-date archive of student evidence is maintained. 
Further information 
For up-to-date advice on teacher involvement and administration of non-examination 
assessments, please refer to the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ) document Instructions 
for conducting non-examination assessments (new GCE and GCSE specifications) available 
on the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
39 
Assessment Objectives 
 
Students must: % in GCSE 
AO1 Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of the factors that 
underpin performance and involvement in physical activity and sport 
25 
AO2 Apply knowledge and understanding of the factors that underpin 
performance and involvement in physical activity and sport 
20 
AO3 Analyse and evaluate the factors that underpin performance and 
involvement in physical activity and sport 
15 
AO4 ● Demonstrate and apply relevant skills and techniques in physical 
activity and sport  
● Analyse and evaluate performance 
40 
Total 100 
 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
Component 
Assessment Objectives Total % for all 
Assessment 
Objectives AO1 % AO2 % AO3 % AO4 % 
Component 1: Fitness and 
Body Systems 
15 12 9 0 36 
Component 2: Health and 
Performance 
10 8 6 0 24 
Component 3: Practical 
Performance 
0 0 0 30 30 
Component 4: Personal 
Exercise Programme (PEP) 
0 0 0 10 10 
Total for GCSE 25 20 15 40 100 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
40 
3 Administration and general information 
Entries 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for this qualification can be found in 
our UK Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations officers and is 
available on our website: qualifications.pearson.com 
Discount code and performance tables 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more than one GCSE, or other Level 2 
qualifications with the same discount code, will have only the grade for their 'first entry' 
counted for the purpose of the school and college performance tables (please see 
Appendix 10: Codes). For further information about what constitutes 'first entry' and full 
details of how this policy is applied, please refer to the DfE website: 
www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-education 
Students should be advised that if they take two GCSEs with the same discount code, 
schools and colleges they wish to progress to are likely to take the view that this 
achievement is equivalent to only one GCSE. The same view may be taken if students take 
two GCSEs or other Level 2 qualifications that have different discount codes but which have 
significant overlap of content. Students or their advisers who have any doubts about their 
subject combinations should check with the institution they wish to progress to before 
embarking on their programmes.  
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, 
special consideration and malpractice 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality policy requires all students to 
have equal opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our qualifications 
to be awarded in a way that is fair to every student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the Equality Act 2010) are not, 
when they are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in comparison to 
students who do not share that characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification and that 
this achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their peers. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be available in English. All student work must be in 
English. 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with special 
educational needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to: 
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the assessment. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
41 
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an individual 
student with a disability, without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding bodies comply with the duty under the 
Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students will 
then know what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for assessment. 
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable adjustments 
where a person with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in undertaking an 
assessment. The awarding organisation is required to take reasonable steps to overcome 
that disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be unique to that individual and 
therefore might not be in the list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of factors, 
which will include: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding 
organisation, timeframes or affects the security or integrity of the assessment. This is 
because the adjustment is not ‘reasonable’. 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student's mark or grade to 
reflect temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the examination/ 
assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a material effect on a 
candidate’s ability to take an assessment or demonstrate their level of attainment in  
an assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to apply for access arrangements 
and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special 
consideration, please refer to the JCQ website www.jcq.org.uk. 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that compromises or seeks to 
compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in controlled assessments discovered before the candidate has signed 
the declaration of authentication form does not need to be reported to Pearson. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
42 
Candidate malpractice found in controlled assessments after the declaration of authenticity 
has been signed, and in examinations must be reported to Pearson on a JCQ Form M1 
(available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form should be emailed to 
candidatemalpractice@pearson.com. Please provide as much information and supporting 
documentation as possible. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies 
with Pearson. 
Failure to report candidate malpractice constitutes staff or centre malpractice.  
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and maladministration of 
our qualifications. As with candidate malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is any act that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of assessment or undermines the integrity 
of the qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported 
immediately, before any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson on a JCQ Form 
M2(a) (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form, supporting 
documentation and as much information as possible should be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions 
lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More-detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the document 
General and Vocational Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments Policies and Procedures, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice. 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to comply with the requirements of 
Ofqual's General Conditions of Recognition. 
The raw marks for Components 1, 2, 3 and 4 in this qualification will be scaled by Pearson to 
represent the relative weighting of 36% for Component 1, 24% for Component 2, 30% for 
Component 3 and 10% for Component 4. For components 3 and 4, marks submitted by the 
centre should be in raw marks based on the relevant assessment criteria grids. 
Component Weighting Raw marks Scaling factor Scaling mark 
Component 1 36% 80 1.575 126 
Component 2 24% 60 1.400 84 
Component 3 30% 105 1.000 105 
Component 4 10% 20 1.750 35 
 
This GCSE qualification will be graded and certificated on a nine-grade scale from 9 to 1 
using the total subject mark where 9 is the highest grade. Individual components are not 
graded. 
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum judged by Pearson to be of 
sufficient standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U result. 
The first certification opportunity for this qualification will be in 2018. The activities with a 
single asterisk in the physical activities tables on pages 21–23 will have a first certification 
opportunity in 2022. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
43 
Student recruitment and progression 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this qualification. 
Progression 
Students can progress from this qualification to: 
● further study of physical education at AS and A Level 
● vocational courses such as the BTEC Nationals in Sport and Sport and Exercise Sciences 
● apprenticeships and other training 
● employment in a related sector. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
44 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
45 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Practical performance authentication sheet 47 
Appendix 2: Personal exercise programme (PEP) authentication sheet 48 
Appendix 3: Personal exercise programme training record form 49 
Appendix 4: Recording practical performances 50 
Appendix 5: Glossary of key terms 55 
Appendix 6: Command word taxonomy 58 
Appendix 7: Calculators 60 
Appendix 8: The context for the development of this qualification 61 
Appendix 9: Transferable skills 63 
Appendix 10: Codes 64 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
46 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
47 
 
 
Appendix 1: Practical performance 
authentication sheet 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Physical Education 1PE0/03 
Centre name: 
 
Centre number: 
Candidate name: 
 
Candidate number: 
Activity Mark 
awarded 
Comments 
[NB: Comment box expands as you start 
entering text] 
1. Individual activity /35   
2. Team activity /35  
3. Free choice activity /35   
Total /105  
 
Teacher declaration 
I declare that the work submitted for assessment has been carried out without assistance 
other than that which is acceptable according to the rules of the specification.  
 
Assessor name:  
Assessor signed:  Date:  
 
Candidate declaration 
I certify that the work submitted for this assessment is my own. I understand that false 
declaration is a form of malpractice. 
 
Candidate signed:  Date:  
 
Additional candidate declaration 
By signing this additional declaration you agree to your work being used to support 
Professional Development, Online Support and Training of both Centre-Assessors and 
Pearson Moderators. If you have any concerns please email 
teachingPEandSport@pearson.com 
 
Candidate signed:  Date:  
This form may be adapted as required. 

 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
48 
 
 
Appendix 2: Personal exercise 
programme (PEP) authentication sheet 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Physical Education 1PE0/04 
Centre name: 
 
Centre number: 
Candidate name: 
 
Candidate number: 
Activity Mark 
awarded 
Comments  
[NB: Comment box expands as you start 
entering text] 
PEP title  /20  
Total /20  
 
Teacher declaration 
I declare that the work submitted for assessment has been carried out without assistance 
other than that which is acceptable according to the rules of the specification.  
 
Assessor name:  
Assessor signed:  Date:  
 
Candidate declaration 
I certify that the work submitted for this assessment is my own. I have clearly referenced 
any sources used in the work. I understand that false declaration is a form of malpractice. 
 
Candidate signed:  Date:  
 
Additional candidate declaration 
By signing this additional declaration you agree to your work being used to support 
Professional Development, Online Support and Training of both Centre-Assessors and 
Pearson Moderators. If you have any concerns please email 
teachingPEandSport@pearson.com 
 
Candidate signed:  Date:  
 
This form may be adapted as required. 

 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
49 
 
 
Appendix 3: Personal exercise 
programme training record form 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Physical Education 1PE0/04 
Centre name: 
 
Centre number: 
Candidate name: 
 
Candidate number: 
Chosen activity/sport: 
 
 
Chosen method of training: 
 
Date and number of training session: 
 
 
Pre-exercise heart rate 
before warm up 
Working heart rate Immediate  
post-exercise heart rate 
   
 
Recovery heart rate at the 
following intervals (bpm) 
1 min 
 
2 min 
 
3 min 4 min 5 min 
 
Description of training session appropriate to the method of training, e.g. map of continuous 
training course, plan of circuit training session 
 
 
 
 
 
Any adaptations or changes you have made to this training session and why 
 
 
 
 

 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
50 
Appendix 4: Recording practical 
performances 
The following guidance applies to Component 3: Practical Performance when recorded 
evidence is required for assessment purposes. 
The purpose of the recording is to evidence all marks awarded. Therefore, all recordings 
must be made under controlled conditions. 
All recordings must be a complete and unedited recording of each performance. 
The camera must be positioned to ensure that the best possible and unobstructed 
recording is made of the performance, as seen by the marker/examiner. 
Each student should be introduced at the start of each performance. They should provide the 
following information: 
● student name and number 
● performance role. 
Before the assessment 
Video evidence should be produced in a standard/common format, such as a DVD, or a ‘free 
to access’ IT application, such as Windows Media Player or Quicktime. This is important as it 
will ensure that the teacher/assessor is able to use the video for assessment purposes, and 
that Pearson will be able to use the video where necessary/appropriate for moderation. 
Video evidence should clearly show all the assessment requirements of the selected physical 
activity and sport, which may require a combination of: 
● wide-angled shots, to give an overall perspective 
● closer range shots, to show aspects such as stance, posture and position 
● close-up shots to show specific requirements and techniques, for example grips in golf. 
Students being assessed must be easily identifiable. If the video shows the student in a team 
game, they should be clearly identifiable by a number, bib or a particular item of clothing. 
Centres must consider the responsibilities relating to the acquisition, and use, of alternative 
forms of evidence, for example the need for parental, or even student, consent relating to 
the use of video. 
The following checks should be made to resources before the recording: 
● ensure that the camera being used has the appropriate facilities for adjusting recorded 
sound levels – particularly if the camera is to be positioned some distance from the 
students  
● check that the picture recorded by the camera is clear enough to identify individual 
students 
● ensure that memory cards have sufficient space for each recording 
● check the camera battery is charged and a power lead is plugged in/available if needed. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
51 
Student identification 
● Plan students’ kits that will support identification on the recording, for example different 
coloured bibs. 
● Test how these kits look on camera from an identification point of view, particularly for 
students in large groups. 
● When watching work prior to the marking, check that students’ use of space can be 
captured by the camera. 
● Ensure that students state their name, candidate number and role at the start of each 
activity. 
Students are assessed as individuals and, as such, it is vital that they can be identified 
individually throughout all assessed performances. 
Test the camera 
● Record a small section of work (perhaps a small game/conditioned practice) using the 
actual camera needed for the performance with students. 
● Check that an audio signal has been recorded and that students can be seen without 
obstruction and heard clearly. 
● Adjust camera position and/or recording levels as needed. 
At the beginning of the assessment 
● Position the camera as practised. 
● Film each performance, beginning with the student introductions. Each student must 
introduce themselves, with a clear pace and at audible volume, stating name, student 
number and role. 
During the performance 
● Check that recording is taking place for each group and that students are fully visible on 
screen. 
● Check available power/battery/memory, as needed, in between the examination 
performances. 
After the assessment 
● Check the recordings, ensuring that each group has been recorded with audio. 
● Ensure that all recordings are backed up as well as transferred to the appropriate 
format for assessment 
● The recording should be saved with the centre number, qualification title and the relevant 
component number. 
● Ensure that the recordings are kept secure until sent to Pearson and any backups kept 
safely until after Enquiries about Results. 
Videoing, with activity specific examples 
The following offers advice to centres in order to: 
● Ensure the camera position is conducive to capturing what the moderator sees 
● Balance the need to capture individual skills and team performance 
● Capture multiple candidates 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
52 
Guidance on videoing racket sports/ring (badminton (2 or 4 people), squash (2), 
table tennis (2 or 4), tennis (2 or 4), boxing (2)). 
In preparation for moderation, it is recommended that a centre groups candidates which will 
enable each candidate to show their skills in their best light. If part way through the 
assessment a candidate is not able to show skills due the ability of their partner/opponent, 
the centre/moderator can re-arrange the players.  
A centre may wish to use only one court/ring to moderate the candidates. Other candidates 
may practice on additional courts but would move onto the designated court when being 
formally moderated. 
When videoing the moderation, ideally, the video recorder should be positioned to capture 
the whole court (or at least be able to capture the majority of the court to show the skills 
and techniques of the individuals). The camera could be focused on one court where 
candidates enter, perform and then leave. The camera could remain stationary to capture all 
candidates participating in the skills in isolation/unopposed situations, conditioned practice(s) 
and a game.
 
If it is not possible to capture the whole court/ring from a static position, the person 
recording will have to move the video recorder to ensure that evidence is captured to show 
the skills of all the candidates e.g. a forehand showing the length. It is essential that all 
candidates on court are captured on the video almost all of the time of the recording.
 
It is strongly recommended that when recording, the whole court is captured and the 
recording does not concentrate on one player at a time because evidence may be missed of 
other players and hence may not capture everything that the moderator sees.
 
Once the assessment has taken place and evidence has been captured the candidates will 
leave the court and 2 (or 4) more candidates would move to that court and be assessed.
 
Moderators will moderate either 2 (singles) or 4 (doubles) players at the same time and 
hence centres will video the same evidence. 
 
Guidance on videoing handball (7 players per team), volleyball (6 players per 
team)
 
In preparation for moderation, it is recommended that a centre group(s) candidates which 
will enable each candidate to show their skills in their best light. If part way through the 
assessment a candidate is not able to show some skills due the ability of their team 
players/opponents, the centre/moderator can re-arrange the players.  
A centre may wish to use only one court to moderate the candidates. Other candidates may 
practice on additional courts but would move onto the designated court when being formally 
moderated. 
When videoing the moderation, ideally, the video recorder should be positioned to capture 
the whole court (or at least be able to capture the majority of the court to show the 
skills/ability of the individuals). The camera could be focused on one court where candidates 
enter, perform and then leave. The camera could remain stationary to capture all candidates 
participating in the skills in isolation/unopposed situations, conditioned practice(s) and a 
game. 
If it is not possible to capture the whole court from a static position, the person recording will 
have to move the video recorder to ensure that evidence is captured to show the skills of all 
the candidates e.g. a defensive shot lands towards the back of the court. It is essential that 
all candidates on court are captured on the video almost all of the time of the recording. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
53 
We strongly recommend that when recording, the whole court is captured and the recording 
does not concentrate on one player at a time because evidence may be missed of other 
players and hence may not capture everything that the moderator sees. If this is not 
possible, we recommend the recording should capture one team at a time. This is not ideal 
as it may take more time.  
Once the assessment has taken place and evidence has been captured the candidates will 
leave the court and more candidates would move to that court and be assessed. 
Guidance on videoing individual activities 
This guidance relates to: dance, athletics, cycling, diving, golf, gymnastics, equestrian, 
canoeing, rowing, kayaking, sculling, rock climbing, skiing, snowboarding, and trampolining. 
If a candidate is being assessed as part of a group, we strongly recommend that the video is 
positioned to capture the whole performance, e.g. the whole stage for a dance routine. The 
camera could remain stationary to capture all candidates participating in the performance.  
If only one person is being assessed, e.g. a solo dance routine, equestrian, etc., the camera 
could remain stationary to capture the whole routine. Alternatively, the recording could 
follow the candidate throughout the whole performance.  
In relation to rowing, sculling, etc., evidence would have to be captured on the move. 
Guidance on videoing team games 
This guidance relates to: football, basketball, camogie, Gaelic football, hockey, hurling, 
lacrosse, netball, rugby league, rugby union. 
It is recommended that as much evidence as possible is captured during skills in 
isolation/unopposed situations and conditioned practices. Practices should be set up to 
demonstrate the skills of the individual, and hence only a very small amount of evidence may 
need to be captured during the full game. When videoing the skills in isolation/unopposed 
situations and conditioned practices, the camera could be focused on one area where 
candidates enter, perform and then leave. The camera could remain stationary to capture all 
candidates participating in these practices. 
Alternatively, the camera can pan as appropriate between areas where different groups of 
candidates (for example of differing abilities) are performing in these practices. 
For a whole team game, ideally the camera should be positioned to capture the whole game. 
However, as this may not be realistic, the camera may be positioned in the most appropriate 
position e.g. the half-way line. The camera should pan to follow the game as it progresses 
ensuring as much is possible is captured and that the camera follows the eye-line of the 
moderator. The moderator and person responsible for recording will liaise to ensure the 
optimal camera position. 
It is essential that if a team activity is shown on moderation day that a full game is played, 
although it is anticipated that almost all of the evidence will be captured during the skills in 
isolation /unopposed situations and conditioned practices.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
54 
Guidance on videoing swimming and diving  
Should centres elect to offer activities which take place in and around a swimming pool they 
must obtain permission from the pool operator/owner that these activities can be recorded. 
The staff member who seeks this permission must be part of the senior leadership team 
within the school. 
Centres must confirm with Pearson that permission has been secured and provide written 
evidence of the pool-operator’s assent to Pearson as soon as it is obtained. 
Centres must also obtain permission from both candidate and parent for the candidate to be 
filmed for the purposes of assessment.  
Centres will be instructed to: 
● only video the candidate(s) who is the subject of the assessment, and try as far as 
possible not to include incidental imaging of any other children, especially where they can 
be identified 
● not video closer-up for longer than is necessary for the purpose of the recording 
● not video in changing rooms 
● ensure that recorded materials are stored securely and are password protected if stored 
electronically 
● on receipt of the recorded materials from a centre, moderators will be instructed to: 
o ensure that recorded materials are stored securely and are deleted when moderation 
has finished. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
55 
Appendix 5: Glossary of key terms 
The following list contains all relevant technical vocabulary, terminology and definitions 
associated with the content for Components 1 and 2. Students will be expected to know and 
understand these, and other words and definitions, particularly for use in the examination 
papers. This glossary is not an exhaustive list of key terms and should be used in conjunction 
with the content for components 1 and 2 to support teaching and learning. 
 
Key term Definition 
Aerobic work Working at a moderate intensity so that the body has time to utilise 
oxygen for energy production, allowing the body to work for a continuous 
period, e.g. long-distance events, for the duration of a match 
Anaerobic work Working at a high intensity without oxygen for energy production, 
therefore limited energy so work period will be short, e.g. sprinting up the 
wing in a football match 
Antagonistic 
muscle pairs 
Pairs of muscles that work together to bring about movement. As one 
muscle contracts (agonist) the other relaxes (antagonist).  
For example, the biceps and triceps. The triceps relax to allow the biceps 
to contract to flex the arm at the elbow. Roles are reversed to extend the 
arm at the elbow 
Axis A line around which the body/a body part can turn 
Basic skill A simple skill requiring little concentration to execute 
Closed skill A skill performed in a predictable environment, e.g. a player taking a 
penalty 
Complex skill A skill requiring a lot of attention/concentration 
Deviance Behaviour that goes against the moral values or laws of the sport 
Distributed 
practice 
Intervals between skill practice in a training session for rest or mental 
rehearsal 
Exercise A form of physical activity done to maintain or improve health and/or 
fitness; it is not competitive sport 
Energy balance This is the basis of weight control. For body weight to remain constant 
energy input (via food) must equal energy expenditure 
Feedback Information received during or after a performance about the performance 
Fitness The ability to meet the demands of the environment 
Fixed practice Repeatedly practising a whole skill within a training session 
Frontal axis Imaginary line passing horizontally through the body from left to right, 
allows flexion and extension 
Frontal plane Imaginary line dividing the body vertically from front to back. Movement 
occurs in the frontal plane about the sagittal axis, e.g. when performing a 
star jump 
Gamesmanship Bending the rules/laws of a sport without actually breaking them 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
56 
 
Key term Definition 
Guidance Information to aid the learning of a skill. This information can be given 
visually, e.g. through demonstrations; verbally, e.g. by the coach 
explaining how to perform the technique; manually, e.g. by physically 
moving a performer into the correct position; and mechanically,  
e.g. by using a harness in trampolining 
Health A state of complete emotional, physical and social wellbeing, and not 
merely the absence of disease and infirmity 
High organisation 
skill 
A skill that cannot be broken down easily and practised separately because 
the phases of the skill are closely linked, e.g. cartwheel, golf swing 
Hydration Being hydrated means the body has the correct amount of water in cells, 
tissues and organs to function correctly. The average recommended daily 
intake is 2.5 litres of water for men and 2 litres for women 
Lactic acid A by-product of energy production. Formed when the body is exercising 
anaerobically at high intensity 
Lactate 
accumulation 
When lactate levels in the blood/muscle rise due to increased work 
intensity, e.g. moving from aerobic to anaerobic exercise 
Lifestyle choice The choices we make about how we live and behave that impact on our 
health 
Low organisation 
skill 
A basic skill that can be broken down easily into different phases so each 
part can be practised separately, e.g. tennis serve, front crawl swimming 
stroke 
Macronutrient  A type of food required in relatively large amounts in the diet,  
e.g. carbohydrates and fats 
Massed practice Practice that occurs without rest between trials 
Micronutrient  A type of food required in relatively small quantities in the diet,  
e.g. vitamins and minerals 
Mechanical 
advantage 
2nd class levers allow a large load to be moved with a relatively small 
amount of muscular effort 
Mechanical 
disadvantage 
3rd class levers cannot lift as heavy loads, with the same amount of effort, 
as 2nd class levers due to the position of the effort and load from the 
fulcrum 
Muscle fibre 
types  
Muscle fibres make up the skeletal muscle. The different fibre types are 
type I, type IIa and type IIx 
Open skill Skills performed in an unpredictable environment, where the performer 
has to react and adjust due to the changing nature of the situation, for 
example a player trying to pass the ball to a team mate who is trying to 
get free from the opposition 
Optimum weight Refers to the weight someone should be, on average, based on their sex, 
height, bone structure and muscle girth 
Sagittal axis Imaginary line passing horizontally through the body from front to back, 
allows abduction and adduction 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
57 
 
Key term Definition 
Sagittal plane Imaginary line dividing the body vertically into left and right sides 
Sedentary 
lifestyle 
Where there is little, irregular or no physical activity 
Sportsmanship Qualities of fairness, following the rules, being gracious in defeat or victory 
Transverse plane Imaginary line dividing the body horizontally from front to back 
Type I Also known as slow-twitch muscle fibres, they are suited to low intensity 
aerobic work, for example marathon running, as they can be used for a 
long period of time without fatiguing 
Type IIa These are fast-twitch muscle fibres, they are used in anaerobic work, but 
can be improved through endurance training to increase their resistance to 
fatigue 
Type IIx 
(previously  
type IIb) 
These are fast-twitch muscle fibres that are used in anaerobic work and 
can generate much greater force than the other fibre types, but fatigue 
quickly. They are beneficial to 100 m sprinters 
Variable practice A training session that includes frequent changes of task so that the skill 
can be repeated in different situations 
Vascular shunting Process that increases blood flow to active areas during exercise by 
diverting blood away from inactive areas. This is achieved by 
vasoconstriction and vasodilation 
Vasoconstriction Narrowing of the internal diameter (lumen) of the blood vessel to decrease 
blood flow 
Vasodilation Widening of the internal diameter (lumen) of the blood vessel to increase 
blood flow 
Vertical axis Imaginary line passing vertically through the body, allows rotation of the 
body in an upright position 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
58 
Appendix 6: Command word taxonomy 
A list of all the command words and their definitions that may appear in the examination 
papers for Components 1 and 2 is given below. 
 
Command word Definition 
Assess Requires reasoned argument of factors to reach a judgement regarding 
their importance/relevance to the question context. For example ‘Assess 
the relative importance of….’ 
Analyse Break something down into its component parts 
Calculate Requires computation in relation to fitness data 
Classify Required to group or place on a scale based on characteristics/analysis of 
characteristics  
Complete Required to add information based on a stimulus/resource. This could be 
to complete a table, graph, chart or missing word/phrase from a 
sentence/statement 
Define Required to give the meaning or definition of a word/term 
Describe Account of something without reasons. Statements in the response need 
to be linked, for example ‘Describe the lever system operating at the 
elbow….’ 
Discuss Required to explore the issue/situation/problem that is being assessed in 
the question context, articulating different or contrasting viewpoints, for 
example advantages, disadvantages. 
Examine Requires a justification/exemplification of a point based on some analysis 
or evaluation within the response. For example, ‘Examine the role of the 
first class lever system….’ 
Explain Requires a justification/exemplification of a point. The answer must 
contain some linked reasoning. For example, the format of the response 
may be ‘fact… because… therefore….’ 
Evaluate Review/analyse information, bringing it together to form a 
conclusion/judgement based on strengths/weaknesses, alternatives, 
relevant data or information. Come to a supported judgement of a 
subject’s qualities and relation to its context 
Give Generally involves the recall of a fact, or an example based on the given 
stimulus. For example, ‘Give an example of a specific sporting 
movement….’ Can be synonymous with identify/state. 
Identify Can require a selection from a given stimulus or resource, for example an 
option from a multiple-choice question or analysis of data from source 
material such as a graph, or can be synonymous with give/state 
Justify Give reasons for answers. This could range from a single response to 
extended writing answers, depending on question context. For example, 
‘Justify the use of interval training to improve….’ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
59 
 
Command word Definition 
Label Requires addition of named structures or features to a diagram 
Predict Often used in data related questions, for example where it requires a 
prediction of what is likely to happen in future, based on given data 
Select Requires a choice based on an evaluation of information from a given 
stimulus/resource 
State Generally involves the recall of a fact, for example ‘State one benefit of 
exercise….’ but can, when used in relation to a context, be used to 
determine a student’s grasp of information presented, for example a data 
analysis question. Can be synonymous with give/identify 
Using an example Often used with explain or describe, where an example is required to 
exemplify the point(s) being made  
Which Mainly used in multiple-choice questions where a selection from a set of 
options is required, for example ‘Which one of the following….’ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
60 
Appendix 7: Calculators 
Students may use a calculator in assessments for this qualification. Centres are responsible 
for making sure that calculators used by their students meet the requirements highlighted in 
the table below.  
Students must be familiar with the requirements before their assessments for this 
qualification. 
 
Calculators must be: 
● of a size suitable for use on a desk 
● either battery or solar powered 
● free of lids, cases and covers that have 
printed instructions or formulae. 
Calculators must not: 
● be designed or adapted to offer any of these 
facilities: 
o language translators 
o symbolic algebraic manipulation 
o symbolic differentiation or integration 
o communication with other machines or 
the internet 
● be borrowed from another candidate during 
an examination for any reason* 
● have retrievable information stored in them. 
 This includes: 
o databanks 
o dictionaries 
o mathematical formulae 
o text. 
The candidate is responsible for the 
following: 
● the calculator’s power supply 
● the calculator’s working condition 
● clearing anything stored in the calculator. 
 
*An invigilator may give students a replacement calculator. 
Further information can be found in the JCQ documents Instructions for conducting 
examinations and Information for candidates for written examinations, available at 
www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
61 
Appendix 8: The context for the 
development of this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] and our 
ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
● reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with those 
taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
● consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including subject 
associations, higher-education academics, teachers and employers to ensure this 
qualification is suitable for a UK context 
● reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in their 
documents GCSE (9 to 1) Qualification Level Conditions and Requirements and GCSE Subject 
Level Conditions and Requirements for Physical Education, updated in February 2020. 
 
 
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification Principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
● demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning and 
measuring higher-order skills 
● rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and valid 
assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in end users of the knowledge, skills and 
competencies of certified students 
● inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students develop at 
different rates and have different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
● empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills, see Appendix 9. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
62 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
May 2014 
“ The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important change to the 
education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications will assist them in 
helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an ‘Expert 
Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or because of 
our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the world as diverse as 
Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification development 
process that has included: 
● extensive international comparability of subject content against the highest-performing 
jurisdictions in the world 
● benchmarking assessments against UK and overseas providers to ensure that they are at 
the right level of demand 
● establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-specific 
expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
● subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future oriented. The 
design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, meaning learner outcomes 
have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a learner’s success 
in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident that we have supported the 
development of qualifications that are outstanding for their coherence, thoroughness and attention 
to detail and can be regarded as representing world-class best practice. ”   
  
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Lee Sing Kong  
Director, National Institute of Education, 
Singapore 
  
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
  
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
All titles correct as at May 2014 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
63 
Appendix 9: Transferable skills 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently flagged the 
need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable them to respond with 
confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines skills, or 
competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that can be learned and 
that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform an activity or task and can be 
built upon and extended through learning.’ 
[1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected and 
evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this process, we 
identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the most evidence-based and 
robust skills framework. We adapted the framework slightly to include the Program for 
International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT Literacy and Collaborative Problem Solving 
(CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves: [2]  
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve general 
cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and communicate. [3]  
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, oral communication, written communication, assertive 
communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, service 
orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared understanding, 
taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team organisation. 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work stress, 
adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, and physical 
adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual teams, 
work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and able to acquire 
new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher education, 
as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the teaching and learning of 
this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning materials, developed with 
stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
 
[1]  OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012) 
[2]  Koenig J A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop (National 
Academies Press, 2011) 
[3]  PISA – The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy (2011) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
64 
Appendix 10: Codes 
 
Type of code Use of code Code 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for performance 
tables is assigned a discount code 
indicating the subject area to which it 
belongs. 
Discount codes are published by the DfE. 
Please see the GOV.UK 
website* 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an 
Ofqual Regulated Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) code. 
The RQF code is known as a Qualification 
Number (QN). This is the code that 
features in the DfE Section 96 and on the 
LARA as being eligible for 16–18 and 19+ 
funding, and is to be used for all 
qualification funding purposes. The QN will 
appear on students’ final certification 
documentation. 
The QN for this 
qualification is: 
601/8161/8 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to 
enter students for a qualification. Centres 
will need to use the entry codes only when 
claiming students’ qualifications. 
GCSE – 1PE0 
Component codes These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be 
entered for individual components. 
Component 1: 1PE0/01 
Component 2: 1PE0/02 
Component 3: 1PE0/03 
Component 4: 1PE0/04 
 
*https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/key-stage-4-qualifications-discount-codes-
and-point-scores 
 
DB180924 9781446941881_GCSE2016_L12_PE_ISSUE5.DOC.1–70/0 
 
 
 
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office:  80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121