A Level
French
Speciﬁ  cation
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French (9FR0)
First teaching from September 2016
First certiﬁ  cation from 2018 Issue 4
 
 
 
 
Summary of Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE  
in French specification  
Issue 4 changes 
If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, contact us via our website at: 
qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/contact-us.html. 
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this current issue Page 
number  
Assessment information for Paper 1 amended with updated guidance on how to 
access the recordings for Section A (listening) 
‘recordings will be issued as audio files via our Secure Download Service (SDS) prior 
to the exam’ 
11 
Administration and general information about the conduct of the speaking assessment 
amended with updated guidance on now to submit recordings of the speaking 
assessment 
‘Complete, unedited recordings of all assessments must be submitted to Pearson via 
the online Learner Work Transfer (LWT) portal’ 
38 
 
If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, contact us via our website at: 
qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/contact-us.html. 
 
 
 
 
Contents 
1 Introduction 2 
Why choose the Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French? 2 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this qualification 3 
Qualification at a glance 4 
2 Subject content and assessment information 7 
Themes and sub-themes 8 
Paper 1: Listening, reading and translation 10 
Paper 2: Written response to works and translation 12 
Paper 3: Speaking 19 
Assessment Objectives 40 
3 Administration and general information 41 
Entries 41 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special consideration and 
malpractice 41 
Student recruitment and progression 44 
Appendix 1: Independent research project form (RP3) 47 
Appendix 2: Prescribed literary texts and films 49 
Appendix 3: Grammar list 50 
Appendix 4: The context for the development of this qualification 53 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 55 
Appendix 6: Level 3 Extended Project qualification 56 
Appendix 7: Codes 58 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4 – January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
2 
1 Introduction 
Why choose the Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in 
French? 
We believe languages should appeal to all students. Our new Pearson Edexcel Level 3 
Advanced GCE in French has been developed to inspire all students who have an appreciation 
of the language, literature, film and culture of the French-speaking world. 
We’ve listened to feedback from the languages community – subject associations, academics 
and advisors, together with hundreds of teachers and students – and have designed a 
motivating course of study that will enable your students to develop an advanced level 
knowledge and understanding of the French language, the culture of France and other 
Francophone countries, as well as practical and valuable language and transferable study 
skills. This specification will help to prepare students for higher education and enhance their 
employability profile. 
Inspiring and engaging themes – our qualification features familiar and popular themes 
as well as some new content that provides clear links to some of the most fundamental and 
interesting aspects of the culture of the target language country and communities. 
Popular literary texts and films – we offer a rich choice of literary texts and films that 
includes contemporary and more classical titles, together with authentic source materials 
from France and the wider French-speaking world. 
Rewards creativity – our assessments place an emphasis on spontaneity and grammar, as 
well as providing plenty of opportunities for students to apply their knowledge independently 
and creatively. Clear mark schemes encourage students to develop ideas, use language to 
persuade and analyse, and give critical responses in their writing and speaking. 
Clear and coherent structure – our qualification has a straightforward structure with four 
engaging themes – Les changements dans la société française; La culture politique et 
artistique dans les pays francophones; L’immigration et la société multiculturelle française; 
L’Occupation et la Résistance. The four themes are studied alongside two works (either two 
literary texts or one literary text and one film) assessed through two externally-examined 
papers (Papers 1 and 2) and one teacher-examiner conducted speaking assessment 
(Paper 3). 
Manageable content – we have worked closely with teachers and students to ensure that 
our content is manageable and appropriate, so that you and your students can be confident 
that you have enough time to cover what you need to at the appropriate depth. 
Continuous progression – our content builds on the understanding developed at 
Key Stage 4 and AS Level and gives students the opportunity to learn and apply important 
transferable skills in critical thinking and analysis, enabling them to make a smooth 
transition to the next level of study. 
AS and A Level qualifications that are co-teachable – co-teaching AS and A Level 
provides flexibility for you and your students. Centres co-teaching AS and A Level can deliver 
Theme 1 and Theme 2 and one literary text or film in the first year, allowing students to be 
entered for the AS Level at the end of the year. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4– January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
3 
Supporting you in planning and implementing 
this qualification 
Planning 
● Our Getting Started Guide, available on our website, gives you an overview of the new 
A Level qualification to help you get to grips with the changes to content and assessment 
and to help you understand what these changes mean for you and your students. 
● We will give you an editable course planner and scheme of work that you can adapt to 
suit your department. 
● Our mapping documents highlight key differences between the new and 2008 
qualification. 
Teaching and learning 
There will be lots of free teaching and learning support to help you deliver the new 
qualifications, including: 
● support with the new literary text and film elements 
● suggested resource lists to help with the teaching of society and culture 
● support for the independent research project 
● support for spontaneous speaking. 
Preparing for exams 
We will also provide a range of resources to help you prepare your students for the 
assessments, including: 
● specimen papers to support formative assessments and mock exams 
● marked exemplars of student work with examiner commentaries 
ResultsPlus 
ResultsPlus provides the most detailed analysis available of your students’ exam 
performance. It can help you identify the topics and skills where further learning would 
benefit your students. 
Get help and support 
Our subject advisor service, led by Alistair Drewery, and online community will ensure that 
you receive help and guidance from us, and that you can share ideas and information with 
other teachers. You can sign up to receive e-newsletters to keep up to date with qualification 
updates and product and service news. 
Learn more at qualifications.pearson.com 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4 – January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
4 
Qualification at a glance 
Content and assessment overview 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French consists of two externally-examined 
papers assessing listening, reading and writing and a speaking assessment. The speaking 
assessment is externally set and conducted by a teacher-examiner*. All assessments are 
marked by Pearson. 
Students must complete their speaking assessment in April/May and all other assessments in 
May/June in any single year. 
*It is usual for teachers to conduct the speaking assessment with their students during a 
timetabled assessment window in April/May, although Pearson offers a visiting examiner 
facility. Timetable and fee information will be available on the Pearson qualifications website 
www.qualifications.pearson.com 
 
Paper 1: Listening, reading and translation (**Paper code: 9FR0/01) 
Written examination: 2 hours 
40% of the qualification 
80 marks 
Content overview 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all four themes. Themes are based on 
the society and culture of the language being studied and are listed on pages 8–9. 
Assessment overview 
Students are not permitted access to a dictionary during the examination. 
The examination is made up of: 
Section A: Listening (30 marks) 
A listening assessment based on a recording, featuring male and female French speakers. 
Students will respond to comprehension questions based on a variety of contexts and 
sources. 
The listening audio files for the sample assessment materials are available on our website. 
Section B: Reading (30 marks) 
A reading assessment based on a variety of text types and genres where students will have 
to respond to comprehension questions. 
Section C: Translation into English (20 marks) 
An unseen passage to be translated from French to English. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4– January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
5 
 
Paper 2: Written response to works and translation (**Paper code: 9FR0/02) 
Written examination: 2 hours and 40 minutes 
30% of the qualification 
120 marks 
Content overview 
This paper draws on the study of two discrete French works: either two literary texts, or one 
literary text and one film. The works must be taken from the list provided in Appendix 2: 
Prescribed literary texts and films. The literary texts listed include a range of novels, plays 
and a series of short stories. All of the films are feature length. 
Assessment overview 
This paper includes a translation exercise and two essays on either two literary texts, or one 
literary text and one film (students must not answer questions on two films). 
Students are not permitted access to a dictionary or any documentation relating to the works 
during the examination. 
Section A: Translation (20 marks) 
Students translate an unseen passage from English into French. 
Section B: Written response to works (literary texts) (50 marks) 
Students must write an extended response on either one or two of the literary texts listed in 
Appendix 2: Prescribed literary texts and films. 
Students select one question from a choice of two for each of their chosen literary text(s). If 
a student answers questions on two literary texts then they do not complete Section C. 
Section C: Written response to works (films) (50 marks) 
Students who answer only one question from a literary text in Section B must now write an 
extended response on one of the films listed in Appendix 2: Prescribed literary texts and 
films. 
Students select one question from a choice of two for their chosen film. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4 – January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
6 
 
Paper 3: Speaking (**Paper code: 9FR0/03) 
Internally conducted and externally assessed 
Total assessment time: between 21 and 23 minutes, which includes a single period 
of 5 minutes’ formal preparation time 
30% of the qualification 
72 marks 
Content overview 
Task 1 draws on vocabulary and structures across all four themes (listed on pages 8–9). 
Task 2 is based on independent research selected and carried out by the student. The 
research may be based on one of the themes or on the student’s own subject of interest 
related to the society and culture of the language studied. 
Students will be assessed on their ability to use a range of language accurately, 
communicate and interact effectively, summarise and analyse findings from written sources 
relating to their research subject, and show knowledge and understanding about the culture 
and society where the language is spoken. 
Assessment overview 
Students complete two tasks. Task 1 is worth 30 marks and Task 2 is worth 42 marks. 
Task 1 (discussion on a Theme) 
Students discuss one theme from the specification based on a stimulus containing two 
different statements. 
Task 2, Part 1 (independent research presentation) 
Students present a summary of at least two of the written sources they have used for their 
research and give a personal response to what they have read. 
Task 2, Part 2 (discussion on independent research) 
Students answer questions on their presentation and then have a wider discussion on their 
research. 
 
**See Appendix 7: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to this 
qualification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4– January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
7 
2 Subject content and assessment 
information 
Qualification aims and objectives 
The aims and objectives of this qualification are to enable students to: 
● enhance their linguistic skills and promote and develop their capacity for critical thinking 
on the basis of their knowledge and understanding of the language, culture and society of 
the country or countries where the language is spoken 
● develop control of the language system to convey meaning, using spoken and written 
skills, including an extended range of vocabulary, for both practical and intellectual 
purposes as increasingly confident, accurate and independent users of the language 
● develop their ability to interact effectively with users of the language in speech and in 
writing, including through online media 
● develop language learning skills and strategies, including communication strategies to 
sustain communication and build fluency and confidence 
● engage critically with intellectually stimulating texts, films and other materials in the 
original language, developing an appreciation of sophisticated and creative uses of the 
language and understanding them within their cultural and social context 
● develop knowledge about matters central to the society and culture, past and present, of 
the country or countries where the language is spoken 
● mediate between cultures and between speakers of the language and speakers of English 
● foster their ability to learn other languages 
● equip themselves with transferable skills such as autonomy, resourcefulness, creativity, 
critical thinking, and linguistic, cultural and cognitive flexibility that will enable them to 
proceed to further study or employment 
● develop their capacity for critical and analytical thinking through the language of study 
● develop as independent researchers through the language of study. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4 – January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
8 
Themes and sub-themes 
Papers 1 and 3 will be based on content from the following four themes. 
The four themes address a range of social issues and trends, as well as aspects of the 
political and artistic culture of France and French-speaking countries. 
Themes 1, 3, and 4 focus on aspects of society or history of France only. Theme 2 requires 
students to broaden their knowledge across any Francophone country/countries and/or 
community/communities. Each theme is broken into three sub-themes (highlighted in bold). 
These sub-themes are each exemplified further. 
Theme 1: Les changements dans la société française 
Theme 1 is set in the context of France only. This theme covers social issues and trends. 
● Les changements dans les structures familiales 
Les changements dans les attitudes envers le mariage, les couples et la famille. 
● L’éducation 
Le système éducatif et les questions estudiantines. 
● Le monde du travail 
La vie active en France et les attitudes envers le travail; le droit à la grève; l’égalité des 
sexes. 
Theme 2: La culture politique et artistique dans les pays 
francophones 
Theme 2 is set in the context of Francophone countries and communities. This theme covers 
artistic culture (through music and festivals and traditions) and political and artistic culture 
(through media). 
● La musique 
Les changements et les développements; l’impact de la musique sur la culture populaire. 
● Les médias 
La liberté d’expression; la presse écrite et en ligne; l’impact sur la société et la politique. 
● Les festivals et les traditions 
Les festivals, fêtes, coutumes et traditions. 
Theme 3: L’immigration et la société multiculturelle française 
Theme 3 is set in the context of France only. This theme covers social issues and trends. 
● L’impact positif de l’immigration sur la société française 
Les contributions des immigrés à l’économie et à la culture. 
● Répondre aux défis de l’immigration et de l’intégration en France 
Les activités des communautés; la marginalisation et l’aliénation du point de vue des 
immigrés. 
● L’extrême droite 
La montée du Front National; les leaders du Front National; l’opinion publique. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4– January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
9 
Theme 4: L’Occupation et la Résistance 
Theme 4 is set in the context of France only. This theme covers political culture. 
● La France occupée 
La collaboration; l’antisémitisme. 
● Le régime de Vichy 
Maréchal Pétain et la Révolution nationale. 
● La Résistance 
Jean Moulin, Charles de Gaulle et les femmes de la Résistance; l’implication des Français 
dans la Résistance. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4 – January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
10 
Paper 1: Listening, reading and translation 
Content 
Students will be assessed on their understanding of spoken and written French from a 
variety of types of authentic texts and listening material, as well as their ability to translate 
accurately from French into English. 
Texts and recordings vary in length to include some extended passages. All spoken and 
written materials are culturally relevant to France and French-speaking countries and are 
drawn from the four themes (listed on pages 8–9). 
Students should be able to: 
● understand main points, gist and detail from spoken and written material 
● infer meaning from complex spoken and written material 
● assimilate and use information from spoken and written sources, including material from 
online media 
● summarise information from spoken sources, reporting key points and subject matter 
● translate from French into English. 
Listening 
The listening section will be made up of spoken passages covering different registers and 
types, including authentic communication involving one or more male and female speakers. 
Sources will include material from online media. 
Reading 
The reading section will be made up of texts containing both factual and abstract content and 
will be authentic or adapted from authentic sources. The texts will include contemporary, 
historical, literary, fiction and non-fiction, written for different purposes and audiences. 
Translation into English 
The content of the translation will be taken from one of the four themes. 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2018. 
● The total assessment time is 2 hours. Recommended timings for each section are given 
below. 
● The assessment is out of 80 marks. 
● There are three sections in the paper, they cover the assessment of listening, reading and 
translation skills in French. 
● Students must answer all questions in each section (A, B and C). 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4– January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
11 
● For Section A (listening), 50 minutes (recommended timing), 30 marks:
o there are four questions in this section made up of multiple choice and open response, 
including questions testing summary skills; all questions are set in French and must be 
answered in French
o students will listen to a recording featuring French-language speakers who will speak at 
a speed appropriate for the expected understanding at this level
o recordings will be issued as audio files via our Secure Download Service (SDS) prior to 
the exam
o students will have individual control of the recording and may stop, revisit and replay 
sections of the recording as they wish.
● For Section B (reading), 50 minutes (recommended), 30 marks:
o students respond to five questions based on the texts provided
o questions comprise both multiple-choice questions and open-response questions; all 
questions are set in French and must be answered in French.
● For Section C (translation into English), 20 minutes (recommended), 20 marks:
o students are given one unseen text in French and must translate it into English.
Th
e recommended timings have been set to enable the student to complete each section in 
sufficient time. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and mark scheme for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 
Advanced GCE in French Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
The listening audio files are available on our website. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4 – January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
12 
Paper 2: Written response to works and translation 
Content 
Students should be able to: 
● develop a detailed understanding and appreciation of the works studied, by writing critical 
and analytical responses in the language of study to the works, taken from the prescribed 
list provided (see Appendix 2: Prescribed literary texts and films) 
● produce responses that show critical appreciation of features such as: 
o key concepts and issues; 
o characterisation; 
o form and technique of presentation, e.g. effect of narrative voice in prose text, effect of 
camera work in film; 
o social and cultural setting; 
as appropriate to the work studied 
● present viewpoints, develop arguments, draw conclusions, analyse and evaluate in writing 
● manipulate language accurately through translating an unseen passage from English into 
French. 
Students must study two discrete French works: either two literary texts, or one literary text 
and one film. The works must be taken from the list in Appendix 2: Prescribed literary texts 
and films. The literary texts listed include a range of novels, plays and a series of short 
stories. All of the films are feature length. The content of the translation will be a passage 
based on one of the four themes. 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2018. 
● The total assessment time is 2 hours and 40 minutes. Recommended timings for each 
section are given below. 
● The assessment is out of 120 marks. 
● There are two parts to this paper, Section A (translation into French) and Sections B and C 
(written response to works). 
● For Section A (translation into French), 30 minutes (recommended timing), 20 marks 
o students are given one unseen text in English and must translate it into French. 
● For Sections B and C (written response to works), 2 hours and 10 minutes, 100 marks 
o students must write two essays, either two selected from Section B (literary texts) or 
one selected from Section B (literary texts) and one from Section C (films) 
o there will be a choice of two questions for each literary text and film. It is recommended 
that, in order to give a detailed analysis of the work, students write between  
300–350 words for each essay, giving justified points of view, arguments and 
conclusions with evidence from the work. The whole essay will be marked regardless of 
length. 
o students are expected to provide a critical and analytical response by selecting relevant 
material form the works, presenting and justifying points of view, developing 
arguments, drawing conclusions based on understanding, and evaluating issues, 
themes and cultural and social contexts related to the works studied. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4– January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
13 
o no credit will be given for essays on literary texts which are based on film versions 
adapted from the literary texts. Evidence given in the essay to justify viewpoints and 
arguments must be based on the original literary text. 
● All questions will be set in French and must be answered in French. 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted. 
● Students must not take any documentation relating to the works into the examination. 
The recommended timings have been given to enable the student to complete each section 
in sufficient time. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and marking criteria (including guidance on how these criteria are applied) 
for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French Sample 
Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Marking guidance 
Marking guidance has been written to accompany the SAMs and is included with the SAMs 
booklet. Please note that this guidance is for the use of the Pearson-appointed external 
examiner. They are printed for reference in the specification to aid understanding of how the 
assessment criteria will be applied. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4 – January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
14 
Marking guidance for Paper 2: Written response to works and 
translation 
This marking guidance is for the use of Pearson-appointed external examiners. The guidance 
has been included for teacher reference to aid understanding of how the assessment criteria 
will be applied. 
Section A – Question 1 (translation) into assessed language 
This task is marked using a points-based mark scheme in which 1 mark is given for each 
correct individual section of language. Please see the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE 
in French Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document for an example of how the 
translation will be marked. 
Sections B and C – Questions 2 to 26 (written response to works) 
There are three levels-based mark grids to be applied to each individual essay that makes up 
the written response to works. The mark grids are: 
● Critical and analytical response (AO4) 
● Range of grammatical structures and vocabulary (AO3) 
● Accuracy of language (AO3). 
General guidance on using levels-based mark schemes 
Step 1: Decide on a band 
● The examiner will first of all consider the answer as a whole and then decide which 
descriptors most closely match the answer and place it in that band. The descriptors for 
each band indicate the different features that will be seen in the student’s answer for that 
band. 
● When assigning a level, the examiner will look at the overall quality of the answer and not 
focus disproportionately on small and specific parts of the answer where the student has 
not performed quite as well as the rest. If the answer covers different aspects of different 
bands of the mark scheme, the examiner will use a ‘best fit’ approach for defining the 
level and then use the variability of the response to help decide the mark within the level, 
for example if the response is predominantly band 5–8 with a small amount of band 9–12 
material, it would be placed in band 5–8 but be awarded a mark near the top of the band 
because of the band 9–12 content. 
Step 2: Decide on a mark 
● Once the examiner has decided on a band they will need to decide on a mark within the 
band. 
● They will decide on the mark to award based on the quality of the answer; they will award 
a mark towards the top or bottom of that band depending on how the student has 
evidenced each of the descriptor bullet points. 
● The examiner will modify the mark based on how securely the trait descriptors are met at 
that band. 
● They will need to go back through the answer as they apply the mark scheme to clarify 
points and assure themselves that the band and the mark are appropriate. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4– January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
15 
Critical and analytical response (AO4) 
● This mark grid assesses students’ ability to respond critically and analytically to the aspect 
of the literary work or film outlined in the question. To provide a critical and analytical 
response, students should select relevant material, present and justify points of view, 
develop arguments, draw conclusions based on understanding and evaluate issues, 
themes and cultural and social contexts. 
● This grid will be applied twice, once for each essay individually. 
● When deciding how to reward an answer, examiners will consult this mark grid as well as 
the indicative content associated with each question which can be found in the document 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs).  
Indicative content contains points that students are likely to use to construct their answer. 
It is possible for an answer to be constructed without mentioning some or all of these 
points as long as students provide alternative responses that fulfil the requirements of the 
question. 
 
Marks Description 
0 No rewardable material. 
1–4 ● Points of view relating to issues/themes/cultural or social contexts are presented, 
with simplistic justification; limited interpretation with frequent misunderstanding 
or confusion; any evidence from the work is descriptive. 
● Limited ability to form arguments or draw conclusions. 
● Response relates to the work but limited focus on the question. 
5–8 ● Points of view relating to issues/themes/cultural or social contexts are presented, 
with attempts made at interpretation, but they occasionally show 
misunderstanding or confusion; evidence selected from the work for justification 
is occasionally appropriate but often descriptive. 
● Arguments are made but with inconsistencies; conclusions are drawn but do not 
fully link to arguments. 
● Response relates to the work but often loses focus on the question. 
9–12 ● Critical analysis of issues/themes/cultural or social contexts is evident in relation 
to particular aspects of the question, with some appropriate interpretations and 
points of view, sometimes justified by appropriately selected evidence from the 
work. 
● Logical arguments are followed through on particular aspects of the question, 
occasionally detailed and with linked conclusions; some points are made without 
exploration. 
● Response is relevant to particular aspects of the question, occasional loss 
of focus. 
13–16 ● Critical analysis of issues/themes/cultural or social contexts is frequently 
demonstrated, with some convincing interpretations and points of view, 
predominantly justified with appropriately selected evidence from the work. 
● Generally detailed, logical arguments are made, with some persuasive 
conclusions that mostly link together. 
● Predominantly relevant response to the question. 
17–20 ● Critical analysis of issues/themes/cultural or social contexts is demonstrated 
through convincing interpretations and points of view, consistently justified with 
appropriately selected evidence from the work. 
● Detailed, logical arguments and conclusions are made that consistently link 
together. 
● Relevant response to the question throughout. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4 – January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
16 
Range of grammatical structures and vocabulary (AO3) 
● This mark grid assesses students’ ability to use a range of grammatical structures and 
vocabulary in order to produce articulate written communication with a range of 
expression. 
● This grid will be applied twice, once for each essay individually. 
 
Marks Description 
0 No rewardable language. 
1–4 ● Limited variation of straightforward grammatical structures with much 
repetition, producing writing that is often restricted and stilted. 
● Limited range of vocabulary resulting in repetitive expression. 
● Limited use of terminology appropriate to literary and cinematic analysis. 
5–8 ● Occasional variation in use of mostly straightforward grammatical structures, 
infrequent use of complex language, producing writing that is sometimes 
stilted. 
● Vocabulary is mostly high frequency with occasional variation, expression is 
frequently repetitive. 
● Occasional use of terminology appropriate for literary and cinematic analysis. 
9–12 ● Some variation in the use of grammatical structures, including some recurrent 
examples of complex language; sections of articulate writing with occasionally 
stilted phrasing. 
● Some variation in use of vocabulary, resulting in variation of expression but 
this is not sustained. 
● Some use of terminology appropriate for literary and cinematic analysis. 
13–16 ● Frequent variation in use of grammatical structures, including different types 
of complex language, producing writing that is articulate throughout the 
majority of the essay. 
● Frequently varied use of vocabulary, resulting in regular variation of 
expression. 
● Frequent use of terminology appropriate for literary and cinematic analysis. 
17–20 ● Consistent variation in use of grammatical structures, including in use of 
complex language, producing consistently articulate writing. 
● Consistently varied use of vocabulary, allowing ideas to be conveyed in a 
variety of different ways. 
● Consistent use of terminology appropriate for literary and cinematic analysis. 
Additional guidance 
Variation of vocabulary and grammatical structures: the traits in the mark grid 
differentiate between the variation of grammatical structures and vocabulary used by 
students. Examiners will judge in which mark band to place students and which mark to 
award, based on the effect that the variety of grammatical structures and vocabulary has on 
the quality of the communication; the wider the variety, the more articulate the 
communication will become (see definition of articulate below).  
Examples of a variety of grammatical structures and vocabulary are: a selection of different 
verbs, tenses, adjectives, vocabulary, including to express literary and cinematic analysis 
(see further detail below), complex language (see definition below) for a variety of purposes, 
including to present and justify points of view, develop arguments, draw conclusions based 
on understanding. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4– January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
17 
Articulate: articulate communication is fluent, effective and coherent as students  
control/manipulate the language to say what they want to say rather than what they can 
say, for a number of different purposes. If students are restricted to what they can say, they 
may not be able to express themselves for all purposes, for example to develop arguments. 
Terminology for literary and cinematic analysis: vocabulary for critical analysis 
according to the work being studied, for example ‘plot’, ‘character’; figures of speech such as 
‘metaphor’, ‘similes’; to describe theme and style such as, ‘camera technique’, ‘hand-held 
camera’, ‘use of black and white’, ‘first person narrative.’ 
Complex language is considered to include the following: 
● conceptually challenging tenses such as the pluperfect, future perfect 
● passive voice 
● subjunctive mood 
● use of relative pronouns 
● using extended sentences to express abstract ideas/convey justified arguments that 
require a range of lexis and structures, for example conjunctions and pronouns 
● using synonyms and a variety of expressions to say things in different ways 
● all grammar and structures included in the grammar list that are specific to A Level. 
Straightforward language is considered to be: 
● simple sentences with limited linking of sentences and clauses 
● high frequency grammatical structures and vocabulary. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4 – January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
18 
Accuracy of language (AO3) 
● This mark grid assesses students’ ability to apply grammar and syntax accurately. 
● This grid will be applied twice, once for each essay individually. 
 
Marks Description 
0 No rewardable language. 
1–2 ● Limited sequences of accurate language resulting in lapses in coherence. 
● Errors occur that often prevent meaning being conveyed. 
3–4 ● Some accurate sequences of language resulting in some coherent writing. 
● Errors occur that sometimes hinder clarity of communication and occasionally 
prevent meaning being conveyed. 
5–6 ● Frequent sequences of accurate language resulting in generally 
coherent writing. 
● Errors occur that occasionally hinder clarity of communication  
7–8 ● Accurate language throughout most of the essay, resulting in mostly coherent 
writing. 
● Errors occur that rarely hinder clarity of communication. 
9–10 ● Accurate language throughout, resulting in consistently coherent writing. 
● Any errors do not hinder clarity of communication. 
Additional guidance 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the 
possessive adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4– January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
19 
Paper 3: Speaking 
Content 
Students should be able to demonstrate: 
● knowledge and understanding of the cultural context by giving ideas, examples and 
information on one of the themes and on a chosen subject of interest they have 
researched linked to the social and cultural context of the language studied 
● the ability to analyse aspects of the cultural context by presenting and justifying valid 
arguments, viewpoints and conclusions 
● the ability to interact and hold a natural and fluent discourse 
● skill in manipulating language accurately 
● the ability to respond to written language in speech. 
These aspects are assessed via two distinct tasks conducted entirely in the target language, 
which are carried out in consecutive order in one session. 
Task 1 (discussion on a theme) 
Content for this task will be based on any one of the twelve sub-themes from one of the four 
overall themes listed on pages 8–9 of the specification. Students will be able to choose one 
out of two sub-themes to discuss and this choice will be given to them on the day. Stimulus 
cards will be given as a springboard to the discussion, which the teacher-examiner will then 
broaden onto other sub-themes of the wider Theme. 
Task 2 (presentation and discussion on student’s independent research project) 
This task is in two parts. Content for this task will be based on the subject of interest that 
students have chosen for their independent research project. This may be based on any of 
the four themes of study listed on pages 8–9 of the specification or on a subject of interest of 
the student’s choosing. However, it must relate to the cultural and social context of the 
language studied. 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: April/May 2018. 
● Timing for the speaking assessment: 
o Task 1: 6 to 7 minutes (recommended) 
o Task 2: 10 to 11 minutes (recommended) 
o Total assessment time: 21 to 23 minutes, (16 to 18 minutes of speaking plus 5 
minutes’ preparation time for Task 1). 
Recommended timings have been given for each task to enable the student to complete 
each one in sufficient time to access the full range of assessment criteria for both tasks. 
● The assessment is out of 72 marks. 
● Students complete two tasks – Task 1 is worth 30 marks and Task 2 is worth 42 marks. 
● Assessments will be conducted by teacher-examiners in centres in one session within a 
prescribed five-week assessment period. This will take place in April and May in any single 
year. Dates for the assessment period will be confirmed in the UK Information Manual at 
the start of each academic year. The assessment period will not always be continuous or 
be the same period each year, for example it will need to accommodate the Easter break, 
which changes each year. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4 – January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
20 
Allocation of stimulus cards 
● The invigilator uses the sequencing grid provided by Pearson to allocate the choice of 
sub-themes to the student. The stimulus cards based on the sub-themes are issued in the 
order prescribed by Pearson. Neither the invigilator nor the teacher-examiner chooses the 
order of the cards. 
● The invigilator gives the student a choice in English of two sub-themes, using the wording 
for the sub-themes given on the sequencing grid, for example: ‘You may choose 'media' or 
'education’. The student does not see the content of the stimulus card at this stage. 
● The sub-themes will come from two of the four overall themes listed on pages 8–9. There 
is a stimulus card for each sub-theme. There are 12 stimulus cards in total  
(three per theme). 
● Once the student has chosen their sub-theme, the invigilator gives the student the 
corresponding stimulus card. This happens immediately before the preparation 
time begins. 
Roles of the teacher-examiner and invigilator 
● As well as supervising students during their 5 minutes’ preparation time, the invigilator is 
responsible for giving students the choice of two sub-themes for the assessment, based 
on the sequencing grid provided by Pearson (see example sequencing grid in General 
instructions to the teacher-examiner included in the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced 
GCE in French Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document). 
● The teacher-examiner is responsible for conducting the assessment. They are not 
responsible for providing the stimulus cards. 
Preparation time and notes 
● The preparation time of 5 minutes begins immediately after the student receives the card. 
Students have 5 minutes to prepare to speak about their card.  
● The preparation time must be supervised and must take place immediately before the 
assessment takes place. It must take place outside of the examination room with an 
invigilator. 
● Each stimulus card contains two statements (A and B) offering different views on the 
sub-theme. Students select one statement from the two given on the stimulus card during 
their 5-minute preparation time. Students give their views on the statement during the 
discussion. 
● Students are permitted to make notes (up to a maximum of one side of A4) during the 
5-minute preparation time. Students may refer to these notes during the assessment. The 
notes should be used for reference only, and students should not read out whole, 
prepared sentences. Students are not permitted to write on the stimulus cards. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4– January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
21 
Task 1 (discussion on a theme) 
● Task 1 follows immediately after the 5 minutes’ preparation time so that students can 
recall their prepared thoughts easily. 
● The student must tell the teacher-examiner which statement they have chosen 
immediately before the discussion begins. 
● Students have approximately 6 to 7 minutes’ discussion time for this task. 
● There are two parts to the discussion. 
o Part 1: the teacher-examiner asks the two compulsory questions in the order that they 
appear on the card. The compulsory questions may be repeated but rephrasing is not 
allowed. The teacher-examiner then helps to develop the discussion by asking 
appropriate follow-up questions relating to the statement on the stimulus card. 
o Part 2: the teacher-examiner then broadens the discussion to cover other aspects of 
the overall theme. Optional generic questions are provided by Pearson as a guide to the 
questions the teacher-examiner should ask in order to enable the student to meet the 
requirements of the assessment criteria, i.e. to elicit examples and information to 
demonstrate their knowledge and understanding of the cultural and social context and 
to analyse aspects of the research topic by developing and justifying arguments and 
forming conclusions. 
Task 2 (presentation and discussion on student’s independent research project) 
● Students have approximately 10 to 11 minutes for this task. 
● There are two parts to this task. 
o Part 1: The discussion must open with a presentation from the student in which they 
provide a summary of at least two of the written sources they have used as part of their 
research, outlining the authors’ main points/ideas and giving a personal response to 
what they have read. The presentation must not exceed two minutes. In this part of 
the task, students are assessed on their ability to respond in speech to written sources. 
o Part 2: The discussion must be broadened out to a wider exploration of the content of 
the student’s presentation and of their research as a whole. The teacher-examiner 
should use the key findings and list of sources on Form RP3 in Appendix 1: Independent 
research form (RP3) to help them formulate their own questions. Optional generic 
questions are provided by Pearson as a guide to the questions the teacher-examiner 
should ask in order to enable the student to meet the requirements of the assessment 
criteria, i.e. to elicit examples and information to demonstrate their knowledge and 
understanding of the cultural and social context and to analyse aspects of the theme by 
developing and justifying arguments and forming conclusions. 
In both tasks, students are expected to ask questions that elicit opinions as part of the 
natural discourse and to confirm that their own points of view have been understood (see 
guidance provided on Elicit points of view/check for understanding beneath the mark grids 
for Interaction (AO1) in the specification and the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in 
French Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. Students are also expected to take 
the lead in the discussions. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4 – January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
22 
The teacher-examiner will cover all parts of each task and ask appropriate questions to 
ensure that the student is able to access the maximum amount of marks available. The 
speaking assessment will last between 16 to 18 minutes (plus 5 minutes’ preparation time) 
and the teacher-examiner will ensure that timings are followed. The timing of the 
assessment begins with the student’s first utterance in relation to Task 1. Once the 
maximum stipulated assessment time has passed, the teacher-examiner will bring the 
assessment to a natural end, allowing the student to complete their last sentence. They will 
turn off the recording device at that point. Centres should be aware that students will not 
receive any marks for any conversation that takes place beyond the maximum time allowed.  
Guidance on the independent research project 
For the purposes of the assessment, independent research means research carried out 
without the help or instruction of others, including teachers. 
The independent research project may be based on any of the four themes of study or on a 
subject of interest of the student’s choosing, but must relate to the cultural and social 
context of the language studied. 
The independent research project must not be based on one of the literary works or films 
studied for Paper 2 but can focus on a wider exploration of the author or film-maker of those 
works studied. For example, if studying a novel by a particular author for Paper 2, the 
independent research must not focus on that novel as it would be a duplication of content. 
However, it could focus on the life of the author or the aspects that motivated the author in 
the broader sense. 
The independent research project must: 
● be based on a question or statement defined and developed by the student individually to 
investigate a particular area of interest specifically related to the culture and/or society of 
one of the target language countries or communities 
● include evidence of the student’s research findings, investigated independently, from a 
range of authentic sources, including the internet 
● enable the student independently to contextualise, analyse and summarise findings 
● enable the student to identify at least two written sources, which they can summarise and 
give a personal response to in their presentation. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4– January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
23 
The table below gives guidance on the process that could be followed. 
Stage Description 
1 Pre-Independent 
Research  
● Teacher instruction on how to conduct research, teacher gives 
advice on suitable resources and how to analyse information. 
● Initial conversations with the teacher on possible questions or 
statements that the student may use for their independent 
research project. 
● Subsequent to the above, the student should independently 
develop the focus of their question or statement. 
● The teacher checks that the student’s question or statement will 
allow the student to access the full range of marks. 
2 Independent 
Research 
● The student conducts research to find and select appropriate 
sources (including written sources). 
● The teacher monitors the project by giving general feedback. 
3 Analysis of 
information 
● Students record the 6–10 key findings of their research on  
Form RP3 and prepare to give information about and analyse their 
findings, ensuring that all material is clearly linked to the target 
language culture. 
● In preparation for their two-minute presentation, students 
prepare to summarise the main points/ideas from at least two of 
the written sources they have used as part of their research and 
to give a relevant personal response. 
 
It is recommended that students start on the identification stage as early as possible in the 
academic year. However, learning hours for the independent research project are not 
specified because the process of information collation and investigation is undertaken 
independently. Students should be prepared to talk in detail about their subject of interest 
for 10-11 minutes. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4 – January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
24 
Controls relating to student independence and teacher guidance to 
students for the independent research project 
Teachers can: 
● give guidance on developing research skills (including methodology and analytical tools) 
● give guidance on selecting a subject and question or statement for the student’s 
independent research project 
● explain what independence means (see definition in Guidance on the independent 
research project) 
● comment on the suitability of the area of research (availability of resources, time 
constraints) 
● give guidance and advice on completing Form RP3 
● advise and direct students to the assessment objectives 
● provide a selection of resources for student access. 
Teachers must: 
● confirm that the question or statement has the potential to meet the requirements of the 
assessment criteria and offer general guidance on any necessary amendments 
● ensure that the question or statement does not correspond with one of the literary works 
or films that the student has studied for Paper 2. Teachers will be able to identify this from 
the information given on Form RP3. Students will receive a mark of zero for Task 2 if their 
independent research project focuses on a work studied for Paper 2 
● review each student’s Form RP3. Teachers should ensure that the research can suitably 
access the specification requirements and give general guidance on the methodology and 
analytical tools that the student could use 
● promote good practice such as referencing and using a bibliography system 
● sign the student’s Form RP3 before the examination to declare that the independent 
research project is wholly the student’s work 
● monitor the different research projects being undertaken in a centre to ensure that 
independence is being maintained. If more than one student chooses to research the 
same topic, the teacher must ensure that each student has a different question or 
statement and therefore an independent focus. 
Teachers must not: 
● give students a choice of questions or statements from which they then choose, including 
a group question or statement for whole-class research 
● give detailed feedback or guidance to individual students about how to improve their work 
to meet the requirements of the assessment criteria. The guidance provided should only 
enable students to take the initiative in making amendments, rather than detailing what 
amendments should be made 
● rehearse or provisionally assess the student’s presentation and give feedback so that the 
student may then improve it 
● provide access to, or rehearse, questions that will be used in the assessment of the 
student’s independent research. 
If the above is not adhered to, the awarding organisation will investigate this as a potential 
case of malpractice. If malpractice is found to have taken place, a penalty will be applied 
dependent on the circumstances and severity of the malpractice. 
For full information regarding malpractice, please see the section entitled Malpractice on 
page 43 of the specification and the JCQ document Suspected Malpractice in Examinations 
and Assessments 2015–16. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4– January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
25 
Students must: 
● initiate and conduct their own research and develop their research skills when 
investigating their subject of personal interest 
● include written sources for their research that are in the assessed language (students 
must refer to at least two written sources in their presentation); these could include 
newspaper and magazine articles, online written sources, journals, literary texts and any 
other suitable written source that can be referenced. However, students can use and refer 
to other authentic sources they have used in their research during the discussion that 
follows the presentation. These could include films, television, radio, online audio-visual 
material and interviews 
● complete and sign the independent research project form and submit it no later than three 
weeks in advance of the date of the assessment (see Appendix 1: Independent research 
project form (RP3)). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4 – January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
26 
Marking guidance for Paper 3: Speaking 
This marking guidance is for the use of Pearson-appointed external examiners. The guidance 
has been included for teacher reference to aid understanding of how the assessment criteria 
will be applied. 
There are a number of levels-based mark schemes to be applied to both tasks. 
General guidance on using levels-based mark schemes 
Step 1: Decide on a band 
● First of all, the examiner will consider the answer as a whole and then decide which 
descriptors most closely match the answer and place it in that band. The descriptors for 
each band indicate the different features that will be seen in the student’s answer for 
that band. 
● When assigning a band, the examiner will look at the overall quality of the answer and not 
focus disproportionately on small and specific parts of the answer where the student has 
not performed quite as well as the rest or indeed has performed temporarily better. If the 
answer covers different aspects of different bands of the mark scheme, they will use a 
‘best fit’ approach for defining the band. They will then use the variability of the response 
to help decide the mark within the band, for example if the response is predominantly 
band 4–6 with a small amount of band 7–9 material, it would be placed in band 4–6 but 
be awarded a mark near the top of the band because of the band 7–9 content. 
Step 2: Decide on a mark 
● Once the examiner has decided on a band they will then need to decide on a mark within 
the band. 
● The examiner will decide the mark to award based on the quality of the answer; they will 
award a mark towards the top or bottom of that band depending on how the student has 
evidenced each of the descriptor bullet points. 
● The examiner will modify the mark based on how securely the trait descriptors are met at 
that band. 
● The examiner will need to go back through the answer as they apply the mark scheme to 
clarify points and to ensure that the band and the mark are appropriate. 
Guidance on timing of the speaking assessment 
The speaking assessment should last between 16 to 18 minutes. The timing of the 
assessment begins with the candidate’s first utterance in relation to Task 1. Once the 
maximum stipulated assessment time has passed, the teacher-examiner must bring the 
assessment to a natural end, allowing the candidate to complete their last sentence.  
The examiner must stop marking at the end of the sentence once the maximum assessment 
time has passed, even if the recorded conversation has gone beyond the maximum time. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4– January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
27 
Task 1 (discussion on a Theme) 
Three mark grids are applied to Task 1: 
● knowledge and understanding of society and culture (AO4) 
● accuracy and range of language (AO3) 
● interaction (AO1). 
Knowledge and understanding of society and culture (AO4) 
This grid assesses the students’ ability to communicate information about and demonstrate 
appreciation of different aspects of culture and society related to the countries/communities 
where the language is spoken. They are also assessed on their ability to respond critically 
and analytically to different aspects of the culture and society by selecting relevant material, 
presenting and justifying points of view, developing arguments, drawing conclusions based 
on understanding and evaluating issues, themes and cultural and social contexts. 
When deciding how to reward an answer, examiners will consult both this mark grid as well 
as the AL speaking Task 1: indicative content associated with each question. This is 
included in the document Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French Sample 
Assessment Materials (SAMs). Indicative content contains points that students are likely to 
use to construct their answer. It is possible for an answer to be constructed without 
mentioning some or all of these points, as long as students provide alternative responses 
that fulfil the requirements of the question. 
 
Marks Description 
0 No rewardable material. 
1–3 ● Occasionally relevant, straightforward ideas, mostly generalised, occasionally 
supported by information/examples/references; frequent loss of focus on the 
cultural and social context. 
● Occasional evidence of analysis; points of view are given with limited 
justification, arguments may be made but not developed, occasionally leading 
to straightforward conclusions that may be contradictory; mainly relies on 
description rather than analysis. 
4–6 ● Relevant, straightforward ideas sometimes supported by 
information/examples/references; some loss of focus on the cultural and 
social context. 
● Some analysis of the cultural and social context is evident, with 
straightforward arguments and points of view which are sometimes developed 
and justified, sometimes drawing straightforward conclusions; relies on 
description rather than analysis in places. 
7–9 ● Relevant, occasionally perceptive ideas frequently supported by pertinent 
information/examples/references; focus predominantly maintained on the 
cultural and social context. 
● Analysis of cultural and social context demonstrated by frequently developed 
and justified arguments and viewpoints, often drawing convincing conclusions. 
10–12 ● Relevant, perceptive ideas consistently supported by pertinent 
information/examples/references; consistently focused on the cultural and 
social context. 
● Analysis of cultural and social context demonstrated by consistently developed 
and justified arguments and viewpoints, drawing convincing conclusions. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4 – January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
28 
Additional guidance 
Perceptive demonstrates an in-depth understanding by making connections between ideas 
and information; goes beyond the standard, predictable response; shows insight/originality. 
Ideas include thoughts, feelings, impressions, opinions. 
Straightforward ideas, arguments, conclusions are deemed to be those that give the 
standard, predictable response. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4– January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
29 
Task 1 (discussion on a Theme) (continued) 
Accuracy and range of language (AO3) 
This mark grid assesses students’ ability to use a range of grammatical structures and 
vocabulary in order to produce articulate communication with a range of expression. It also 
assesses students’ ability to apply grammar and syntax accurately and accuracy of 
pronunciation 
 
Marks Description 
0 No rewardable language. 
1–3 ● Limited variation in the use of grammatical structures and vocabulary, limited 
or repetitive use of complex and idiomatic language, occasional variation of 
expression; communication is sometimes restricted/stilted. 
● Limited sequences of accurate language; often errors occur that hinder clarity 
of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed. 
● Pronunciation and intonation are inconsistent, leading to occasional impairment 
in communication. 
4–6 ● Some variation in the use of grammatical structures and vocabulary, with use of 
some repetitive complex and idiomatic language, resulting in some variation of 
expression; some sequences of articulate communication. 
● Accurate sequences of language, resulting in some coherent speech; sometimes 
errors occur that hinder clarity of communication. 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible though sometimes inaccurate. 
7–9 ● Frequent variation in use of grammatical structures and vocabulary, including 
examples of complex and idiomatic language, resulting in frequent variation of 
expression and frequent sequences of articulate communication. 
● Accurate language throughout most of the conversation, resulting in generally 
coherent speech; errors occur but rarely hinder clarity of communication. 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible and mostly accurate. 
10–12 ● Consistent variation in use of grammatical structures and vocabulary, including 
different types of complex structures and idiomatic language, expressing ideas 
in a variety of ways, resulting in articulate communication. 
● Accurate language throughout resulting in coherent speech that is immediately 
understandable; any errors do not hinder clarity of the communication. 
● Pronunciation and intonation are accurate, intelligible and authentic sounding. 
Additional guidance 
Complex language is considered to include the following: 
● conceptually challenging tenses such as the pluperfect, future perfect 
● passive voice 
● subjunctive mood 
● use of relative pronouns 
● using extended sentences to express abstract ideas/convey justified arguments that 
require a range of lexis and structures, for example conjunctions and pronouns 
● using synonyms and a variety of expressions to say things in different ways 
● all grammar and structures included in the grammar list that are specific to A Level. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4 – January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
30 
Variation in use of grammatical structures and vocabulary: the traits in the mark grid 
differentiate between the variation of grammatical structures and vocabulary used by 
students. Examiners should judge in which mark band to place students and which mark to 
award, based on the effect that the variety of grammatical structures and vocabulary has on 
the quality of the communication; the wider the variety, the more articulate the 
communication will become (see definition of articulate below).  
Examples of a variety of grammatical structures and vocabulary are: a selection of different 
verbs, tenses, adjectives, vocabulary and complex language (see above for definition of 
complex language) for a variety of purposes such as to present and justify points of view, 
develop arguments, draw conclusions based on understanding and evaluating issues. 
Articulate: articulate communication is fluent, effective and coherent as students control/ 
manipulate the language to express with some ease what they want to say for a number of 
different purposes. If students are restricted by their language skills they may not be able to 
express themselves for all purposes, for example to develop arguments. 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free speech in order to access the 
top band. The mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have 
on clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the listener from the content of what is being said. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make speech difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood) or errors that force listeners to strain to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the 
possessive adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the listener from the content of what is 
being said.  
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message  
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, i.e. using the incorrect person or the 
verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are provided as examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4– January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
31 
Task 1 (discussion on a Theme) (continued) 
Interaction (AO1) 
This mark grid assesses students’ ability to interact with the examiner by giving relevant 
responses based on what they have heard, by initiating communication and eliciting points of 
view. 
 
Marks Description 
0 No rewardable material. 
1–2 ● Interacts with occasional spontaneity to some questions and statements, but 
requires frequent prompting; occasionally able to sustain the conversation, 
using communication strategies if necessary; frequent hesitation. 
● Occasionally initiates communication but development often relies on the 
examiner’s lead; may elicit points of view/check for understanding, though 
this may appear contrived. 
3–4 ● Interacts spontaneously for extended sections of the conversation, 
responding mostly with assurance but needing occasional prompting; able to 
sustain most of the conversation, using communication strategies if 
necessary; occasional hesitation. 
● Initiates communication by frequently taking the lead to develop the 
conversation; elicits points of view/checks for understanding although 
occasionally at an inappropriate moment. 
5–6 ● Interacts spontaneously throughout, responding with assurance to questions 
and statements; able to sustain conversation throughout, using 
communication strategies if necessary; minimal hesitation. 
● Initiates communication by consistently taking the lead to develop the 
conversation; elicits points of view/checks for understanding naturally and 
appropriately at different points in the conversation. 
Additional guidance 
Interacts spontaneously: responds to questions and statements that arise as a natural 
part of the conversation; gives a relevant, impromptu response based on what they have 
heard. 
Communication strategies: strategies that aid communication and allow the conversation 
to be sustained, for example rephrasing, circumlocution, adjusting the message, asking for 
clarification/repetition, repair strategies such as self-correction; these strategies enable 
students to deliver the message when exact vocabulary or expressions are not known. 
Elicit points of view/check for understanding: as part of the language of genuine 
discourse, students are required to engage the examiner in the conversation by asking for 
their points of view and checking that their own point of view has been understood. They are 
expected to do this throughout the speaking assessment at appropriate points during the 
conversation. This constitutes questions such as: 
● Seriez-vous d’accord avec moi? 
● N’est-il pas correct de penser que…? 
● Peut-on dire que…? 
● Que pensez-vous de...? 
● Est-ce que vous me comprenez? 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4 – January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
32 
The timing of the assessment means that the teacher-examiner should contribute only brief 
opinions in response to these types of questions, in order to give students the maximum 
length of assessment time. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4– January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
33 
Task 2, Part 1 (independent research presentation) 
One mark grid is applied to this part of the task: 
● responding to written language in speech (AO2). 
Responding to written language in speech (AO2) 
This grid is used to assess the student’s two-minute presentation only, it is not applied to 
the discussion that follows the presentation. This mark grid assesses students’ ability to 
understand and respond in speech to written language that is drawn from a variety of 
sources and to summarise information from written sources in speech. The written sources 
will be those that students read as part of their independent research and they must refer to 
at least two named written sources during their presentation. 
For guidance on what might be included in the presentation and how it may be structured, 
see Indicative content for Task 2 Part 1, independent research presentation in the 
document Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French Sample Assessment Materials 
(SAMs) 
 
Marks Description 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Summary makes limited reference to named written sources, makes 
generalised comments rather than being focused on authors’ main 
points/ideas. 
● Gives a personal response with limited justification, loses focus on the 
written sources, straying into general opinion. 
Responses that refer to just one single written source can be awarded a 
maximum of 3 marks only. 
4–6 ● Summary refers to named written sources but lacks clarity or is uneven in 
its coverage of authors’ main points/ideas. 
● Gives a mostly relevant personal response with occasional justification, 
some loss of focus on the written sources. 
7–9 ● Presents a mostly clear summary of named written sources, generally clear 
outline of authors’ main points/ideas. 
● Gives a relevant personal response to the written sources supported with 
some justification. 
10–12 ● Presents a clear summary of named written sources, giving a clear outline 
of authors’ main points/ideas. 
● Gives a convincing personal response to the written sources supported with 
clear justification. 
Additional guidance 
Personal response: this is considered to be giving justified opinions, demonstrating 
engagement with the written sources by making focused comments, giving a reaction 
to/expressing feelings and thoughts about the written sources. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4 – January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
34 
Task 2, Part 2 (discussion on independent research) 
Three mark grids are applied to this part of the task: 
● knowledge and understanding of society and culture (AO4) 
● accuracy and range of language (AO3) 
● interaction (AO1). 
Knowledge and understanding of society and culture (AO4) 
This grid assesses students’ ability to communicate information about and demonstrate 
appreciation of different aspects of culture and society related to the countries/communities 
where the language is spoken. They are also assessed on their ability to respond critically 
and analytically to different aspects of the culture and society by selecting relevant material, 
presenting and justifying points of view, developing arguments, drawing conclusions based 
on understanding and evaluating issues. 
 
Marks Description 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Occasionally relevant, straightforward ideas, mostly generalised, 
occasionally supported by information/examples/references; frequent loss 
of focus on the cultural and social context. 
● Occasional evidence of analysis; points of view are given with limited 
justification, arguments may be made but not developed, occasionally, 
leading to straightforward conclusions which may be contradictory; mainly 
relies on description rather than analysis. 
4–6 ● Relevant, straightforward ideas sometimes supported by 
information/examples/references; some loss of focus on the cultural and 
social context. 
● Some analysis of the cultural and social context is evident, with 
straightforward arguments and points of view that are sometimes 
developed and justified, sometimes drawing straightforward conclusions; 
relies on description rather than analysis in places. 
7–9 ● Relevant, occasionally perceptive ideas frequently supported by pertinent 
information/examples/references; focus predominantly maintained on the 
cultural and social context. 
● Analysis of cultural and social context demonstrated by frequently 
developed and justified arguments and viewpoints, often drawing 
convincing conclusions. 
10–12 ● Relevant, perceptive ideas consistently supported by pertinent 
information/examples/references; consistently focussed on the cultural and 
social context. 
● Analysis of cultural and social context demonstrated by consistently 
developed and justified arguments and viewpoints, drawing convincing 
conclusions. 
Additional guidance 
Perceptive demonstrates an in depth understanding by making connections between ideas 
and information; goes beyond the standard, predictable response; shows insight/originality. 
Ideas include thoughts, feelings, impressions, opinions. 
Straightforward ideas, conclusions, arguments are deemed to be those that give the 
standard, predictable response. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4– January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
35 
Task 2, Part 2 (discussion on independent research) (continued) 
Accuracy and range of language (AO3) 
This mark grid assesses students’ ability to use a range of grammatical structures and 
vocabulary in order to produce articulate communication with a range of expression. It also 
assesses students’ ability to apply grammar and syntax accurately and accuracy of 
pronunciation. 
 
Marks Description 
0 No rewardable language 
1–3 ● Limited variation in the use of grammatical structures and vocabulary, 
limited or repetitive use of complex and idiomatic language, occasional 
variation of expression; communication is sometimes restricted/stilted. 
● Limited sequences of accurate language; often errors occur that hinder 
clarity of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed. 
● Pronunciation and intonation are inconsistent, leading to occasional 
impairment in communication. 
4–6 ● Some variation in the use of grammatical structures and vocabulary, with 
use of some repetitive complex and idiomatic language, resulting in some 
variation of expression; some sequences of articulate communication. 
● Accurate sequences of language, resulting in some coherent speech; 
sometimes errors occur that hinder clarity of communication. 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible though sometimes inaccurate. 
7–9 ● Frequent variation in use of grammatical structures and vocabulary, 
including examples of complex and idiomatic language, resulting in frequent 
variation of expression and frequent sequences of articulate communication. 
● Accurate language throughout most of the conversation, resulting in 
generally coherent speech; errors occur but rarely hinder clarity of 
communication. 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible and mostly accurate. 
10–12 ● Consistent variation in use of grammatical structures and vocabulary, 
including different types of complex structures and idiomatic language, 
expressing ideas in a variety of ways, resulting in articulate communication. 
● Accurate language throughout resulting in coherent speech that is 
immediately understandable; any errors do not hinder clarity of the 
communication. 
● Pronunciation and intonation are accurate, intelligible and authentic-
sounding. 
Additional guidance 
Complex language is considered to include the following: 
● conceptually challenging tenses such as the pluperfect, future perfect 
● passive voice 
● subjunctive mood 
● use of relative pronouns 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4 – January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
36 
● using extended sentences to express abstract ideas/convey justified arguments that 
require a range of lexis and structures, for example conjunctions and pronouns 
● using synonyms and a variety of expressions to say things in different ways 
● all grammar and structures included in the grammar list that are specific to A Level. 
Variation in use of grammatical structures/varied use of vocabulary: the traits in the 
mark grid differentiate between the variation of grammatical structures and vocabulary used 
by students. Examiners should judge in which mark band to place students and which mark 
to award, based on the effect that the variety of grammatical structures and vocabulary has 
on the quality of the communication; the wider the variety, the more articulate the 
communication will become (see definition of articulate below). 
Examples of a variety of grammatical structures and vocabulary are: a selection of different 
verbs, tenses, adjectives, vocabulary and complex language (see definition above) for a 
variety of purposes such as to present and justify points of view, develop arguments, draw 
conclusions based on understanding and evaluating issues. 
Articulate: articulate communication is fluent, effective and coherent as students 
control/manipulate the language to express with some ease what they want to say for a 
number of different purposes. If students are restricted to what they can say, they may not 
be able to express themselves for all purposes, for example to develop arguments. 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free speech in order
 to access the 
top band. The mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have 
on clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the listener from the content of what is being said. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make speech difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood) or errors that force listeners to strain to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the 
possessive adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the listener from the content of what is 
being said. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message  
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, i.e. using the incorrect person or the 
verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are provided as examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4– January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
37 
Task 2, Part 2 (discussion on independent research) (continued) 
Interaction (AO1) 
This mark grid assesses students’ ability to interact with the examiner by giving relevant 
responses based on what they have heard, by initiating communication and eliciting points of 
view. 
 
Marks Description 
0 No rewardable material. 
1–2 ● Interacts with occasional spontaneity to some questions and statements, but 
requires frequent prompting; occasionally able to sustain the conversation, 
using communication strategies if necessary; frequent hesitation. 
● Occasionally initiates communication but development often relies on the 
examiner’s lead; may elicit points of view/check for understanding, though 
this may appear contrived. 
3–4 ● Interacts spontaneously for extended sections of the conversation, 
responding mostly with assurance but needing occasional prompting; able to 
sustain most of the conversation, using communication strategies if 
necessary; occasional hesitation. 
● Initiates communication by frequently taking the lead to develop the 
conversation; elicits points of view/checks for understanding although 
occasionally at an inappropriate moment. 
5–6 ● Interacts spontaneously throughout, responding with assurance to questions 
and statements; able to sustain conversation throughout, using 
communication strategies if necessary; minimal hesitation. 
● Initiates communication by consistently taking the lead to develop the 
conversation; elicits points of view/checks for understanding naturally and 
appropriately at different points in the conversation. 
Additional guidance 
Interacts spontaneously: responds to questions and statements that arise as a natural part 
of the conversation; gives a relevant, impromptu response based on what they have heard. 
Communication strategies: strategies that aid communication and allow the conversation 
to be sustained, for example rephrasing, circumlocution, adjusting the message, asking for 
clarification/repetition, repair strategies such as self-correction; these strategies enable 
students to deliver the message when exact vocabulary or expressions are not known. 
Elicit points of view/check for understanding: as part of the language of genuine 
discourse, students are required to engage the examiner in the conversation by asking for 
their points of view and checking that their own point of view has been understood. They are 
expected to do this throughout the speaking assessment at appropriate points during the 
conversation. This constitutes questions such as: 
● Seriez-vous d’accord avec moi? 
● N’est-il pas correct de penser que…? 
● Peut-on dire que…? 
● Que pensez-vous de...? 
● Est-ce que vous me comprenez? 
The timing of the assessment means that the teacher-examiner should contribute only brief 
opinions in response to these types of questions, in order to give students the maximum 
length of assessment time. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4 – January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
38 
Administration and general information about the conduct of 
the speaking assessment 
General information 
● A pack of assessment materials will be sent to centres in advance of the prescribed  
five-week assessment period, which is during April and May. This must be kept in secure 
conditions by the Examinations Officer until it is given to the teacher-examiner responsible 
for the conduct of the speaking assessment. Students must not gain access to these 
materials before the assessment commences. 
● The teacher/examiner may open the pack three working days before the prescribed five 
week assessment period, in order to be familiar with the material and to prepare 
questions in advance. The assessment materials in this pack must not be removed from 
the centre premises. 
● The teacher-examiner responsible for the conduct of the speaking assessments is required 
to preserve the confidentiality of the examining materials: these materials must be 
handed back to the Examinations Officer on completion of the tests and must be kept 
secure. 
● Complete, unedited recordings of all assessments must be submitted to Pearson via the 
online Learner Work Transfer (LWT) portal. 
● All assessments will be marked against assessment criteria that can be found in the 
specification and the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French Sample 
Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
● Centres must have procedures in place to verify the identity of all students at the time of 
the assessment. They need to confirm this in the Form RP3 in Appendix 1: Independent 
research form (RP3). Centres are required to submit to Pearson one completed Form RP3 
for each student in the cohort. 
Preparation time and notes 
● The notes made during the preparation time should be a reference only, and students 
should not read out whole, prepared sentences. 
● The preparation time must be supervised. It must take place outside of the room with an 
invigilator. As well as supervising students during their 5 minutes’ preparation time, the 
invigilator is responsible for informing students of the two sub-themes from which they 
can make their choice and for giving them the correct stimulus card based on that choice. 
● A teacher who teaches the subject being examined or a senior member of teaching staff 
who has had overall responsibility for the candidates preparation for the examination 
cannot act as an invigilator during the examination (JCQ document Instructions for 
conducting examinations, 2015–2016, paragraph 6.3, page 18). 
● Students are not permitted to write on the stimulus card. 
● Students must return their notes and stimulus card to the teacher-examiner at the end of 
the assessment. 
● Any notes made during the preparation time must be kept securely by the centre until the 
end of October. 
● Students cannot have access to a dictionary, or any other resource, during the preparation 
time. 
● The teacher-examiner must test that both the machine used for recording the speaking 
assessment and the backup machine are working before the assessment begins. Both 
machines should be used in order to mitigate against any problems with the recordings, 
and recordings should be checked after the assessment to ensure they have worked. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4– January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
39 
Independent research project form 
● Students must submit Form RP3 to the teacher, or to Pearson if the centre is using a 
visiting examiner, no later than three weeks before the date of the assessment, outlining 
the findings from the sources they have used for their research. 
● The list of sources must include at least two written sources. 
● The purpose of the form is to provide sufficient information for the teacher-examiner to 
conduct a discussion; students will not be assessed on the contents of Form RP3. 
● The summary of the 6 to 10 key research findings is to be completed by the student in 
English in advance, on Form RP3. 
● Students will be required to declare the literary work(s) and/or film studied for Paper 2 on 
Form RP3 so the teacher-examiner can ensure that there is no repetition of this material 
in Task 2. Students and teachers must sign a declaration on Form RP3 to confirm all work 
is the student’s own. 
Students are allowed to refer to their Form RP3 in Task 2, but they are not allowed to write 
additional notes on it. It will be checked by the teacher-examiner in the examination room. 
Visiting examiners 
It is usual for teachers to conduct the speaking assessment with their students during a 
timetabled assessment window in April/May, although Pearson offers a visiting examiner 
facility. Timetable and fee information will be available on our website. 
Sample assessment materials 
Sample student and teacher-examiner cards for the tasks and marking criteria (including 
guidance of how these criteria are applied) can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 
Advanced GCE in French Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Marking guidance has been written to accompany the SAMs and is included with the SAMs 
booklet. Please note that this guidance is for the use of the Pearson-appointed external 
examiners, who will mark the assessments. They are printed for reference only so as to aid 
understanding of how the criteria is applied. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4 – January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
40 
Assessment Objectives 
 
Students must: 
% in GCE 
A Level 
AO1 Understand and respond: 
● in speech to spoken language including face-to-face interaction 
● in writing to spoken language drawn from a variety of sources 
20 
AO2 Understand and respond: 
● in speech to written language drawn from a variety of sources 
● in writing to written language drawn from a variety of sources 
30 
AO3 Manipulate the language accurately, in spoken and written forms, 
using a range of lexis and structure 
30 
AO4 Show knowledge and understanding of, and respond critically and 
analytically to, different aspects of the culture and society of 
countries/communities where the language is spoken 
20 
Total 100% 
 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
Paper 
Assessment Objectives Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives AO1 % AO2 % AO3 % AO4 % 
Paper 1: Listening, reading 
and translation 
15 25 __ __ 40% 
Paper 2: Written response to 
works and translation 
__ __ 20 10 30% 
Paper 3: Speaking 5 5 10 10 30% 
Total for GCE A Level 20 30 30 20 100% 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4– January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
41 
3 Administration and general information 
Entries 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for this qualification can be found in 
our UK Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations officers and is 
available on our website. 
Discount code and performance tables 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more than one GCE qualification with 
the same discount code will have only one of the grades they achieve counted for the 
purpose of the school and college performance tables. This will be the grade for the larger 
qualification (i.e. the A Level grade rather than the AS grade). If the qualifications are the 
same size, then the better grade will be counted (please see Appendix 7: Codes). 
Students should be advised that if they take two GCE qualifications with the same discount 
code, colleges, universities and employers they wish to progress to are likely to take the 
view that this achievement is equivalent to only one GCE. The same view may be taken if 
students take two GCE qualifications that have different discount codes but have significant 
overlap of content. Students or their advisers who have any doubts about their subject 
combinations should check with the institution they wish to progress to before embarking on 
their programmes. 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, 
special consideration and malpractice 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our Equality Policy requires all students to 
have equal opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our qualifications 
to be awarded in a way that is fair to every student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the Equality Act 2010) are not, 
when they are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in comparison to 
students who do not share that characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification and that 
this achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their peers. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be in French. All student work must be in French, except 
the translation in Paper 1 (Section C), which requires a response in English. 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with special 
educational needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to: 
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the assessment. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4 – January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
42 
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an individual 
student with a disability, without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding bodies comply with the duty under the 
Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students will 
then know what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for assessment. 
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable adjustments 
where a person with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in undertaking an 
assessment. The awarding organisation is required to take reasonable steps to overcome 
that disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be unique to that individual and, 
therefore, might not be in the list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of factors, 
which will include: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding 
organisation, timeframes or affects the security or integrity of the assessment. This is 
because the adjustment is not ‘reasonable’. 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student's mark or grade to 
reflect temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the 
examination/assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a material 
effect on a student’s ability to take an assessment or demonstrate their level of attainment in 
an assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to apply for access arrangements 
and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special 
consideration, please refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4– January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
43 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that compromises or seeks to 
compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in examinations must be reported to Pearson using a JCQ Form M1 
(available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The should be emailed to 
candidatemalpractice@pearson.com. Please provide as much information and supporting 
documentation as possible. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies 
with Pearson. 
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and maladministration of 
our qualifications. As with student malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is any act that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the 
integrity of the qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported 
immediately, before any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson on a JCQ Form 
M2a (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form, supporting 
documentation and as much information as possible should be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions 
lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the document 
General and Vocational Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments Policies and Procedures, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice. 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to comply with the requirements of 
Ofqual's General Conditions of Recognition. 
The raw marks for Paper 1 and 3 in this qualification will be scaled by Pearson to represent 
the relative weighting of 40% for Paper 1 and 30% for Paper 3.  
Paper  Weighting  Raw marks Scaling factor Scaling mark 
1 40% 80 2.00 160 
2 30% 120 1.000 120 
3 30% 72 1.667 120 
This A Level qualification will be graded and certificated on a six-grade scale from A* to E 
using the total subject mark. Individual papers are not graded. 
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum judged by Pearson to be of 
sufficient standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U result. 
The first certification opportunity for this qualification will be 2018. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4 – January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
44 
Student recruitment and progression 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this qualification. 
Students who would benefit most from studying this qualification are likely to have a Level 2 
qualification such as a GCSE in French. 
Progression 
This qualification offers a suitable progression route from GCSE and AS Level, focusing on 
the development of all four language skills, listening, speaking, reading and writing. 
Grammar and the mastering of linguistic features are key elements of this qualification as is 
the inclusion of authentic written and spoken sources, responding through writing to 
literature and film, and independent research. 
Students are expected to be able to develop knowledge and understanding of the social 
issues and trends and political and artistic culture of the target language country and 
communities. They should be able to express and justify their own opinions, develop 
arguments, and persuade, in speech and writing, building on the fluency and spontaneity 
developed at Key Stages 3 and 4. 
The skill of translation will be developed from those skills practised at Key Stages 3 and 4. 
The range of topics promotes a clear progression in grammar, vocabulary and cultural 
knowledge and understanding from Key Stages 3 and 4, and will increase linguistic and 
cognitive demand. The grammar list illustrates the level required for this qualification. 
This qualification offers a suitable progression route to further study at university level. In 
addition, the study of one language at GCE can facilitate and help promote the learning of 
other languages. The qualification may also add to an individual’s employability profile, 
particularly for UK organisations trading overseas as well as with international companies 
based in the UK and globally. Students can progress to a wide range of careers in areas such 
as journalism and media, education, science, medicine, the civil service, sales, marketing, 
retail and charities. 
Students will be able to apply their knowledge, skills and understanding to authentic, real-life 
contexts. They will develop transferable skills that support study of other GCE subjects, 
higher education study, and the transition to employment, together with an understanding 
and appreciation of French-speaking countries and their cultures. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4– January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
45 
 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Independent research project form (RP3) 47 
Appendix 2: Prescribed literary texts and films 49 
Appendix 3: Grammar list 50 
Appendix 4: The context for the development of this qualification 53 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 55 
Appendix 6: Level 3 Extended Project qualification 56 
Appendix 7: Codes 58 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4 – January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
46 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4– January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
47 
 
 
Appendix 1: Independent research project 
form (RP3) 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French (9FR0/03) 
Centre name: Centre number: 
Candidate name: Candidate number: 
Examination series: 
Research question/statement: 
 
a) This form must be submitted no later than three weeks in advance of the 
date of the assessment. Candidates are permitted to take a copy of this form 
into the assessment but they are not allowed to write additional notes on it. 
Key findings of research: You must provide 6 to 10 findings in English 
1 
 
6 
2 
 
7 
3 
 
8 
4 
 
9 
5 
 
10 
 
List of sources: The following sources were used during the course of conducting the 
independent research (students must include at least two written sources, which students 
must refer to during their presentation in Task 2) 
Full title of article/journal/literary 
text/film/other 
Author and date (if applicable) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Please continue on a separate sheet if necessary. 
The independent research project must not be based on one of the literary works or films studied 
for Paper 2. Students will receive a mark of zero for Task 2 if their independent research project 
focuses on a work studied for Paper 2. 

 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4 – January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
48 
Students must write the works studied below. 
Declaration of works studied for Paper 2 
Paper 2 literary texts/film studied: 
(1) ...................................................................................................................... 
(2) ...................................................................................................................... 
 
Candidate declaration: I declare that the material I have used for my independent research 
project is not based on either of the works studied for Paper 2. I declare that the work submitted 
for this assessment is my own. I have clearly referenced any sources used in the work. I 
understand that false declaration is a form of malpractice. I agree to my work being used to 
support professional development, online support and training of teachers and examiners. 
 
Candidate signature: …………………………………………………Date: ……………………………………………… 
 
 
Teacher declaration: I declare that this work is solely that of the candidate and that it has been 
carried out in line with Pearson and JCQ documentation for the conduct of the examinations. I 
agree to this work being used to support teachers and examiners. 
 
Teacher signature: ………………………………………………………Date: ……………………………………………… 
 
If you need any advice on completing the form, please email: 
languagesassessment@pearson.com 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4– January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
49 
Appendix 2: Prescribed literary texts and 
films 
For Paper 2, students are required to study two works from the list below. This can be either 
two literary texts or one literary text and one film. 
Literary texts 
● Boule de Suif et autres contes de guerre (Boule de Suif, Un Duel, Deux Amis, La Mère 
Sauvage), Guy de Maupassant, 1880 (short stories) 
● La Place, Annie Ernaux, 1983 (novel) 
● Le Blé en Herbe, Colette, 1923 (novel) 
● Le Château de ma Mère, Marcel Pagnol, 1957 (novel) 
● Le Gone du Chaâba, Azouz Begag, 2005 (novel) 
● Les Mains Sales, Jean-Paul Sartre, 1948 (play) 
● Les Petits Enfants du siècle, Christiane Rochefort, 1961 (novel) 
● Le Tartuffe, Molière, 1669 (play) 
● L’Étranger, Albert Camus, 1942 (novel) 
● No et Moi, Delphine de Vigan, 2007 (novel) 
● Thérèse Desqueyroux, François Mauriac, 1927 (novel) 
● Une si longue lettre, Mariama Bâ, 1981 (novel) 
● Un Sac de Billes, Joseph Joffo, 1973 (novel) 
Films 
● Au Revoir les Enfants, dir. Louis Malle (1987) 
● Chocolat, dir. Claire Denis (1988) 
● Cléo de 5 à 7, dir. Agnès Varda (1962) 
● Deux Jours, une Nuit, dirs. Jean-Pierre Dardenne, Luc Dardenne (2014) 
● Entre les murs, dir. Laurent Cantet (2008) 
● Intouchables, dirs. Oliver Nakache, Eric Toledano (2011) 
● La Haine, dir. Mathieu Kassovitz (1995) 
● La Vie en Rose, dir. Olivier Dahan (2007) 
● Le Dernier Métro, dir. Françöis Truffaut (1980) 
● Les Choristes, dir. Christophe Barratier (2004) 
● Les 400 Coups, dir. Françöis Truffaut (1959) 
● Un Long Dimanche de Fiançailles, dir. Jean-Pierre Jeunet (2004) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4 – January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
50 
Appendix 3: Grammar list 
Students at A Level are expected to have studied the grammatical system and structures of 
the language during their course. Knowledge of the grammar and structures specified for 
GCSE is assumed. 
In the examination, students will be required to use, actively and accurately, grammar and 
structures appropriate to the tasks set, drawn from the following lists. The mention of an 
item in these lists implies knowledge of both its forms and its functions at an appropriate 
level of accuracy and complexity. 
The examples in italics in parentheses are indicative, that is they serve to illustrate the part 
of speech or structure that the students must know and hence do not represent an 
exhaustive specification of the required grammatical knowledge. For items marked (R), 
receptive knowledge only is required.  
Nouns 
● Gender 
● Singular and plural forms 
Articles 
● Definite, indefinite and partitive 
Adjectives 
● Agreement 
● Position 
● Comparative and superlative 
● Use of adjectives as nouns (e.g. le vieux, les Anglais) 
● Demonstrative (ce, cet, cette, ces) 
● Indefinite (including autre, chaque, même, quelque) 
● Possessive (mon, ma, mes, etc.) 
● Interrogative and exclamatory (quel, quelle, quels, quelles) 
Numerals 
● Cardinal (e.g. un, deux) 
● Ordinal (e.g. premier, deuxième) 
● Expression of time and date 
Adverbs 
● Formation of adverbs in –ment 
● Comparative and superlative 
● Interrogative (including combien (de), comment, où, pourquoi, quand) 
Quantifiers/intensifiers 
● Including assez, beaucoup, moins, plus, la plupart, plusieurs, presque, tant, très, trop 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4– January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
51 
Pronouns 
● Personal: subject, including on 
● Object: direct and indirect 
● Disjunctive/emphatic personal, as subject and object: moi/moi-même, etc. 
● Position and order 
● Reflexive 
● Relative (including qui, que, dont, lequel etc., auquel etc., ce qui, ce que) 
● Demonstrative (celui, celle, ceux, celles; and celui-ci/celui-là etc.) 
● Indefinite (including quelqu’un, quelque chose) 
● Possessive (le mien etc.) 
● Interrogative (including qui, que, quoi) 
● Use of y, en 
Verbs 
● Conjugation of regular -er, -ir, -re verbs, modal verbs, principal irregular verbs, including 
reflexive verbs 
● Agreement of verb and subject 
● Use of il y a 
● Modes of address (tu, vous) 
● Impersonal verbs 
● Constructions with verbs 
o Verbs followed by an infinitive (with or without a preposition) 
● Dependent infinitives (faire réparer) (R) 
● Perfect infinitive 
● Negative forms 
● Interrogative forms 
● Use of tenses 
o present 
o perfect (including agreement of past participle) 
o imperfect 
o future 
o conditional 
o future perfect 
o conditional perfect 
o pluperfect 
o past historic (R) 
● Use of the infinitive, present participle (e.g. en arrivant) and past participle 
● Verbal paraphrases and their uses (including aller + infinitive, venir de + infinitive) 
● Passive voice 
o present tense 
o other tenses (R) 
● Dependent infinitives (faire réparer) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4 – January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
52 
● Passive voice: all tenses 
● Subjunctive mood: 
o present (common uses, for example, after expressions of possibility, necessity, 
obligation and after conjunctions such as bien que) 
o perfect tense 
o imperfect tense (R) 
Prepositions 
● All prepositions, both simple (e.g. sous) and complex (e.g. au-delà de) 
Conjunctions 
● Coordinating conjunctions (e.g. et, ou, mais) 
● Subordinating conjunctions 
Negation 
● Use of negative particles (e.g. ne...pas, ne...personne, ne...que) 
● Use of ne with negative subjects (e.g. Personne n’est venu) 
Questions 
Commands  
Word order 
● Inversion after speech 
● Inversion after adverbs 
Other constructions 
● Time expressions with depuis and il y a 
● Comparative constructions 
● Indirect speech 
Discourse markers 
● e.g. Au contraire, En fait 
Fillers 
● e.g. alors, bon 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4– January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
53 
Appendix 4: The context for the 
development of this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] and our 
ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
● reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with those 
taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
● consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including higher-education 
academics and teachers to ensure this qualification is suitable for a UK context 
● reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in their 
documents GCE Qualification Level Conditions and Requirements and GCSE/GCE Subject 
Level Conditions and Requirements for Modern Languages (French, German, Spanish), 
published in May 2015. 
 
 
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification Principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
● demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning and 
measuring higher-order skills 
● rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and valid 
assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in end users of the knowledge, skills 
and competencies of certified students 
● inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students develop at 
different rates and have different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
● empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills, see Appendix 5: 
Transferable skills. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4 – January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
54 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
May 2014 
  The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important change to the 
education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications will assist them in 
helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an ‘Expert 
Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or because of 
our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the world as diverse as 
Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification development 
process that has included: 
● Extensive international comparability of subject content against the highest-performing 
jurisdictions in the world 
● Benchmarking assessments against UK and overseas providers to ensure that they are at 
the right level of demand 
● Establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-specific 
expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
● Subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future oriented. The 
design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, meaning learner outcomes 
have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a learner’s 
success in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident that we have 
supported the development of qualifications that are outstanding for their coherence, 
thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as representing world-class best 
practice.     
  
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Lee Sing Kong 
Director, National Institute of Education, 
Singapore 
  
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
  
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
All titles correct as at May 2014 
“ 
” 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4– January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
55 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently flagged the 
need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable them to respond with 
confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines skills, or 
competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that can be learned and 
that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform an activity or task and can be 
built upon and extended through learning.’[1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected and 
evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this process, we 
identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the most evidence-based and 
robust skills framework. We adapted the framework slightly to include the Program for 
International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT Literacy and Collaborative Problem Solving 
(CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves the following[2]. 
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve general 
cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and communicate[3]. 
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, speaking communication, written communication, 
assertive communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, service 
orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared understanding, 
taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team organisation. 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work stress, 
adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, and physical 
adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual teams, 
work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and able to acquire 
new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher education, 
as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the teaching and learning of 
this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning materials, developed with 
stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
 
[1]  OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012) 
[2]  Koenig J A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop (National 
Academies Press, 2011) 
[3]  PISA – The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy (2011) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4 – January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
56 
Appendix 6: Level 3 Extended Project 
qualification 
What is the Extended Project? 
The Extended Project is a stand-alone qualification that can be taken alongside GCEs. It 
supports the development of independent learning skills and helps to prepare students for 
their next step – whether that be higher education or employment. The qualification: 
● is recognised by higher education for the skills it develops 
● is worth half of an Advanced GCE qualification at grades A*–E 
● carries UCAS points for university entry. 
The Extended Project encourages students to develop skills in the following areas: research, 
critical thinking, extended writing and project management. Students identify and agree a 
topic area of their choice for in-depth study (which may or may not be related to a GCE 
subject they are already studying), guided by their teacher. 
Students can choose from one of four approaches to produce: 
● a dissertation (for example an investigation based on predominantly secondary research) 
● an investigation/field study (for example a practical experiment) 
● a performance (for example in music, drama or sport) 
● an artefact (for example creating a sculpture in response to a client brief or solving an 
engineering problem). 
The qualification is non-examination assessment based and students are assessed, in 
English, on the skills of managing, planning and evaluating their project. Students will 
research their topic, develop skills to review and evaluate the information, and then present 
the final outcome of their project. 
The Extended Project has 120 guided learning hours (GLH) consisting of a 40-GLH taught 
element that includes teaching the technical skills (for example research skills) and an 
80-GLH guided element that includes mentoring students through the project work. The 
qualification is 100% internally assessed and externally moderated. 
How to link the Extended Project with languages 
The Extended Project creates the opportunity to develop transferable skills for progression to 
higher education and to the workplace, through the exploration of either an area of personal 
interest or a topic of interest from within the language qualification content. The project 
must be written in English. 
Through the Extended Project, students will develop skills that support their study of French, 
including: 
● conducting, organising and using research 
● independent reading in the subject area 
● planning, project management and time management 
● defining a hypothesis to be tested in investigations or developing a design brief 
● collecting, handling and interpreting data and evidence 
● evaluating arguments and processes, including arguments in favour of alternative 
interpretations of data and evaluation of experimental methodology 
● critical thinking. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4– January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
57 
In the context of the Extended Project, critical thinking refers to the ability to identify and 
develop arguments for a point of view or hypothesis and to consider and respond to 
alternative arguments. This supports the development of evaluative skills, through 
evaluating different arguments, and using qualitative and quantitative evidence to support 
informed judgements and propose evidence-based solutions to issues. 
Types of Extended Project related to languages 
Students may produce a dissertation on any topic that can be researched and argued, for 
example a controversial issue such as ‘marriage for all’, ‘secularism’, ‘the impact of 
immigration’ or the ‘role of Europe’. 
A dissertation might involve an investigation such as: 
● the impact of English language on the French music industry 
● an investigation into the success of the different education systems in France. 
The dissertation uses secondary research sources to provide a reasoned defence or a point of 
view, with consideration of counter-arguments. 
An alternative might be an investigative project or field study involving the collection of data 
from primary research, for example: 
● a study of the impact of emigration on the local community in a Francophone country 
● a statistical survey of changing social attitudes towards using digital devices for reading 
the news in France. 
A field study might consider an issue that lends itself to primary research, for example an 
investigation into the impact of government subsidies on the French film industry. 
Using the Extended Project to support breadth and depth 
In the Extended Project, students are assessed on the quality of the work they produce and 
the skills they develop and demonstrate through completing this work. Students should 
demonstrate that they have extended themselves in some significant way beyond what they 
have been studying in French. Students can demonstrate extension in one or more 
dimensions: 
● deepening understanding – where a student explores a topic in greater depth than in the 
specification content. This could be an in-depth exploration of one aspect of the themes 
● broadening skills – where a student learns a new skill. This might be learning how to 
design a website or learning a new statistical technique that can be used in the analysis of 
either primary or secondary data collected by the student 
● widening perspectives – where the student’s project spans different subjects. A student 
studying French with business may wish to research the impact of tourism on a particular 
region or locality. A student studying French with history may wish to analyse the impact 
of the French Revolution on today’s society. 
Information to support the delivery and assessment of the Extended Project, including the 
specification, can be found on our website. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in French – Specification 
Issue 4 – January 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
58 
Appendix 7: Codes 
 
Type of code Use of code Code 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for performance 
tables is assigned a discount code 
indicating the subject area to which it 
belongs. 
Please see the GOV.UK 
website* 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an 
Ofqual Regulated Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) code. 
The RQF code is known as a Qualification 
Number (QN). This is the code that 
features in the DfE Section 96 and on the 
LARA as being eligible for 16–18 and 19+ 
funding, and is to be used for all 
qualification funding purposes. The QN will 
appear on students’ final certification 
documentation. 
The QN for this 
qualification is: 
601/8702/5 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to 
enter students for a qualification. Centres 
will need to use the entry codes only when 
claiming students’ qualifications. 
A Level – 9FR0 
Paper codes These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be 
entered for individual papers. 
Paper 1: 9FR0/01 
Paper 2: 9FR0/02 
Paper 3: 9FR0/03 
 
*www.gov.uk/government/publications/key-stage-4-qualifications-discount-codes-and-point-
scores 
 
 
 
DB091221 9781446948835_GCE2016_AL_FRENCH_ISSUE4.DOC.1–64/0 
 
 
About Pearson 
Pearson is the world's leading learning company, with 22,500 employees in more than 
70 countries working to help people of all ages to make measurable progress in their lives 
through learning. We put the learner at the centre of everything we do, because wherever 
learning flourishes, so do people. Find out more about how we can help you and your 
learners at qualifications.pearson.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This specification is Issue 4. We will inform centres of any changes to this issue. The latest 
issue can be found on the Pearson website: qualifications.pearson.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References to third party material made in this specification are made in good faith. Pearson 
does not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may 
be subject to change, or any opinions expressed therein. (Material may include textbooks, 
journals, magazines and other publications and websites.) 
 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
 
ISBN 978 1 446 94883 5 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2022 
 
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office:  80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121