Speciﬁ  cation
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese
(listening, reading and writing) (9JA0)
First teaching from September 2018
First certiﬁ  cation from 2020
A Level
Japanese
Japanese
Issue 2
 
 
About Pearson 
We are the world’s leading learning company operating in countries all around the world. We 
provide content, assessment and digital services to learners, educational institutions, 
employers, governments and other partners globally. We are committed to helping equip 
learners with the skills they need to enhance their employability prospects and to succeed in 
the changing world of work. We believe that wherever learning flourishes so do people. 
References to third party materials made in this specification are made in good faith. Pearson 
does not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may 
be subject to change, or any opinions expressed therein. (Materials may include textbooks, 
journals, magazines and other publications and websites.) 
 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
 
ISBN 978 1 446 94711 1 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2024 
  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese 
specification  
Issue 2 changes 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this current issue Page 
number 
Subject advisor name removed: 
‘Our subject advisor service and online community will ensure that you receive help 
and guidance from us...’ 
3 
Update to the language of questions and answers in Paper 1: 
‘For Section B (reading), 45 minutes (recommended timing), 20 marks: 
● Students respond to four question in English based on the Japanese texts 
provided.’ 
‘For Section C (writing), 1 hour and 25 minutes (recommended timing), 40 marks: 
● students read one unseen text in Japanese 
● students respond to a statement in Japanese based on the research subject;…' 
Removal of the following bullet point: 
● ‘All questions in Sections B and C are set in Japanese and must be answered in 
Japanese.’ 
11 
Update to the language of questions and answers in Paper 2: 
‘All questions in sections B and C will be set in both Japanese and English, but must 
be answered in Japanese.’ 
22 
Update to language of questions and answers in Paper 3: 
‘For Section A (listening), 45 minutes (recommended timing), 30 marks: 
● There are four questions in English in this section made up of multiple choice and 
open-response questions, including questions testing summary skills.’ 
Removal of Section A in the following bullet point: 
● ‘All questions in Section B are set in Japanese and must be answered in 
Japanese.’ 
29 
Update to the language of assessment information: 
‘Assessment of this qualification will be in Japanese and English. Student responses 
to the translation in Paper 1 (Section A) and comprehension questions in Paper 1 
(Section B) and Paper 3 (Section A) will be in English. All other student responses 
must be in Japanese.’ 
35 
 
If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, contact us via our 
website at: qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/contact-us.html. 
  
 
 
  
 
 
Contents 
1 Introduction 2 
Why choose the Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese? 2 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this qualification 3 
Qualification at a glance 4 
2 Subject content and assessment information 7 
Paper 1: Translation into English, reading comprehension and writing  
(research question) 10 
Paper 2: Translation into Japanese and written response to works 21 
Paper 3: Listening, reading and writing 28 
Assessment Objectives 34 
3 Administration and general information 35 
Entries 35 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special consideration  
and malpractice 35 
Student recruitment and progression 38 
Appendix 1: Prescribed literary texts and films 42 
Appendix 2: Grammar list 43 
Appendix 3: Kanji list 46 
Appendix 4: The context for the development of this qualification 48 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 50 
Appendix 6: Level 3 Extended Project qualification 51 
Appendix 7: Codes 53 
 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
2 
1 Introduction 
Why choose the Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE 
in Japanese? 
We believe languages should appeal to all students. Our new Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE 
in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) has been developed to inspire all students to 
have an appreciation of the language, literature, film and culture of Japan. 
We’ve listened to feedback from the languages community – subject associations, academics 
and advisors, together with teachers and students – and have designed a motivating course 
of study that will enable your students to develop advanced level knowledge and 
understanding of the Japanese language, the culture of Japan, as well as practical and 
valuable language and transferable study skills. This specification will help to prepare 
students for higher education and enhance their employability profile. 
Inspiring and engaging themes – our qualification features familiar and popular themes, 
as well as some new content that provides clear links to some of the most fundamental and 
interesting aspects of the culture of Japan. 
Popular literary texts and films – we offer a choice of literary texts and films that includes 
contemporary and more classic titles. 
Rewards creativity – our assessments place an emphasis on communication and grammar, 
as well as providing plenty of opportunities for students to apply their knowledge 
independently and creatively. Clear mark schemes encourage students to develop ideas, use 
language to persuade and analyse, and give critical responses in their writing. 
Clear and coherent structure – our qualification has a straightforward structure with four 
engaging themes: 変わっていく若者の生活; 変わっていく文化; 変わっていく人
生観; 東日本大震災後の日本 
The four themes are studied alongside two works (either two literary texts or one literary 
text and one film) and are assessed through three externally-examined papers. 
Manageable content – we have worked closely with teachers and students to ensure that 
our content is manageable and appropriate so that you and your students can be confident 
that you have enough time to cover what you need to at the appropriate depth. 
Continuous progression – our content builds on the understanding developed at  
Key Stage 4 and gives students the opportunity to learn and apply important transferable 
skills in critical thinking and analysis, enabling them to make a smooth transition to the next 
level of study. However, students do not need to have studied GCSE Japanese to follow this 
course. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
3 
Supporting you in planning and implementing 
this qualification 
Our Getting Started Guide, available on our website, gives you an overview of the new 
A Level qualification to help you get to grips with the changes to content and assessment 
and to help you understand what these changes mean for you and your students. 
Teaching and learning 
There will be lots of free teaching and learning support to help you deliver the new 
qualification, including: 
● support with teaching literature and film 
● support for the independent research. 
ResultsPlus 
ResultsPlus provides the most detailed analysis available of your students’ examination 
performance. It can help you identify the topics and skills where further learning would 
benefit your students. 
Get help and support 
Our subject advisor service and our online community will ensure that you receive help and 
guidance from us, and that you can share ideas and information with other teachers. You can 
sign up to receive e-newsletters to keep up to date with qualification updates and product 
and service news. 
Learn more at qualifications.pearson.com 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
4 
Qualification at a glance 
Content and assessment overview 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
consists of three externally-examined papers that assess listening, reading and writing skills. 
These assessments will be set and marked by Pearson. 
Students must complete all assessments in May/June in any single year. 
Paper 1: Translation into English, reading comprehension and writing (research 
question) (*Paper code: 9JA0/01) 
Written examination: 2 hours and 30 minutes 
40% of the qualification 
80 marks 
Content overview 
Section A draws on vocabulary and structures from any one of the sub-themes within the 
four themes listed on pages 8–9. 
Section B draws on vocabulary and structures across all sub-themes within the four 
themes listed on pages 8–9.  
Section C is based on independent research selected and carried out by the student. The 
research must be based on one of the research subjects listed on pages 8–9. All aspects of 
the chosen research subject must be studied. Students use information from their 
research findings and from an unseen written stimulus to answer the question.  
Assessment overview 
Students are not permitted access to a dictionary during the examination or any 
documentation related to their research. 
The examination is made up of: 
Section A: Translation into English (20 marks) 
An unseen passage to be translated from Japanese to English. 
Section B: Reading (20 marks) 
A reading assessment based on a variety of text types and genres. Students must respond 
to a series of comprehension questions. 
Section C: Writing (research question) (40 marks) 
A reading and writing question based on an aspect of the student’s chosen research 
subject. Students read a text and then answer a question, incorporating information and 
ideas from both the text and their research findings. 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
5 
 
Paper 2: Translation into Japanese and written response to works  
(*Paper code: 9JA0/02) 
Written examination: 2 hours and 40 minutes 
30% of the qualification 
110 marks 
Content overview 
Section A draws on vocabulary and structures from any one of the sub-themes within the 
four themes listed on pages 8–9.  
Sections B and C draw on the study of two discrete Japanese works: either two literary 
texts or one literary text and one film. The works must be taken from the list provided in 
Appendix 1: Prescribed literary texts and films. The literary texts listed include a novel, an 
autobiography and a short story collection. All of the films are feature length. 
Assessment overview 
This paper includes a translation exercise and two essays on either two literary texts or 
one literary text and one film (students must not answer questions on two films). 
Students are not permitted access to a dictionary or any documentation relating to the 
works during the examination. 
Section A: Translation into Japanese (20 marks) 
Students translate an unseen passage from English into Japanese. 
Section B: Written response to works (literary texts) (45 marks) 
Students must write an extended response on either one or two of the literary texts listed 
in Appendix 1: Prescribed literary texts and films. 
Students select one question from a choice of two for each of their chosen literary text(s). 
If a student answers questions on two literary texts then they do not complete Section C. 
Section C: Written response to works (films) (45 marks) 
Students who answer only one question from a literary text in Section B must write an 
extended response on one of the films listed in Appendix 1: Prescribed literary works  
and films. 
Students select one question from a choice of two for their chosen film. 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
6 
Paper 3: Listening, reading and writing  
(*Paper code: 9JA0/03) 
Written examination: 2 hours and 15 minutes 
30% of the qualification 
60 marks 
Content overview 
Section A draws on vocabulary and structures across all sub-themes within the four 
themes listed on pages 8–9.  
Section B draws on vocabulary and structures across any one of the sub-themes within  
the four themes listed on pages 8–9. There is one unseen listening source and one unseen 
written source that students must respond to. 
Assessment overview 
This paper includes a listening comprehension and a question that assesses listening, 
reading and writing skills together. 
Students are not permitted access to a dictionary during the examination. 
Section A: Listening comprehension (30 marks) 
A listening assessment based on a recording that features male and female Japanese 
speakers. Students will respond to comprehension questions based on a variety of 
contexts and sources. 
The listening audio files for the sample assessment materials are available on the  
Pearson Edexcel website. 
Section B: Listening, reading and writing question (30 marks) 
Students summarise a listening source and a text that are based on the same sub-theme. 
Students then evaluate the points of view in both sources, stating which views they agree 
with and why. 
 
*See Appendix 7: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to this 
qualification. 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
7 
2 Subject content and assessment 
information 
Qualification aims and objectives 
The aims and objectives of this qualification are to enable students to: 
● enhance their linguistic skills and promote and develop their capacity for critical thinking 
on the basis of their knowledge and understanding of the language, culture and society of 
Japan 
● develop control of the language system to convey meaning, using written skills, including 
an extended range of vocabulary, for both practical and intellectual purposes as 
increasingly confident, accurate and independent users of Japanese 
● develop their ability to understand language in spoken and written form and to interact 
effectively with users of Japanese in writing  
● develop language skills and strategies, including comprehension strategies such as using 
contextual clues and cues, and communication strategies to build fluency and confidence 
in writing  
● develop speaking skills as part of their courses of study, although there will be no 
assessment of those skills 
● engage critically with intellectually stimulating texts, films and other materials in the 
original language, developing an appreciation of sophisticated and creative uses of 
Japanese and understanding them within their cultural and social context 
● develop knowledge about matters central to the society and culture, past and present,  
of Japan 
● translate texts from English into Japanese, and from Japanese into English 
● foster their ability to learn other languages 
● equip themselves with transferable skills such as autonomy, resourcefulness, creativity, 
critical thinking, and linguistic, cultural and cognitive flexibility that will enable them to 
proceed to further study or employment 
● develop their capacity for critical and analytical thinking through the language of study 
● develop as independent researchers through the language of study. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
8 
Themes, sub-themes and research subjects 
Papers 1, 2 and 3 will be based on content from the following four themes. 
The four themes address a range of content related to society past and present, as well as 
aspects of the political, artistic and intellectual culture of Japan. They are set in the context 
of Japan only. 
Themes 1 and 3 focus on Japanese society past and present, Theme 2 focuses on Japanese 
artistic and intellectual culture past and present and Theme 4 focuses on Japanese political 
culture past and present.  
Each theme is broken into two sub-themes and a research subject (highlighted in bold). Each 
sub-theme and research subject is divided into a series of aspects.  
Students are required to select only one research subject for Paper 1. For their research, 
students must cover all three aspects of the research subject. Teachers should consider 
students’ individual circumstances when giving them guidance on selecting an appropriate 
research subject. 
 
テーマ１： 変わっていく若者の生活 
Theme 1 is set in the context of society past and present. 
• 教育 
教育制度やその改革(ゆとり教育以降)：試験や塾：文部科学省によるカ
リキュラム管理 
• 若者の健康(身体面と心理面) 
若者にかかるプレッシャー：それが健康や食生活に与える影響：いじめ 
 
自由研究の課題 
• 家族関係や人間関係     
伝統的な家族構成：核家族：家庭内の人間関係 
 
テーマ２：変わっていく文化 
Theme 2 is set in the context of artistic culture past and present (変わるポピュラー・カ
ルチャー) and intellectual culture past and present (テクノロジーの影響). 
 
• 変わるポピュラー・カルチャー 
アニメや漫画：音楽：武道・武術 
• テクノロジーの影響 
   テクノロジーの進歩：ロボット：オートメーション 
 
自由研究の課題 
• 変わっていく行事  
伝統的な祭りや現代的なイベント：イベントや祭りと観光業の影響：西洋
行事の流入 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
9 
テーマ３：変わっていく人生観 
Theme 3 is set in the context of society past and present. 
• 変化する労働 
終身雇用制度の崩壊：仕事に対する意識の変化：仕事のための移住 
• 長引く不景気 
日常生活への影響：政府の対応：経済の国際化：移住外国人労働者の受け
入れ 
 
自由研究の課題 
• 高齢化社会 
高齢者の孤立：家族からのサポート：社会的支援 
 
 
テーマ４：東日本大震災後の日本 
Theme 4 is set in the context of political culture past and present. 
• 3 月 11 日とその直後 
地震と津波の被害：避難生活：救出と援助：海外の反応 
• 復興への政策 
被災地の立て直し：ボランティアや国民の団結：困難を乗り切る力：心の
ケア 
 
自由研究の課題 
• 福島原発事故後の省エネ生活 
 日常生活の中の省エネ：エネルギー供給をめぐる議論：省エネに関する
 昔の知恵 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
10 
Paper 1: Translation into English, reading 
comprehension and writing (research question) 
Content 
Students will be assessed on their ability to translate accurately from Japanese into English, 
their understanding of written Japanese from a variety of types of authentic texts, and their 
knowledge and understanding of culture and society via research. 
Texts vary in length and include an extended passage. All written materials are culturally 
relevant to Japan and are drawn from the four themes (listed on pages 8–9). 
Students should be able to: 
● translate from Japanese into English 
● understand main points and detail from written material 
● infer meaning from complex written material 
● assimilate and use information from written sources 
● develop research skills, demonstrating the ability to initiate and conduct individual 
research using a range of authentic sources in Japanese 
● use information from research findings and an unseen stimulus to put forward an 
argument, draw conclusions and demonstrate knowledge and understanding of the 
research subject. 
Although speaking skills are not directly assessed in the qualification, students should be 
encouraged to develop their speaking skills in Japanese during the course of study. 
Appendix 3 indicates the kanji that students must be able to recognise for the purposes of 
the qualification. Any kanji used in the question papers which are not on the list will be 
glossed so that students can understand them. 
Translation into English 
The content of the translation will be taken from any one of the sub-themes within the four 
themes. 
Reading 
The reading section will be made up of texts containing both factual and abstract content and 
will be authentic or adapted from authentic sources. The texts will include contemporary, 
historical, literary, fiction and non-fiction sources, written for different purposes and 
audiences. 
Writing (research question) 
This section is comprised of an unseen text based on the research subject and a question 
related to the text. Students must use their research findings, as well as information in the 
text, to answer the question. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
11 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2020. 
● The total assessment time is 2 hours and 30 minutes. Recommended timings for each 
section are given below. 
● The assessment is out of 80 marks. 
● There are three sections in the paper. They cover the assessment of translation, reading, 
and writing skills in Japanese, as well as knowledge and understanding of culture and 
society.  
● Students must answer all questions in Sections A and B and one question on their chosen 
research subject in Section C. 
● Students are not permitted access to a dictionary during the examination or any 
documentation related to their research. 
● For Section A (translation into English), 20 minutes (recommended timing), 20 marks: 
o students are given one unseen text in Japanese and must translate it into English. 
● For Section B (reading), 45 minutes (recommended timing), 20 marks: 
o students respond to four questions in English based on the Japanese texts provided 
o questions comprise both multiple-choice and open-response questions. 
● For Section C (writing), 1 hour and 25 minutes (recommended timing), 40 marks: 
o students read one unseen text in Japanese 
o students respond to a statement in Japanese based on the research subject; they must 
use information from the unseen text and their research findings in their response 
o students are expected to critically analyse the statement and demonstrate knowledge 
and understanding of the research subject. They do this by presenting ideas, arguments 
and conclusions that are supported by relevant information, examples and references 
from their research findings and from the stimulus text. Students must use a range of 
language accurately and focus on the question throughout their response 
o students should write approximately 600 to 700 characters in their answer. 
The recommended timings have been set to enable the student to complete each section in 
sufficient time. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
12 
Guidance on the independent research 
For the purposes of the assessment, independent research means research carried out 
without the help or instruction of others, including teachers. 
The independent research must relate to the Japanese-speaking cultural and/or social 
context. The student must base their research on all aspects of one of the prescribed 
research subjects listed on pages 8 and 9.  
The independent research must not relate to or make reference to one of the literary works 
or films studied for Paper 2. The independent research must: 
● allow students to gather evidence independently from at least two authentic sources in the 
assessed language. Authentic sources could include newspaper and magazine articles, 
online written sources, journals, literary texts, films, television, radio, online audio-visual 
material and interviews. The types of evidence which show knowledge and understanding 
of society and culture (and research) are outlined in information relating to indicative 
content on page 16 of this specification 
● enable the student to contextualise and evaluate their findings independently. 
The table below gives guidance on the process that could be followed. 
 
Stage Description 
1 Pre-independent 
research 
● Teacher instruction on how to conduct research, for example the 
teacher gives advice on suitable resources and how to analyse 
information. 
● Initial conversations with the teacher explaining the content of the 
research subject as outlined in the specification.  
● Teachers should consider students’ individual circumstances when 
giving them guidance on selecting an appropriate research subject. 
2 Independent 
research 
● The student conducts research to find and select appropriate 
sources. 
● The teacher monitors the research by giving general feedback. 
● Students evaluate their findings and prepare for the assessment.  
It is recommended that students decide on which research subject they wish to research as 
early as possible in the academic year. However, learning hours for the independent research 
are not specified because the process of information collation and investigation are 
undertaken independently.  
Teachers can: 
● give guidance on developing research skills (including methodology and analytical tools) 
● give guidance on the content of the research subjects as outlined in the specification 
● comment on the availability of resources and time constraints 
● advise and direct students to the Assessment Objectives. 
Teachers must: 
● explain what independence means (see definition in Guidance on the independent  
research) 
● confirm that students’ research meets all of the aspects of the research subject and has 
the potential to meet the requirements of the assessment criteria  
● ensure that students do not intend to use any of the literary works or films they have 
studied for Paper 2 in their research  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
13 
● monitor the different research subjects being undertaken in a centre to ensure that 
independence is being maintained. If more than one student chooses the same research 
subject, the teacher must ensure that each student is working independently.  
Teachers must not: 
● teach the content of the research subjects to students or provide sources. 
Students must: 
● initiate and conduct their own research, and develop their research skills when 
investigating their research subject. 
If malpractice is found to have taken place, a penalty may be applied dependent on the 
circumstances and severity of the malpractice. 
For full details on malpractice, please see the section entitled Malpractice and the JCQ 
document Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and Assessments 2016–17. 
Synoptic assessment 
● Synoptic assessment requires students to work across different parts of a qualification and 
to show their accumulated knowledge and understanding of a topic or subject area. 
● Synoptic assessment enables students to show their ability to combine their skills, 
knowledge and understanding with breadth and depth of the subject.  
● This paper assesses synopticity. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and mark scheme for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 
Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) Sample Assessment Materials 
(SAMs) document. 
Marking guidance 
Marking guidance has been written to accompany the SAMs and is included with the SAMs 
booklet. Please note that this guidance is for the use of the Pearson-appointed external 
examiners. It is printed for reference in the specification to aid understanding of how the 
assessment criteria will be applied. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
14 
Marking guidance for Paper 1: Translation into English, 
reading comprehension and writing (research question) 
This marking guidance is for the use of Pearson-appointed external examiners. The guidance 
has been included for teacher reference to aid understanding of how the assessment criteria 
will be applied. 
Section A – Question 1 (translation into English) 
This task is marked using a points-based mark scheme in which 1 mark is given for each 
correct individual section of language. Please see the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE 
in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document 
for an example of how the translation will be marked. 
Section B – Questions 2 to 5 (reading comprehension) 
A sample paper and mark scheme for this section can be found in the Pearson Edexcel  
Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) Sample Assessment 
Materials (SAMs). 
Section C – Writing (research question) 
There are three levels-based mark grids to be applied to this question. These are:  
● knowledge and understanding of society and culture (via research) (AO4) 
● understand and respond to written language in writing (AO2)  
● accuracy and range of language (AO3). 
General guidance on using levels-based mark schemes 
Step 1: Decide on a marking band 
● First of all, the examiner will consider the answer as a whole and then decide which 
descriptors most closely match the answer and place it in that band. The descriptors for 
each band indicate the different features that will be seen in the student’s answer for that 
band. 
● When assigning a level, the examiner will look at the overall quality of the answer and not 
focus disproportionately on small and specific parts of the answer where the student has 
not performed quite as well as the rest. If the answer covers different aspects of different 
bands of the mark scheme, the examiner will use a ‘best fit’ approach for defining the 
level. They will then use the variability of the response to help decide the mark within the 
level.  
 
For example, if the response is predominantly band 13–16 with a small amount of  
band 17–20 material, it would be placed in band 13–16 but be awarded a mark near the 
top of the band because of the band 17–20 content. 
Step 2: Decide on a mark 
● Once the examiner has decided on a band they will need to decide on a mark within the 
band. 
● They will decide on the mark to award based on the quality of the answer; they will award 
a mark towards the top or bottom of that band, depending on how the student has 
evidenced each of the descriptor bullet points. 
● The examiner will modify the mark based on how securely the trait descriptors are met at 
that band. 
● They will need to go back through the answer as they apply the mark scheme to clarify 
points and assure themselves that the band and the mark are appropriate. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
15 
Knowledge and understanding of society and culture (AO4 – 20 marks) 
This mark grid assesses the content of the student’s answer in relation to the knowledge and 
understanding of culture and society they have demonstrated, based on their research. It 
also assesses their ability to critically analyse by sustaining a line of argument and drawing 
conclusions about aspects of culture and society, based on the question related to the 
research subject.  
Understand and respond to written language (AO2 – 10 marks) 
This grid assesses students’ understanding of the unseen text by their ability to use relevant 
information from it to contribute to the ideas, arguments and conclusions presented on 
society and culture.  
The two mark grids for AO4 and AO2 are presented side by side. This is because of the 
connection between the information that the student is producing, based on knowledge and 
understanding of society and culture, and the information they are using from the unseen 
text to contribute to this.  
The recommended word count for each essay is 300–350 words but the whole essay will be 
marked regardless of length.  
Indicative content 
● When deciding how to reward the answer for content, examiners will consult both of these 
mark grids as well as the indicative content associated with each question, this can be 
found in the document Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, 
reading and writing) Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs). Indicative content contains 
points that students are likely to use to construct their answer. It is possible for an answer 
to be constructed without mentioning some or all of these points as long as students 
provide alternative responses that fulfil the requirements of the question. 
● The indicative content shows that students are expected to place more emphasis on 
knowledge and understanding of society and culture (AO4) than on the text (understand 
and respond in writing to written language – AO2). This emphasis is reflected in the 
greater number of marks available for AO4 (20 marks) than for AO2 (10 marks). 
● Students can demonstrate their knowledge and understanding of society and culture 
(research) by providing relevant ideas/information/references/examples related to aspects 
such as: 
o lifestyle/customs/events, both current and historical  
o important figures, both current and historical 
o public opinion, feelings, reactions and behaviour. 
This list is not exhaustive. Such examples are illustrated in the indicative content in the 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing)  
Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs). 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
16 
 
Knowledge and understanding of 
society and culture (AO4) 
Understand and respond to written 
language (AO2) 
Marks Description Marks Description 
0 No rewardable material. 0 No rewardable material 
1–4 ● Limited, straightforward, 
predictable ideas expressed 
on culture and society; 
limited information/ 
examples/references from 
research to support ideas; 
limited focus on the 
research subject.  
● Limited evidence of critical 
analysis of culture and 
society; points of view 
have little justification; 
limited/brief conclusions 
that are frequently 
contradictory; frequently 
relies on description rather 
than analysis.  
1–2 
● Limited use of relevant 
information/examples/references 
from the text to contribute to 
ideas, arguments and conclusions 
about society and culture; 
information used is frequently 
contradictory/irrelevant.  
5–8 ● Occasionally relevant, 
straightforward ideas 
expressed about culture 
and society, mostly 
generalised, occasionally 
supported by information/  
examples/references from 
research; some loss of 
focus on the research 
subject.  
● Occasional evidence of 
critical analysis of culture 
and society; points of view 
are given with occasional 
justification, arguments 
may be made but not 
developed, occasionally 
leading to straightforward 
conclusions that may 
include contradictions; 
some reliance on 
description rather than 
analysis.  
3–4 
● Occasionally uses relevant 
information/examples/references 
from the text to contribute to 
ideas, arguments and conclusions 
about society and culture; 
sometimes information used is 
contradictory/irrelevant.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
17 
Knowledge and understanding of 
society and culture (AO4) 
Understand and respond to written 
language (AO2) 
Marks Description Marks  Description 
9–12 ● Relevant, straightforward 
ideas expressed about 
culture and society, 
sometimes supported by 
information/examples/ 
references from research; 
occasional loss of focus on 
the research subject. 
● Some critical analysis of 
culture and society is 
evident, with 
straightforward arguments 
and points of view which 
are sometimes developed 
and justified, sometimes 
drawing straightforward 
conclusions; occasionally 
relies on description rather 
than analysis.  
5–6 
● Sometimes uses relevant 
information/examples/references 
from the text to contribute to 
ideas, arguments and conclusions 
about society and culture; 
occasionally information used is 
contradictory/irrelevant.  
13–16 ● Relevant, occasionally 
perceptive ideas expressed 
about culture and society, 
frequently supported by 
pertinent information/ 
examples/reference from 
research; focus 
predominantly maintained 
on the research subject. 
● Critical analysis of culture 
and society demonstrated 
by frequently developed 
and justified arguments 
and viewpoints, often 
drawing convincing 
conclusions.  
7–8 
● Mostly uses relevant 
information/examples/references 
from the text to contribute to 
ideas, arguments and conclusions 
about society and culture. 
17–20 ● Relevant, perceptive ideas 
expressed about culture 
and society, consistently 
supported by pertinent 
information/examples/ 
references from research; 
focused on the research 
subject throughout.  
● Critical analysis of culture 
and society demonstrated 
by consistently developed 
and justified arguments 
and viewpoints, drawing 
convincing conclusions.  
9–10 
● Consistently uses relevant 
information/examples/references 
from the text to contribute to 
ideas, arguments and conclusions 
about society and culture. 
 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
18 
Additional guidance 
Perceptive: demonstrates an in-depth understanding by making connections between ideas 
and information; goes beyond the standard, predictable response; shows insight/originality. 
Ideas include thoughts, feelings, impressions, opinions. 
Straightforward ideas, arguments, conclusions are deemed to be those that give the 
standard, predictable response. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
19 
Accuracy and range of language mark grid (AO3) 
This mark grid assesses students’ ability to use a range of grammatical structures, 
vocabulary and kanji accurately to produce articulate communication with a range of 
expression. Students are rewarded for using a wide variety of kanji. 
 
Marks Description 
0 No rewardable language. 
1–2 ● Limited variation of straightforward grammatical structures, vocabulary and 
kanji, with much repetition; repetitive expression, writing is often restricted 
and stilted. 
● Limited sequences of accurate language, resulting in lapses in coherence; 
errors occur that often prevent meaning being conveyed. 
3–4 ● Occasional variation in the use of mostly straightforward grammatical 
structures, vocabulary and kanji, infrequent use of complex language; 
expression is frequently repetitive, writing is sometimes stilted. 
● Some accurate sequences of language, resulting in some coherent writing; 
errors occur that sometimes hinder clarity of communication and occasionally 
prevent meaning being conveyed. 
5–6 ● Some variation in the use of grammatical structures, vocabulary and kanji, 
some recurrent examples of complex language; variation of expression but 
this is not sustained; sections of articulate writing with occasionally stilted 
phrasing. 
● Frequent sequences of accurate language, resulting in generally coherent 
writing; errors occur that occasionally hinder clarity of communication. 
7–8 ● Frequent variation in use of grammatical structures, vocabulary and kanji, 
including different types of complex language; regular variation of expression, 
writing is articulate throughout the majority of the response. 
● Accurate language throughout most of the response, resulting in mostly 
coherent writing; errors occur that rarely hinder clarity of communication. 
9–10 ● Consistent variation in use of grammatical structures, vocabulary and kanji, 
consistent variation in use of complex language; conveys ideas in a variety of 
ways, consistently articulate writing. 
● Accurate language throughout, resulting in consistently coherent writing; any 
errors do not hinder clarity of the communication. 
Additional guidance 
Complex language is considered to include the following: 
● verb endings that are conceptually challenging as they do not have an exact equivalent in 
English such as ～てしまう 
● the passive 
● the causative 
● relative clauses 
● using extended sentences to express abstract ideas/convey justified arguments that 
require a range of lexis and structures, for example using two separate grammatical 
endings together such as 行ってみることができる 
● using synonyms and a variety of expressions to say things in different ways. 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
20 
Variation in use of grammatical structures/varied use of vocabulary: the traits in the 
mark grid differentiate between the variation of grammatical structures and vocabulary used 
by students. Examiners should judge which mark band to place students and which mark to 
award based on the effect that the variety of grammatical structures and vocabulary has on 
the quality of the communication; the wider the variety, the more articulate the 
communication will become (see definition of articulate below).  
Examples of a variety of grammatical structures and vocabulary are: a selection of different 
verbs, tenses, adjectives, vocabulary and complex language (see definition above) for a 
variety of purposes such as to present and justify points of view, develop arguments, draw 
conclusions based on understanding and evaluate issues. 
Articulate: articulate communication is fluent, effective and coherent as students control/ 
manipulate the language to express themselves with ease for a number of different 
purposes. The more articulate the writing, the easier and more quickly the reader can 
progress through the writing without having to re-read to understand the message.  
If students are restricted to what they can express, they may not be able to use language for 
all purposes, for example to justify arguments. The writing will become more difficult to read 
quickly and with ease as the reader has to stop and re-read to understand the message. 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access 
the top band. The mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors 
have on clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example minor errors in character formation 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example incorrect particles with verbs of giving and receiving, a sentence in 
which the main verb does not match an implied subject  
● frequent errors that hinder clarity as they distract the reader from the content of the 
writing, for example the kanji 白instead of 自. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example failing to mark a 
change of subject where one is needed 
● mother tongue interference. 
 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
21 
Paper 2: Translation into Japanese and written 
response to works  
Content 
Students should be able to: 
● manipulate language accurately through translating an unseen passage from English into 
Japanese 
● develop a detailed understanding and appreciation of the works studied, by writing critical 
and analytical responses in the language of study to the works, taken from the prescribed 
list provided (see Appendix 1: Prescribed literary texts and films) 
● produce responses that relate to features such as the form and the technique of 
presentation; key themes concepts and issues; characterisation; structure of the plot; and 
the social and cultural setting 
● present viewpoints, develop arguments, persuade, analyse and evaluate. 
Although speaking skills are not directly assessed in the qualification, students should be 
encouraged to develop their speaking skills in Japanese during the course of study.  
Appendix 3 indicates the kanji that students must be able to recognise for the purposes of 
the qualification. Any kanji used in the question papers which are not on the list will be 
glossed so that students can understand them. 
Translation into Japanese 
The content of the translation will be taken from any one of the sub-themes within the four 
themes. 
Written response to works 
Students must study two discrete Japanese works: either two literary texts, or one literary 
text and one film. The works must be taken from the list in Appendix 1: Prescribed literary 
texts and films. The literary texts listed include a novel, an autobiography and a short story 
collection. All the films are feature length.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
22 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2020. 
● The total assessment time is 2 hours and 40 minutes. Recommended timings for each 
section are given below. 
● The assessment is out of 110 marks. 
● There are three parts to this paper, Section A (translation into Japanese) and Sections B  
and C (written response to works). 
● For Section A (translation into Japanese), 30 minutes (recommended timing), 20 marks: 
o students are given one unseen text in English and must translate it into Japanese. 
● For Sections B and C (written response to works), 2 hours and 10 minutes, 90 marks: 
o students must write two essays selected from Section B (literary texts) or one selected 
from Section B (literary texts) and one from Section C (films) 
o there will be a choice of two questions for each literary text and film. As a guide, we 
advise students to write approximately 600-700 characters for each essay in order to 
give a detailed analysis of the works, although the whole essay will be marked 
regardless of length  
o students should justify points of view, arguments and conclusions with evidence from 
the work  
o students are expected to provide a critical and analytical response by selecting relevant 
material from the works, presenting and justifying points of view, developing 
arguments, drawing conclusions based on understanding, and evaluating different 
aspects of the works studied 
o no credit will be given for essays on literary texts that are based on film versions 
adapted from the literary texts. Evidence given in the essay to justify viewpoints and 
arguments must be based on the original literary text. 
● All questions in sections B and C will be set in both Japanese and English, but must be 
answered in Japanese. 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted. 
● Students must not take any documentation relating to the works into the examination. 
The recommended timings have been given to enable the student to complete each section 
in sufficient time. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and marking criteria (including guidance on how these criteria are applied) 
for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese 
(listening, reading and writing) Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Marking guidance 
Marking guidance has been written to accompany the SAMs and is included with the SAMs 
booklet. Please note that this guidance is for the use of the Pearson-appointed external 
examiners. It is printed for reference in the specification to aid understanding of how the 
assessment criteria will be applied. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
23 
Marking guidance for Paper 2: Translation into Japanese and 
Written response to works  
This marking guidance is for the use of Pearson-appointed external examiners. The guidance 
has been included for teacher reference to aid understanding of how the assessment criteria 
will be applied. 
Section A – Question 1 (translation into Japanese) 
This question is marked using a points-based mark scheme in which 1 mark is given for each 
correct individual section of language. Please see the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE 
in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document 
for an example of how the translation will be marked. 
Sections B and C – Questions 2 to 7 (written response to works) 
There are three levels-based mark grids to be applied to each individual essay included in 
Sections B and C, written response to works. The mark grids are: 
● critical and analytical response (AO4) 
● range of grammatical structures and vocabulary (AO3) 
● accuracy of language (AO3). 
General guidance on using levels-based mark schemes 
Step 1: Decide on a marking band 
● First of all, the examiner will consider the answer as a whole and then decide which 
descriptors most closely match the answer and place it in that band. The descriptors for 
each band indicate the different features that will be seen in the student’s answer for that 
band. 
● When assigning a level, the examiner will look at the overall quality of the answer and not 
focus disproportionately on small and specific parts of the answer where the student has 
not performed quite as well as the rest. If the answer covers different aspects of different 
bands of the mark scheme, the examiner will use a ‘best fit’ approach for defining the 
level. They will then use the variability of the response to help decide the mark within the 
level. For example if the response is predominantly band 5–8 with a small amount of band 
9–12 material, it would be placed in band 5–8 but be awarded a mark near the top of the 
band because of the band 9–12 content. 
Step 2: Decide on a mark 
● Once the examiner has decided on a band they will need to decide on a mark within the 
band. 
● They will decide on the mark to award based on the quality of the answer; they will award 
a mark towards the top or bottom of that band, depending on how the student has 
evidenced each of the descriptor bullet points. 
● The examiner will modify the mark based on how securely the trait descriptors are met at 
that band. 
● They will need to go back through the answer as they apply the mark scheme to clarify 
points and assure themselves that the band and the mark are appropriate. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
24 
Sections B and C, Questions 2 to 7 (written response to works) 
Critical and analytical response (AO4) 
● This mark grid assesses students’ ability to respond critically and analytically to the aspect 
of the literary text or film outlined in the question. To provide a critical and analytical 
response, students should select relevant material, present and justify points of view, 
develop arguments, draw conclusions based on understanding and evaluate issues, 
themes and cultural and social contexts. 
● This grid should be applied twice, once for each essay individually. 
● When deciding how to reward an answer, examiners will consult this mark grid as well as 
the indicative content associated with each question, which can be found in the document 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. Indicative content contains points that 
students are likely to use to construct their answer. It is possible for an answer to be 
constructed without mentioning some or all of these points as long as students provide 
alternative responses that fulfil the requirements of the question. 
● The recommended word count for each essay is 600–700 characters, but the whole essay 
will be marked regardless of length. 
Marks Description 
0 No rewardable material. 
1–4 ● Points of view relating to issues/themes/cultural or social contexts are presented 
with simplistic justification, limited interpretation with frequent misunderstanding 
or confusion; any evidence from the work is descriptive. 
● Limited ability to form arguments or draw conclusions. 
● Response relates to the work but there is limited focus on the question. 
5–8 ● Response relates to the work but often loses focus on the question. 
● Points of view relating to issues/themes/cultural or social contexts are presented, 
with attempts made at interpretation, but they occasionally show misunderstanding 
or confusion; evidence selected from the work for justification is occasionally 
appropriate but often descriptive. 
● Arguments are made but with inconsistencies; conclusions are drawn but do not 
fully link to arguments. 
9–12 ● Critical analysis of issues/themes/cultural or social contexts is evident in relation to 
particular aspects of the question, with some appropriate interpretations and points 
of view, sometimes justified by appropriately selected evidence from the work. 
● Logical arguments are followed through on particular aspects of the question, 
occasionally detailed and with linked conclusions; some points are made without 
exploration. 
● Response is relevant to particular aspects of the question with occasional loss of 
focus. 
13–16 ● Critical analysis of issues/themes/cultural or social contexts is frequently 
demonstrated, with some convincing interpretations and points of view, 
predominantly justified with appropriately selected evidence from the work. 
● Generally detailed, logical arguments are made, with some persuasive conclusions 
that mostly link together. 
● Predominantly relevant response to the question. 
17–20 ● Critical analysis of issues/themes/cultural or social contexts is demonstrated 
through convincing interpretations and points of view, consistently justified with 
appropriately selected evidence from the work. 
● Detailed, logical arguments and conclusions are made that consistently link 
together. 
● Relevant response to the question throughout. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
25 
Range of grammatical structures and vocabulary (AO3) 
● This mark grid assesses students’ ability to use a range of grammatical structures, 
vocabulary and kanji accurately to produce articulate communication with a range of 
expression. Students are rewarded for using a wide variety of kanji. 
● This grid will be applied twice, once for each essay individually. 
Marks Description 
0 No rewardable language. 
1–3 ● Limited variation of straightforward grammatical structures with much repetition, 
producing writing that is often restricted and stilted. 
● Limited variation of vocabulary and kanji resulting in repetitive expression. 
● Limited use of terminology appropriate to literary and cinematic analysis. 
4–6 ● Occasional variation in the use of mostly straightforward grammatical structures, 
infrequent use of complex language, producing writing that is sometimes stilted. 
● Occasional variation of mostly straightforward vocabulary and kanji, expression is 
frequently repetitive. 
● Occasional use of terminology appropriate for literary and cinematic analysis. 
7–9 ● Some variation in the use of grammatical structures, including some recurrent 
examples of complex language; sections of articulate writing with occasionally 
stilted phrasing. 
● Some variation in use of vocabulary and kanji, resulting in variation of expression 
but this is not sustained. 
● Some use of terminology appropriate for literary and cinematic analysis. 
10–12 ● Frequent variation in use of grammatical structures, including different types of 
complex language, producing writing that is articulate throughout the majority of 
the response. 
● Frequent variation in use of vocabulary and kanji, resulting in regular variation of 
expression. 
● Frequent use of terminology appropriate for literary and cinematic analysis. 
13–15 ● Consistent variation in use of grammatical structures, consistent variation in use of 
complex language, producing consistently articulate writing. 
● Consistent variation in use of vocabulary and kanji, allowing ideas to be conveyed 
in a variety of ways. 
● Consistent use of terminology appropriate for literary and cinematic analysis. 
Additional guidance 
Variation of vocabulary and grammatical structures: the traits in the mark grid 
differentiate between the variation of grammatical structures and vocabulary used by 
students. Examiners will judge which mark band to place students in and which mark to 
award, based on the effect that the variety of grammatical structures and vocabulary has on 
the quality of the communication; the wider the variety, the more articulate the 
communication will become (see definition of articulate below). 
Examples of a variety of grammatical structures and vocabulary are: a selection of different 
verbs, tenses, adjectives, vocabulary, including to express literary and cinematic analysis 
(see further details below), complex language (see definition below) for a variety of 
purposes, including to present and justify points of view, develop arguments, draw 
conclusions based on understanding. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
26 
Articulate: articulate communication is fluent, effective and coherent as students control/ 
manipulate the language to say what they want to say rather than what they can say, for a 
number of different purposes. If students are restricted to what they can say, they may not 
be able to express themselves for all purposes, for example to develop arguments. 
Terminology for literary and cinematic analysis: vocabulary for critical analysis 
according to the work being studied, for example ‘plot’, ‘character’; figures of speech such as 
‘metaphor’, ‘simile’; to describe theme and style such as ‘camera technique’, ‘hand-held 
camera’, ‘use of black and white’, ‘first person narrative’. 
Complex language is considered to include the following: 
● verb endings that are conceptually challenging as they do not have an exact equivalent in 
English such as ～てしまう 
● the passive 
● the causative 
● relative clauses 
● using extended sentences to express abstract ideas/convey justified arguments that 
require a range of lexis and structures, for example using two separate grammatical 
endings together such as 行ってみることができる 
● using synonyms and a variety of expressions to say things in different ways. 
Straightforward language is considered to be: 
● simple sentences with limited linking of sentences and clauses 
● high-frequency grammatical structures and vocabulary. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
27 
Accuracy of language (AO3) 
● This mark grid assesses students’ ability to apply grammar and syntax accurately. 
● This grid will be applied twice, once for each essay individually. 
 
Marks Description 
0 No rewardable language. 
1-2 ● Limited sequences of accurate language, resulting in lapses in coherence. 
● Errors occur that often prevent meaning being conveyed. 
3–4 ● Some accurate sequences of language, resulting in some coherent writing. 
● Errors occur that sometimes hinder clarity of communication and occasionally 
prevent meaning being conveyed. 
5–6 ● Frequent sequences of accurate language, resulting in generally  
coherent writing. 
● Errors occur that occasionally hinder clarity of communication. 
7–8 ● Accurate language throughout most of the response, resulting in mostly 
coherent writing. 
● Errors occur that rarely hinder clarity of communication. 
9–10 ● Accurate language throughout, resulting in consistently coherent writing. 
● Any errors do not hinder clarity of communication. 
Additional guidance 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band. The mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have 
on clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example minor errors in character formation 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example incorrect particles with verbs of giving and receiving, a sentence in 
which the main verb does not match an implied subject  
● frequent errors that hinder clarity, as they distract the reader from the content of the 
writing, for example the kanji 白 instead of 自. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example failing to mark a 
change of subject where one is needed 
● mother tongue interference. 
 
NB: these are provided as examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
28 
Paper 3: Listening, reading and writing  
Content 
Students will be assessed on their understanding of spoken Japanese from a variety of 
authentic listening sources, as well as on their ability to summarise and evaluate viewpoints 
in spoken and written material. 
Recordings vary in length and include an extended passage. All spoken and written materials 
are culturally relevant to Japan and for Section A are drawn from across the four themes 
(listed on pages 8–9). Materials for Section B will be drawn from any one of the sub-themes 
from the four themes. 
Students should be able to: 
● listen, and respond in writing, to spoken passages, including an extended passage from a 
range of different contexts and sources, understand main points, gist and detail from 
spoken and written material 
● infer meaning from complex spoken material 
● assimilate and use information from spoken and written sources  
● summarise information from spoken and written sources, reporting key points and subject 
matter in writing 
● identify main ideas, and summarise different points of view, drawn from spoken and 
written sources 
● evaluate points of view and draw conclusions in writing 
● apply listening, reading and writing skills in combination. 
Although speaking skills are not directly assessed in the qualification, students should be 
encouraged to develop their speaking skills in Japanese during the course of study. 
Appendix 3 indicates the kanji that students must be able to recognise for the purposes of 
the qualification. Any kanji used in the question papers which are not on the list will be 
glossed so that students can understand them. 
Section A (listening comprehension) 
The listening section will be made up of spoken passages covering different registers and 
types, including authentic communication involving one or more male and female speakers. 
Sources will include material from online media. 
Section B (listening, reading and writing question) 
This section is comprised of a listening source and a reading text. Students must summarise 
the different points of view in each source. They must then answer a question, which 
requires the student to evaluate the viewpoints in both sources and draw conclusions. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
29 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2020. 
● The total assessment time is 2 hours and 15 minutes. Recommended timings for each 
section are given below. 
● The assessment is out of 60 marks. 
● There are two sections in the paper. They cover the assessment of listening, reading and 
writing skills in Japanese.  
● Students must answer all questions in both sections (A and B). 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted. 
● For Section A (listening), 45 minutes (recommended timing), 30 marks: 
o there are four questions in English in this section made up of multiple-choice and open-
response questions, including questions testing summary skills 
o students will listen to a recording featuring Japanese-language speakers who will speak 
at a speed appropriate for the expected understanding at this level 
o recordings will be issued as a CD or in MP3 audio format. The MP3 sound files must be 
accessed via a secure download from the Pearson website. The listening audio files are 
also available on our website 
o students will have individual control of the recording and may stop, revisit and replay 
sections of the recording as they wish. 
● For Section B (listening, reading and writing question), 1 hour and 30 minutes 
(recommended timing), 30 marks: 
o students listen to a recording and read a written text 
o students summarise the different points of view in both sources 
o students answer a question in writing which requires them to evaluate the viewpoints in 
the recording and the text and draw conclusions 
o the question is an open-response question 
o students should write approximately 400-500 characters for their response to  
question 5(c) 
o all questions in Section B are set in Japanese and must be answered in Japanese. 
Recommended timings have been given for each section to enable the student to complete 
each one in sufficient time to access the full range of assessment criteria.  
Synoptic assessment  
● Synoptic assessment requires students to work across different parts of a qualification and 
to show their accumulated knowledge and understanding of a topic or subject area. 
● Synoptic assessment enables students to show their ability to combine their skills, 
knowledge and understanding with breadth and depth of the subject.  
● This paper assesses synopticity. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and marking criteria (including guidance on how these criteria are applied) 
for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese 
(listening, reading and writing) Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
30 
Marking guidance for Paper 3: Listening, reading and  
writing task 
Marking guidance has been written to accompany the SAMs and is included with the SAMs 
booklet. Please note that this guidance is for the use of the Pearson-appointed external 
examiners. It is printed for reference in the specification to aid understanding of how the 
assessment criteria will be applied. 
Section A – Questions 1 to 4 
A points-based mark scheme for this section can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 
Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) Sample Assessment Materials 
(SAMs) document. 
Section B – Listening, reading and writing 
A points-based mark scheme for questions 5(a) and 5(b) can be found in the Pearson 
Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) Sample 
Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
There are three levels-based mark grids applied to question 5(c). The mark grids are: 
● understand and respond to spoken language (AO1) 
● understand and respond to written language (AO2) 
● accuracy and range of language (AO3). 
General guidance on using levels-based mark schemes 
Step 1: Decide on a marking band 
● First of all, the examiner will consider the answer as a whole and then decide which 
descriptors most closely match the answer and place it in that band. The descriptors for 
each band indicate the different features that will be seen in the student’s answer for that 
band. 
● When assigning a band, the examiner will look at the overall quality of the answer and not 
focus disproportionately on small and specific parts of the answer where the student has 
not performed quite as well as the rest or indeed has performed temporarily better. If the 
answer covers different aspects of different bands of the mark scheme, they will use a 
‘best fit’ approach for defining the band. They will then use the variability of the response 
to help decide the mark within the band. For example, if the response is predominantly 
band 3–4 with a small amount of band 5–6 material, it would be placed in band 3–4 but 
be awarded a mark at the top of the band because of the band 5–6 content. 
Step 2: Decide on a mark 
● Once the examiner has decided on a band they will then need to decide on a mark within 
the band. 
● The examiner will decide the mark to award based on the quality of the answer; they will 
award a mark towards the top or bottom of that band depending on how the student has 
evidenced each of the descriptor bullet points. 
● The examiner will modify the mark based on how securely the trait descriptors are met at 
that band. 
● The examiner will need to go back through the answer as they apply the mark scheme to 
clarify points and to assure that the band and the mark are appropriate. 
Understand and respond to spoken language (AO1 – 6 marks) 
● This mark grid assesses students’ understanding of spoken language and how well they 
use information from it to evaluate and draw conclusions. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
31 
Understand and respond to written language (AO2 – 6 marks) 
● This mark grid assesses students’ understanding of written language and how well they 
use information from it to evaluate and draw conclusions. 
The two mark grids for AO1 and AO2 are presented side-by-side. This is because of the 
interconnection of the task in that students need to compare information that they hear to 
the information that they read. They need to do this in order to weigh up the views in both 
sources to be able to write their evaluation and come to cohesive conclusions. 
Indicative content 
● When deciding how to reward the answer, examiners will consult these mark grids as well 
as the indicative content associated with the question which can be found in the document 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. Indicative content contains points that 
students are likely to use to construct their answer. It is possible for an answer to be 
constructed without mentioning some or all of these points as long as students provide 
alternative responses that fulfil the requirements of the question.  
● The recommended word count for question 5(c) is 400–500 characters but the whole 
response will be marked regardless of length. 
 
Understand and respond to spoken 
language (AO1) 
Understand and respond to written 
language (AO2) 
Marks Description Marks Description 
0 No rewardable material. 0 No rewardable material. 
1–2 ● Occasionally relevant 
judgement expressed on the 
viewpoints in the spoken 
source; often strays into 
description of content without 
evaluation.  
● Limited conclusions drawn on 
the spoken source, sometimes 
inconsistent with evaluation of 
viewpoints.  
1–2 
● Occasionally relevant 
judgement expressed on the 
viewpoints in the written 
source; often strays into 
description of content without 
evaluation.  
● Limited conclusions drawn on 
written source, sometimes 
inconsistent with evaluation of 
viewpoints.  
3–4 ● Expresses some relevant 
judgements on the viewpoints 
in the spoken source, some of 
which are substantiated; 
occasionally strays into 
description of content without 
evaluation.  
● Draws straightforward 
conclusions on the spoken 
source, occasional inconsistency 
with evaluation of viewpoints.  
3–4 ● Expresses some relevant 
judgements on the viewpoints 
in the written source, some of 
which are substantiated; 
occasionally strays into 
description of content without 
evaluation.  
● Draws straightforward 
conclusions on written source, 
occasional inconsistency with 
evaluation of viewpoints. 
5–6 ● Expresses relevant and 
substantiated judgements on 
the viewpoints in the spoken 
source, showing clear 
evaluation.  
● Draws convincing conclusions 
on the spoken source, 
consistent with evaluation of 
viewpoints.  
5–6 ● Expresses relevant and 
substantiated judgements on 
the viewpoints in the written 
source, showing clear 
evaluation.  
● Draws convincing conclusions 
on written source, consistent 
with evaluation of viewpoints. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
32 
Accuracy and range of language mark grid (AO3) 
This mark grid assesses students’ ability to use a range of grammatical structures, 
vocabulary and kanji accurately to produce articulate communication with a range of 
expression. Students are rewarded for using a wide variety of kanji. 
 
Marks Description 
0 No rewardable language. 
1–2 ● Limited variation of straightforward grammatical structures, vocabulary and 
kanji, with much repetition; repetitive expression, writing is often restricted 
and stilted. 
● Limited sequences of accurate language, resulting in lapses in coherence; 
errors occur that often prevent meaning being conveyed. 
3–4 ● Occasional variation in the use of mostly straightforward grammatical 
structures, vocabulary and kanji, infrequent use of complex language; 
expression is frequently repetitive, writing is sometimes stilted. 
● Some accurate sequences of language, resulting in some coherent writing; 
errors occur that sometimes hinder clarity of communication and occasionally 
prevent meaning being conveyed. 
5–6 ● Some variation in the use of grammatical structures, vocabulary and kanji, 
some recurrent examples of complex language; variation of expression but 
this is not sustained; sections of articulate writing with occasionally stilted 
phrasing. 
● Frequent sequences of accurate language, resulting in generally 
coherent writing; errors occur that occasionally hinder clarity of 
communication. 
7–8 ● Frequent variation in use of grammatical structures, vocabulary and kanji, 
including different types of complex language; regular variation of expression, 
writing is articulate throughout the majority of the response. 
● Accurate language throughout most of the response, resulting in mostly 
coherent writing; errors occur that rarely hinder clarity of communication. 
9–10 ● Consistent variation in use of grammatical structures, vocabulary and kanji, 
consistent variation in use of complex language; conveys ideas in a variety of 
ways, consistently articulate writing. 
● Accurate language throughout, resulting in consistently coherent writing; any 
errors do not hinder clarity of the communication. 
Additional guidance 
Complex language is considered to include the following: 
● verb endings that are conceptually challenging as they do not have an exact equivalent in 
English such as ～てしまう 
● the passive 
● the causative 
● relative clauses 
● using extended sentences to express abstract ideas/convey justified arguments that 
require a range of lexis and structures, for example using two separate grammatical 
endings together such as 行ってみることができる 
● using synonyms and a variety of expressions to say things in different ways. 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
33 
Variation in use of grammatical structures/varied use of vocabulary: the traits in the 
mark grid differentiate between the variation of grammatical structures and vocabulary used 
by students. Examiners should judge in which mark band to place students and which mark 
to award, based on the effect that the variety of grammatical structures and vocabulary has 
on the quality of the communication; the wider the variety, the more articulate the 
communication will become (see definition of articulate below).  
Examples of a variety of grammatical structures and vocabulary are: a selection of different 
verbs, tenses, adjectives, vocabulary and complex language (see definition above) for a 
variety of purposes such as to present and justify points of view, develop arguments, draw 
conclusions based on understanding and evaluating issues. 
Articulate: articulate communication is fluent, effective and coherent as students control/ 
manipulate the language to express themselves with ease for a number of different 
purposes. The more articulate the writing, the easier the reader can progress through the 
writing without having to re-read to understand the message. If students are restricted to 
what they can express, they may not be able to use languages for all purposes, for example 
to justify arguments/interest the reader. The writing will become more difficult to read with 
ease as the reader has to stop and re-read to understand the message.  
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order
 to access the 
top band. The mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have 
on clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example minor errors in character formation 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example incorrect particles with verbs of giving and receiving, a sentence in 
which the main verb does not match an implied subject  
● frequent errors that hinder clarity as they distract the reader from the content of the 
writing, for example the kanji 白instead of 自.  
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example failing to mark a 
change of subject where one is needed 
● mother tongue interference. 
 
NB: these are provided as examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
34 
Assessment Objectives 
 
Students must:  
% in GCE  
A Level 
AO1 Understand and respond in writing to spoken language drawn 
from a variety of sources 
20 
AO2 Understand and respond in writing to written language drawn 
from a variety of sources 
30 
AO3 Manipulate the language accurately, in written forms, using a 
range of lexis and structure 
30 
AO4 Show knowledge and understanding of, and respond critically and 
analytically to, different aspects of the culture and society of the 
countries where the language is spoken 
20 
Total 100% 
 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
Paper 
Assessment Objectives Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives AO1 % AO2 % AO3 % AO4 % 
Paper 1: Translation into 
English, reading 
comprehension and writing 
(research question)  
__ 25 5 10 40% 
Paper 2: Translation into 
Japanese and written 
response to works  
__ __ 20 10 30% 
Paper 3: Listening, reading 
and writing 
20 5 5 __ 30% 
Total for GCE A Level 20 30 30 20 100% 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
35 
3 Administration and general information 
Entries 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for this qualification can be found in 
our UK Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations officers and is 
available on our website. 
Discount code and performance tables 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more than one GCE qualification with 
the same discount code will have only one of the grades they achieve counted for the 
purpose of the school and college performance tables.  
Students should be advised that if they take two GCE qualifications with the same discount 
code, the colleges, universities and employers to which they wish to progress are likely to 
take the view that this achievement is equivalent to only one GCE. The same view may be 
taken if students take two GCE qualifications that have different discount codes but which 
have significant overlap of content. Before embarking on their programmes, students or their 
advisers who have any doubts about their subject combinations should check with the 
institution to which they wish to progress. 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, 
special consideration and malpractice 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our Equality Policy requires all students to 
have equal opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our qualifications 
to be awarded in a way that is fair to every student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the Equality Act 2010) are not, 
when they are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in comparison to 
students who do not share that characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification and that 
this achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their peers. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be in Japanese. Student responses to the translation in 
Paper 1 (Section A) and comprehension questions in Paper 1 (Section B) and Paper 3 
(Section A) will be in English. All other student responses must be in Japanese. 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with special 
educational needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to: 
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the assessment. 
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an individual 
student with a disability, without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding bodies comply with the duty under the 
Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
36 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
37 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students will 
then know what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for assessment. 
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable adjustments 
where a person with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in undertaking an 
assessment. The awarding organisation is required to take reasonable steps to overcome 
that disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be unique to that individual and, 
therefore, might not be in the list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of factors, 
including: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding 
organisation, or affects timeframes or the security or integrity of the assessment. This is 
because the adjustment is not ‘reasonable’. 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student's mark or grade to 
reflect temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the 
examination/assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a material 
effect on a student’s ability to take an assessment or demonstrate their level of attainment in 
an assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to apply for access arrangements 
and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special 
consideration, please refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk 
Malpractice 
Student malpractice 
Student malpractice refers to any act by a student that compromises or seeks to compromise 
the process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the qualifications or the 
validity of results/certificates. 
Student malpractice in examinations must be reported to Pearson using a JCQ Form M1 
(available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to Investigations Team, Pearson, 190 High Holborn, 
London, WC1V 7BH. Please provide as much information and supporting documentation as 
possible. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice constitutes staff or centre malpractice. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
38 
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and maladministration of 
our qualifications. As with student malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is any act that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the 
integrity of the qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported 
immediately, before any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson on a  
JCQ Form M2a (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form,  
supporting documentation and as much information as possible can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to Investigations Team, Pearson, 190 High Holborn, 
London, WC1V 7BH. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies with 
Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the document 
General and Vocational Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments Policies and Procedures, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice. 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to comply with the requirements of 
Ofqual's General Conditions of Recognition. 
The raw marks for all the papers in this qualification will be scaled by Pearson to represent 
the relative weighting of 40% for Paper 1, 30% for Papers 2 and 3. 
 
Paper Weighting Raw marks Scaling factor Scaling mark 
1 40% 80 1.850 148 
2 30% 110 1.009 110.99 
3 30% 60 1.850 111 
 
This A Level qualification will be graded and certificated on a six-grade scale from A* to E 
using the total subject mark. Individual papers are not graded. 
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum judged by Pearson to be of 
sufficient standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U result. 
The first certification opportunity for this qualification will be 2020. 
Student recruitment and progression 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
39 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this qualification. 
Students who would benefit most from studying this qualification are likely to have a Level 2 
qualification such as a GCSE in Japanese. However, students do not need to have studied 
GCSE Japanese to follow this course. 
Progression 
This qualification offers a suitable progression route from GCSE, focusing on the 
development of three language skills: listening, reading and writing. Grammar and the 
mastering of linguistic features are key elements of this qualification, as is the inclusion of 
authentic written and spoken sources, responding through writing to literature and film, and 
independent research. 
Students are expected to be able to develop knowledge and understanding of society past 
and present, and of the political, artistic and intellectual culture of Japan. They should be 
able to express and justify their own opinions, develop arguments, and persuade, in writing, 
building on the fluency developed at Key Stage 4.  
The skill of translation will be developed from those skills practised at Key Stages 3 and 4. 
The range of topics promotes a clear progression in grammar, vocabulary and cultural 
knowledge and understanding from Key Stage 4, and will increase linguistic and cognitive 
demand. The grammar list illustrates the level required for this qualification.  
This qualification offers a suitable progression route to further study at university level. In 
addition, the study of one language at GCE can facilitate and help promote the learning of 
other languages. The qualification may also add to an individual’s employability profile, 
particularly for UK organisations trading overseas as well as with international companies 
based in the UK and globally. Students can progress to a wide range of careers in areas such 
as journalism and media, education, science, medicine, the civil service, sales, marketing, 
retail, and charities. 
Students will be able to apply their knowledge, skills and understanding to authentic, real-life 
contexts. They will develop transferable skills that support the study of other GCE subjects, 
higher education study, and the transition to employment, together with an understanding 
and appreciation of Japanese-speaking countries and their cultures. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
40 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Prescribed literary texts and films 42 
Appendix 2: Grammar list 43 
Appendix 3: Kanji list 46 
Appendix 4: The context for the development of this qualification 48 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 50 
Appendix 6: Level 3 Extended Project qualification 51 
Appendix 7: Codes 53 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
41 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
42 
Appendix 1: Prescribed literary texts 
and films 
For Paper 2, students are required to study two works from the list below. The texts can be 
either two literary texts or one literary text and one film. Teachers should select works that 
are appropriate for their students. 
Literary texts 
      編著、1991 (short-story collection) 
  
窓際のトットちゃん、黒柳徹子、1991 (autobiography) 
Films 
千と千尋の神隠し、宮崎駿監督 (2001) 
ディア・ドクター、 西川美和監督 (2009) 
誰も知らない、是枝裕和監督 (2004) 
 
  
 
どんどん読めるいろいろな話、秋元  美晴・糸川  優
キッチン、吉本ばなな、1998  (novel)  - part 1 only
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
43 
Appendix 2: Grammar list 
Students at A Level are expected to have studied the grammatical system and structures of 
the language during their course. Knowledge of the grammar and structures specified for 
GCSE is assumed. 
In the examination, students will be required to use, actively and accurately, grammar and 
structures appropriate to the tasks set, drawn from the following lists. The mention of an 
item in the lists implies knowledge of both its forms and its functions at an appropriate level 
of accuracy and complexity. 
The examples in parentheses are indicative, that is they serve to illustrate the part of speech 
or structure that students must know and hence do not represent an exhaustive specification 
of the required grammatical knowledge. For items marked (R), receptive knowledge only is 
required. 
Comparatives 
A はB よりXX です。 
A とB とどちら（のほう）がXX ですか。 
A のほうがXX です。 
A よりB のほうがXX です。 
A はB ほど + negative 
A はB のXX 倍です。 
Superlatives 
(XX の中で) A が一番XX です。 
どれが一番XX ですか。 
Turning nouns into adjectives 
Using 的 
Turning adjectives into nouns 
Using さ  (e.g. この本の厚さを見てください) 
 
Verbs 
Verb 
ます stem plus 
やすい (e.g. あの先生の説明は分かりやすい。) 
にくい (e.g. この教科書は分かりにくい。) 
かた (e.g. はしの使いかたを見せてください。) 
すぎる (e.g.  昨日はちょっと食べすぎました。) 
Verb て form plus 
みる 
しまう 
おく 
ほしい 
くる (e.g.  だんだん分かってきました。) 
いく (e.g.  これからも増えていくでしょう。) 
あげる、もらう、くれる 
Verb 
ない form plus 
で (e.g.  ここに入らないでください。) 
なくてもいい (e.g.  明日は来なくてもいいです。) 
なければならない・いけない (e.g.  今晩は勉強しなければなりません。) 
ないほうがいい (e.g.  今日は行かないほうがいいです。) 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
44 
Verb た form plus 
ほうがいい  for advice 
まま    for unchanged state 
Specific verbs 
あげる、もらう、くれる 
見える、聞こえる 
Volition form 
Use as volition form (e.g.  プールに行こう) 
＋と思う (e.g.  もっと勉強しようと思います。) 
＋とする (e.g.  泳いで川を渡ろうとしています。) 
Nominalising 
Using ことor の (e.g.  テレビを見るのは楽しいです。) 
Other verb forms 
The potential form 
The causative 
The passive (including suffering passive) (including によって) 
Transitive and intransitive verbs (including  てある、ている) 
Relative clauses 
ぼうしをかぶっている人 
Defining 
XX という物・人 etc. 
Possibility and probability 
でしょう 
かもしれません 
はずです 
だろう 
Temporal and conditional clauses 
たら 
なら 
ば 
と 
場合 
とき 
3rd person 
Use of がる (e.g. 子どもはアイスクリームを食べたがる。) 
する versus なる 
Verb + ことになる・ことにする・ことになっている・ことにしている 
よう + になる・にする・にしている 
The uses of ところ 
For example: 今食べたところです。 
 今食べているところです。 
 これから食べるところです。 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
45 
Purpose of an action 
Using  ため（に） (e.g. 日本語を勉強するために日本に来ました。) 
Using  ように (e.g. 外国へ行けるように、貯金しています。) 
Explanatory sentence ending 
の・んです (e.g. かぜをひいたんです。) 
わけです (e.g. つまり、ここでの勉強をやめるというわけですね。) 
Linking sentences 
ので for ‘because’ (e.g. 雨が降ったので、登山に行きませんでした。) 
のに for ‘despite’  (e.g. 説明したのにわからないようです。) 
ても for ‘even if’ (e.g. 雨が降っても行きます。) 
Conjecture and hearsay 
Plain form plus そう (e.g. 山田さんは来ないそうです。) 
Verb or adjective stem plus そう (e.g. 雨が降りそうです。) 
Plain form plus よう (e.g. 山下さんは来ないようです。) 
 
Questions 
なぜ 
Embedded questions using か (e.g. 田中さんが来るか、知っていますか。) 
Embedded questions using かどうか (e.g. 間に合うかどうか分かりません。) 
こそあど  words 
こう、そう、ああ、どう 
Particles 
など 
も for ‘more than expected’ (e.g. 五百万円もします。) 
ずつ for “each” 
ばかり 
までに 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
46 
Appendix 3: Kanji list 
These are the kanji that the students are expected to recognise. If any kanji not on this list 
are used in the examination papers, they will be glossed. Knowledge of the kanji specified for 
GCSE is assumed.  
 
2 strokes 力            
3 strokes 々 工 士 与 亡        
4 strokes 内 
比 
不 止 欠 予 引 方 夫 収 介 反 太 
5 strokes 平 広 主 立 仕 正 世 以 代 去 用 民 
 可 付 由 末 圧 示 台 史 必 払 失 礼 
 加            
6 strokes 成 米 回 早 忙 色 当 次 両 向 交 伝 
 全 在 光 考 合 死 再 宅 汚 仮 存 因 
 守 老 任 各 共 印 危      
7 strokes 足 困 利 走 忘 医 返 良 別 局 助 材 
 役 技 応 災 究 位 声 投 初 希 決 低 
 求 告 完 対 身 努 判 含     
8 strokes 明 林 供 彼 若 歩 育 始 定 者 卒 実 
 昔 注 受 季 果 取 味 例 協 析 府 治 
 性 念 的 具 服 価 泣 苦 放 到 表 非 
 法 制 命 述 参 押 呼 直     
9 strokes 客 便 度 科 送 省 洋 活 点 界 変 信 
 建 急 発 計 美 飛 首 係 品 紀 施 染 
 逃 負 逆 保 看 研 政 約 単 指 要 故 
 重 面 相 退 専        
10 strokes 速 通 島 連 起 座 借 記 員 徒 流 倍 
 特 浴 将 害 師 核 射 留 席 原 降 残 
 弱 格 消 案 個 笑 眠 配 能 展 挙 被 
 般 疲           
11 strokes 閉 習 問 宿 組 章 転 商 悪 現 術 授 
 第 経 進 産 球 寄 済 設 許 探 救 常 
 険 紹 側 堂 細 野 望 接 深 訪 健 移 
 断 婚 責 康 情 域 得      
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
47 
12 strokes 達 森 短 開 遅 着 答 遊 貸 絵 費 温 
 運 営 最 然 集 結 暑 寒 登 給 勝 援 
 策 復 想 痛 落 軽 備 絡 期 報 悲 覚 
 喜 普 減 過 無 勤 割 景 等 葉 統 象 
 博            
13 strokes 暗 遠 数 寝 暖 農 業 違 意 感 節 続 
 試 詳 禁 戦 準 辞 資 置 路 夢 解  
14 strokes 静 歌 様 際 適 説 算 関 歴 練 慣 像 
 塾 雑 誌 増 境 疑 種 察     
15 strokes 質 熱 線 調 震 談 論 賛 課 影 億 選 
16 strokes 薬 親 機 輸 頼 避 頭 興     
17 strokes 齢 環           
18 strokes 題 観 験 職 難 簡 顔 類     
19 strokes 願 離           
20 strokes 護 議 響          
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
48 
Appendix 4: The context for the 
development of this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] and our 
ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
● reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with those 
taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
● consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including higher-education 
academics and teachers to ensure this qualification is suitable for a UK context 
● reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in their 
documents GCE Qualification Level Conditions and Requirements and GCSE/GCE Subject 
Level Conditions and Requirements for Modern Foreign Languages, published in April 2016. 
 
 
  
 
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification Principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
● demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning and 
measuring higher-order skills 
● rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and valid 
assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in end users of the knowledge, skills 
and competencies of certified students 
● inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students develop at 
different rates and have different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
● empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills, see Appendix 5. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
49 
 
Level Conditions and Requirements for Modern Foreign Languages, published in April 2016. 
 
  
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
May 2014 
“The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important change to the 
education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications will assist them in 
helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an ‘Expert 
Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or because of 
our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the world as diverse as 
Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification development 
process that has included: 
● establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-specific 
expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
● subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future oriented. The 
design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, meaning learner outcomes 
have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a learner’s 
success in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident that we have 
supported the development of qualifications that are outstanding for their coherence, 
thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as representing world-class best 
practice.
”  
  
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Lee Sing Kong 
Director, National Institute of Education, 
Singapore 
  
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
  
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
All titles correct as at May 2014. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
50 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently flagged the 
need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable them to respond with 
confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines skills, or 
competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that can be learned and 
that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform an activity or task and can be 
built upon and extended through learning.’
[1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected and 
evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this process, we 
identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the most evidence-based and 
robust skills framework. We adapted the framework slightly to include the Program for 
International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT Literacy and Collaborative Problem Solving 
(CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves the following:[2] 
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve general 
cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and communicate.[3] 
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, speaking communication, written communication, 
assertive communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, service 
orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared understanding, 
taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team organisation. 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work stress, 
adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, and physical 
adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual teams, 
work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and able to acquire 
new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher education, 
as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the teaching and learning of 
this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning materials, developed with 
stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
  
 
[1]  OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012) 
[2]  Koenig J A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop  
(National Academies Press, 2011) 
[3]  PISA – The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy (2011) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
51 
Appendix 6: Level 3 Extended Project 
qualification 
What is the Extended Project? 
The Extended Project is a standalone qualification that can be taken alongside GCEs. It 
supports the development of independent learning skills and helps to prepare students for 
their next step – whether that be higher education or employment. The qualification: 
● is recognised by higher education for the skills it develops 
● is worth half of an Advanced GCE qualification at grades A*–E 
● carries UCAS points for university entry. 
The Extended Project encourages students to develop skills in the following areas: research, 
critical thinking, extended writing and project management. Students identify and agree a 
topic area of their choice for in-depth study (which may or may not be related to a GCE 
subject they are already studying), guided by their teacher. 
Students can choose from one of four approaches to produce: 
● a dissertation (for example an investigation based on predominantly secondary research) 
● an investigation/field study (for example a practical experiment) 
● a performance (for example in music, drama or sport) 
● an artefact (for example creating a sculpture in response to a client brief or solving an 
engineering problem). 
The qualification is coursework based and students are assessed, in English, on the skills of 
managing, planning and evaluating their project. Students will research their topic, develop 
skills to review and evaluate the information, and then present the final outcome of their 
project. 
The Extended Project has 120 guided learning hours (GLH) consisting of a 40-GLH taught 
element that includes teaching the technical skills (for example research skills) and an 
80-GLH guided element that includes mentoring students through the project work. The 
qualification is 100% internally assessed and externally moderated. 
How to link the Extended Project with languages 
The Extended Project creates the opportunity to develop transferable skills for progression to 
higher education and to the workplace, through the exploration of either an area of personal 
interest or a topic of interest from within the language qualification content. The project 
must be written in English. 
Through the Extended Project, students will develop skills that support their study of 
Japanese, including: 
● conducting, organising and using research 
● independent reading in the subject area 
● planning, project management and time management 
● defining a hypothesis to be tested in investigations or developing a design brief 
● collecting, handling and interpreting data and evidence 
● evaluating arguments and processes, including arguments in favour of alternative 
interpretations of data and evaluation of experimental methodology 
● critical thinking. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
52 
In the context of the Extended Project, critical thinking refers to the ability to identify and 
develop arguments for a point of view or hypothesis and to consider and respond to 
alternative arguments. This supports the development of evaluative skills, through 
evaluating different arguments, and using qualitative and quantitative evidence to support 
informed judgements and propose evidence-based solutions to issues. 
Types of Extended Project related to languages 
Students may produce a dissertation on any topic that can be researched and debated, for 
example a controversial issue such as, ‘equal rights for immigrant communities in Japan’, 
‘religion in Japanese politics’.  
A dissertation might involve an investigation such as: 
● the impact of English language on the Japanese music industry 
● Japan as an island nation. 
The dissertation uses secondary research sources to provide a reasoned defence or a point of 
view, with consideration of counter-arguments. 
An alternative might be an investigative project or field study involving the collection of data 
from primary research, for example: 
● social integration of Japanese ex-pats working in the UK 
● a statistical survey of changing social attitudes towards social media in Japan 
● consideration of an issue that lends itself to primary research, for example an 
investigation into the impact of government subsidies on the Japanese film industry. 
Using the Extended Project to support breadth and depth 
In the Extended Project, students are assessed on the quality of the work they produce and 
the skills they develop and demonstrate through completing this work. Students should 
demonstrate that they have extended themselves in some significant way beyond what they 
have been studying in Japanese. Students can demonstrate extension in one or more 
dimensions: 
● deepening understanding – where a student explores a topic in greater depth than in 
the specification content; this could be an in-depth exploration of one aspect of the 
themes 
● broadening skills – where a student learns a new skill. This might be learning how to 
design a website or learning a new statistical technique that can be used in the analysis of 
either primary or secondary data collected by the student 
● widening perspectives – where the student’s project spans different subjects. A student 
studying Japanese with business may wish to research the impact of tourism on a 
particular region or locality. A student studying Japanese with history may wish to analyse 
the impact of natural disasters in the 20th century. 
Information to support the delivery and assessment of the Extended Project, including the 
specification, can be found on our website. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Japanese (listening, reading and writing) 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
53 
Appendix 7: Codes 
 
Type of code Use of code Code 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for 
performance tables is assigned a 
discount code that indicates the subject 
area to which it belongs. 
Discount codes are published by the DfE. 
Please see the GOV.UK 
website* 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an 
Ofqual Regulated Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) code. 
The RQF code is known as a Qualification 
Number (QN). This is the code that 
features in the DfE Section 96 and on the 
LARA as being eligible for 16–18 and 
19+ funding, and is to be used for all 
qualification funding purposes. The QN 
will appear on students’ final certification 
documentation. 
The QN for this 
qualification is: 
603/2437/5 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to 
enter students for a qualification. 
Centres will need to use the entry codes 
only when claiming students’ 
qualifications. 
A Level – 9JAO 
Paper codes These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be 
entered for individual papers. 
Paper 1: 9JAO/01 
Paper 2: 9JAO/02 
Paper 3: 9JAO/03 
 
*www.gov.uk/government/publications/2018-performance-tables-discount-code 
 
 
 
DB030724 9781446947111_GCE2017_AL JAPANESE_ISSUE2.DOCX.1–58/0 
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office:  80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121
