A Level 
Music
Technology
Specification
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology (9MT0)     
First teaching from September 2017
First certification from 2019 Issue 3
 
 
 
 
Summary of Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in 
Music Technology specification Issue 3 changes  
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this current issue Page 
number  
In Component 1: Recording, Items for submission for assessment sections the 
following has been updated: 
‘The complete recording must be submitted digitally in the format detailed in the 
administrative support guide which can be found on the Pearson website. Each 
student’s work should be clearly labelled with their name, centre number, candidate 
number and component code.’ 
‘The complete recording must be submitted via the online submission platform Learner 
Work Transfer (LWT). Each student’s work should be clearly labelled with their name, 
centre number, candidate number and component code.’ 
15 
In Component 2: Technology-based Composition Items for submission for assessment 
sections the following has been updated: 
‘The complete technology-based composition must be submitted digitally in the format 
detailed in the administrative support guide which can be found on the Pearson 
website. Each student’s work should be clearly labelled with their name, centre 
number, candidate number and component code.’ 
‘The complete technology-based composition must be submitted via the online 
submission platform LWT. Each student’s work should be clearly labelled with their 
name, centre number, candidate number and component code.’ 
27 
In Component 3: Listening and analysing the following has been updated: 
‘Each student will have seven audio recordings.’ to 
‘Each student will have seven audio files.’ 
41 
In Component 3: Listening and analysing the following has been updated: 
‘Each student will need access to a computer workstation to hear the audio recordings.’ 
‘Each student will need access to headphones and an individual audio player to hear 
the audio files.’ 
41 
 
Earlier issue 2 shows previous changes. 
If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, contact us via our website at: 
qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/contact-us.html. 
 
 
 
 
Contents 
1 Introduction 2 
Why choose Edexcel A Level Music Technology? 2 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this qualification 3 
Qualification at a glance 4 
Overview of Areas of Study 6 
2 Subject content and assessment information 7 
Component 1: Recording 8 
Component 2: Technology-based Composition 21 
Component 3: Listening and analysing 34 
Component 4: Producing and analysing 42 
Assessment Objectives 52 
3 Administration and general information 53 
Entries 53 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special consideration and 
malpractice 53 
Student recruitment and progression 55 
Appendix 1: Command word taxonomy 59 
Appendix 2: Question types 60 
Appendix 3: List of acronyms 61 
Appendix 4: The context for the development of this qualification 62 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 64 
Appendix 6: Level 3 Extended Project qualification 65 
Appendix 7: Codes 67 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
2 
 
1 Introduction 
Why choose Edexcel A Level Music Technology? 
We’ve listened to feedback from all parts of the music technology community, including 
teachers, subject associations and higher education. We’ve used this opportunity of 
curriculum change to redesign qualifications so that they reflect the demands of the evolving 
music technology environment, allowing us to design qualifications that enable your students 
to apply themselves and give them the skills to succeed in their chosen field. 
Clear emphasis on music technology, without the emphasis on music theory – We’ve 
retained the practical and theoretical elements of music technology which motivate your 
students and reduced the emphasis on music theory which we know some students have 
struggled with. 
Keeping the engaging practical content your students love – We know that it’s 
important that the content is relevant to your students and for them to see the practical 
application in everyday life. We’ve retained the practical tasks they love and ensured the 
theory is relevant to the technology they are using.   
Equipping students with skills for higher education and beyond – Our content is 
designed to develop a broad range of skills including project management, appraising and 
analysis, creativity and imagination. Students will be able to progress to undergraduate 
study in Music Technology, Sound Production, Sound Engineering and many other courses 
requiring a similar skill set. 
Clearly defined and accessible assessments – Despite an increased exam content, we’ve 
kept a lot of practical elements in the course and given higher weighting to the exam 
containing practical elements. We’ve also clearly defined the skills required in each of the 
non-examination assessment assessments to help you focus on the demands and outcomes of 
the tasks. 
Trusted expert support when you need it – We share your passion for the subject and 
will support you through the introduction of the new specification and help you feel confident 
with the new content through training events, course planners, case studies, guides and 
mapping documents. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology – 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
3 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this 
qualification 
Planning  
● Our Getting Started guide gives you an overview of the new AS and A Level 
qualifications to help you to get to grips with the changes to content and assessment and 
to help you understand what these changes mean for you and your students. 
● We will give you an editable course planner and schemes of work which you can adapt 
to suit your department.  
● Our mapping documents highlight key differences between the new and 2008 
qualifications.  
Teaching and learning  
There will be free teaching and learning support to help you deliver the new qualifications, 
including: 
● editable course planner and schemes of work that you can adapt to suit your department 
● support in delivering the new non-examination assessment tasks of recording and  
technology-based composition  
● guidance on how to co-teach the AS and A Level qualification 
Preparing for exams 
We will also provide a range of resources to help you prepare your students for the 
assessments, including: 
● access to past papers to allow you to develop homework and test resources, 
● marked exemplars of student work with examiner commentaries.  
ResultsPlus 
ResultsPlus provides the most detailed analysis available of your students’ exam 
performance. It can help you identify the topics and skills where further learning would 
benefit your students.  
Get help and support 
Our subject advisor service will ensure you receive help and guidance from us and that you 
can share ideas and information with other teachers. You can sign up to receive e-
newsletters to keep up to date with qualification updates and product and service news.  
Learn more at qualifications.pearson.com 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
4 
Qualification at a glance 
Content and assessment overview 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology consists of two 
externally-examined papers and two non-examined assessment components. 
Students must submit their non-examined assessment (NEA) and complete the examinations 
in May/June in the year of certification. 
 
Component 1: Recording (*component code: 9MT0/01) 
Non-examined assessment: externally assessed 
20% of the qualification 
60 marks 
Content overview 
Production tools and techniques to capture, edit, process and mix an audio recording. 
Assessment overview 
● One recording, chosen from a list of 10 songs provided by Pearson, consisting of a 
minimum of five compulsory instruments and two additional instruments, released on our 
website on 1st June in the calendar year preceding the year in which the qualification is to 
be awarded. 
● Keyboard tracks may be sequenced. 
● Total time must be between 3 minutes and 3½ minutes. 
● Logbook and authentication form must be supplied. 
 
Component 2: Technology-based composition (*component code: 9MT0/02) 
Non-examined assessment: externally assessed 
20% of the qualification 
60 marks 
Content overview 
Creating, editing, manipulating and structuring sounds to produce a technology-based 
composition. 
Assessment overview 
● One technology-based composition chosen from three briefs set by Pearson released on 
our website on 1st September in the calendar year preceding the year in which the 
qualification is to be awarded. 
● Synthesis and sampling/audio manipulation and creative effects use must be included. 
● Total time must be 3 minutes. 
● Logbook and authentication form must be supplied. 
 
*See Appendix 7: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to this 
qualification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology – 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
5 
 
Component 3: Listening and analysing (*component code: 9MT0/03) 
Written examination: 1 hour 30 minutes 
25% of the qualification 
75 marks 
Content overview 
● Knowledge and understanding of recording and production techniques and principles, in 
the context of a series of unfamiliar commercial recordings supplied by Pearson. 
● Application of knowledge related to all three areas of study: 
o recording and production techniques for both corrective and creative purposes 
o principles of sound and audio technology 
o the development of recording and production technology. 
Assessment overview 
● This paper comprises two sections: A and B and all questions are compulsory. 
● Unfamiliar commercial recordings to accompany questions on the paper will be provided to 
each student.  
● Section A: Listening and analysing (40 marks) – four questions, each based on unfamiliar 
commercial recordings supplied by Pearson (10 marks each). 
● Section B: Extended written responses (35 marks) – two essay questions. One comparison 
question, which uses two unfamiliar commercial recordings (15 marks).  
The second essay uses the final unfamiliar commercial recording provided by Pearson (20 
marks). 
 
Component 4: Producing and analysing (*component code: 9MT0/04) 
Written/practical examination: 2 hours 15 minutes (plus 10 minutes setting–up time) 
35% of the qualification 
105 marks 
Content overview 
● Knowledge and understanding of editing, mixing and production techniques, to be applied 
to unfamiliar materials provided by Pearson in the examination. 
● Application of knowledge related to two of the areas of study: 
o recording and production techniques for both corrective and creative purposes 
o principles of sound and audio technology. 
Assessment overview 
● This paper comprises two sections: A and B and all questions are compulsory. 
● Each student will be provided with a set of audio/MIDI materials for the practical element 
of the examination, to include: 
o audio files relating to three instrumental/vocal parts. 
o a single MIDI file from which a fourth instrumental part will be created or synthesised. 
● Students will correct and then combine the audio and MIDI materials to form a completed 
mix, which may include creating new tracks or parts from the materials provided.  
● Section A: Producing and analysing (85 marks) – five questions related to the audio and 
MIDI materials provided that include both written responses and practical tasks. 
● Section B: Extended written response (20 marks) – one essay focusing on a specific 
mixing scenario, signal path, effect or music technology hardware unit. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
6 
Overview of Areas of Study 
Three Areas of Study underpin the whole specification, encouraging both breadth and depth 
of knowledge and understanding. In addition, within individual components, they provide a 
contextual focus for students’ practical and theoretical work. They are: 
Area of Study 1: Recording and production techniques for both corrective and 
creative purposes 
In component 1, the focus of this Area of Study will be on the use of recording and mixing 
techniques to capture, edit and produce a recording. In component 2, the focus will be on 
the use of sound creation and manipulation techniques to create, edit and structure a 
technology-based composition. In component 3, the focus will be on the capture, 
arrangement of sounds and mixing and mastering techniques that have been used on a 
series of unfamiliar commercially available recordings and in component 4, the focus will be 
on use of sound creation and processing techniques to correct and mix a recording. 
Area of Study 2: Principles of sound and audio technology 
In component 3, the focus of this Area of Study will be the knowledge and understanding of 
the principles of sound and of audio technology in relation to unfamiliar commercially 
available recordings provided by Pearson in the exam. In component 4, the focus will be the 
knowledge and understanding of the principles of sound and of audio technology in relation 
to theoretical and practical contexts provided by Pearson in the exam.  
Area of Study 3: The development of recording and production technology 
In component 3, the focus of this Area of Study will be the knowledge and understanding of 
the history and development of recording and production technology from current digital 
technologies back to the mono, analogue recording technologies in the 1930s. 
The table below identifies where each Area of Study is covered in the components. Please 
refer to Appendix 3 for definitions of any acronyms used in each Area of Study. 
 
Area of Study Component 
1: Recording and production techniques 
for both corrective and creative 
purposes 
1: Recording 
2: Technology-based composition 
3: Listening and analysing 
4: Producing and analysing  
2: Principles of sound and audio 
technology 
3: Listening and analysing 
4: Producing and analysing  
3: The development of recording and 
production technology 
3: Listening and analysing  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology – 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
7 
2 Subject content and assessment 
information 
This qualification will support students in forming personal and meaningful relationships with 
music technology through the development of musical knowledge, understanding and skills. 
These include recording, technology-based composition, listening, analysing and producing. 
Students will be encouraged to engage with a wide range of music technology techniques 
and develop an understanding of the historical and cultural contexts of the use of music 
technology in the creation and production of music. 
This qualification will also allow students to develop particular strengths and interests, 
encourage lifelong learning and provide access to higher education and university degree 
courses in music technology and music technology-related subjects, as well as music 
technology-related and other careers. 
Qualification aims and objectives 
The aims and objectives of this qualification are to enable students to: 
● understand the principles of sound and audio technology and how they are used in 
creative and professional practice 
● understand a wide range of recording and production techniques and how they are used in 
practice for both corrective and creative purposes 
● develop recording skills to demonstrate an understanding of sound and its capture 
● develop the skills to create and manipulate sound in imaginative and creative ways 
● develop skills in critical and analytical listening to evaluate the use of sound and audio 
technology in students’ own and others’ work 
● develop an understanding of the historical and cultural contexts of the use of technology 
in the creation, performance and production of music 
● understand the interdependence of sound engineering knowledge, understanding 
and skills 
● make links between the integrated activities of recording, processing, mixing, sound 
creation and creative music technology applications, underpinned by analytical listening 
● understand the basic principles of acoustics, psycho-acoustics, and the digitalisation 
of sound 
● understand the latest developments in music technology and the impact they have on 
technology-based composition, performance and the tonal qualities of recordings 
● develop and extend the knowledge, understanding and skills needed to create recordings 
and technology-based compositions which communicate effectively to the listener 
● understand the history and traditions of the sonic and musical applications of technology 
and how they promote personal, social, intellectual and cultural development 
● develop the skills required to manage music technology projects from inception to 
completion, by evaluating and refining recordings and technology-based compositions over 
extended periods of time 
● develop as effective and independent students, and as critical, creative and reflective 
thinkers with enquiring minds. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
8 
Component 1: Recording 
Overview 
The purpose of this component is to assess students’ skills in capturing, editing and mixing 
sounds to produce an audio recording with increased sensitivity and control. Students will 
develop the skills to capture and manipulate sounds in corrective and creative ways in order 
to communicate effectively with listeners. 
The recording relates to Area of Study 1: Recording and production techniques for both 
corrective and creative purposes. 
Students will use technology to explore a range of techniques for capturing, editing and 
manipulating sound which will help them understand the impact of music technology on 
creative processes in the studio. They will then produce a completed mix. 
Content 
Skills, knowledge and understanding 
Students will be required to demonstrate the ability to: 
● use music production tools and techniques to capture sounds, including musical 
instruments with accuracy and control 
● manipulate existing sounds and music with technical control and style to 
produce recordings 
● use processing techniques effectively to produce a balanced final mix 
● develop competence as a music producer and sound engineer by producing recordings 
● use aural discrimination to evaluate music technology elements to refine recordings 
● use music production tools and techniques to create new sounds and music with technical 
control and style 
● develop effectiveness as a music producer and sound engineer by producing recordings. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology – 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
9 
 
Area of Study 1: Recording and production techniques for both corrective and 
creative purposes 
Topic Content Skills, knowledge and 
understanding 
1.1 Software 
and hardware 
The core and advanced 
functions of a digital audio 
workstation (DAW) 
● Functions are detailed below in this 
table 
A range of hardware  ● Microphones; audio interfaces; 
microphone   pre-amps; DI boxes; 
mixing desks; outboard effects; 
guitar pedals 
1.2 Capture of 
sound 
 
Gain structure and how it 
affects noise and distortion 
 
● Setting gain to maiximise signal-
to-noise-ratio 
● Avoiding clipping, interference and 
hiss 
● Pre-amp controls: phantom power; 
gain; pad; high pass filter; 
polarity; clip/activity LED 
Characteristics and suitability 
of microphones 
 
 
● Dynamic, condenser 
● Directional microphones; (cardioid, 
hypercardioid and figure of eight 
polar patterns): omnidirectional 
microphones 
● Proximity effect 
● Microphone frequency responses 
● Sensitivity 
Microphone techniques  
 
● Single and multiple microphone 
techniques 
● Placement distance and angle  
● Managing spill and background 
noise 
● Eliminating plosives 
1.3 Audio 
editing 
Truncating ● Scissor tool/split 
How to remove clicks and noise 
 
● Fades and cross fades 
Audio editing functions ● Normalising and inverting 
waveforms 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
10 
 
Area of Study 1: Recording and production techniques for both corrective and 
creative purposes continued 
Topic Content  Skills, knowledge and 
understanding 
1.4 Pitch and 
rhythm 
correction and 
manipulation 
How to correct inaccuracies in 
pitch 
 
 
● For example, re-tuning a vocal 
part with automatic tuning 
● Manually tuning individual 
notes using pitch shift 
● Replacing small errors with 
material from elsewhere in the 
song 
How to correct inaccuracies in 
rhythm 
● Replacing small errors with 
material from elsewhere in the 
song 
● Manually cutting and moving 
notes that are out of time 
Parameters that allow greater 
control and creativity 
● Pitch: use of automatic tuning 
as a creative effect; response 
time; fine tuning in cents 
1.5 Automation 
 
Volume and pan automation ● Fades and movement in the 
stereo field 
Automating parameters of plug-
ins 
● For example, cut-off frequency 
and delay feedback 
1.6 Dynamic 
processing 
Uses of compression and gating 
● Situations when you would use 
a compressor and or/gate 
● Limiting; expansion; de-essing 
● Pumping 
Core and advanced parameters 
of a compressor and gate 
● Compressor threshold, ratio 
and make-up gain, attack, 
release, knee and side-chain 
● Gate threshold, attack, release, 
reduction/range 
1.7 Stereo 
 
Pan  ● Setting pan positions for 
individual parts (tracks, 
instruments and/or vocals) in a 
recording 
Panning law, mono-summing and 
mid-side processing 
● Stereo widening 
● Mono compatibility 
1.8 EQ Different types of EQ in a 
recording 
● Low shelf; high shelf; band; 
low pass filter; high pass filter; 
band pass filter 
● Correcting problems including 
sibilance, noise and resonances 
How different parameters affect 
sound 
● Gain; frequency/cut off; 
resonance; Q; slope  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology – 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
11 
 
Area of Study 1: Recording and production techniques for both corrective and 
creative purposes continued 
Topic Content Skills, knowledge and 
understanding 
1.9 Effects Core and advanced parameters ● Wet/dry and bypass settings 
● Core and advanced parameters 
as listed for each effect 
Reverb ● Room; hall; plate; spring, gated; 
reversed 
● Reverb time 
Delay ● Single and multi-tap; slapback; 
timed; ping pong 
● Delay time; feedback 
● Automatic double tracking (ADT) 
Modulated delay ● Flange; chorus; phaser 
● LFO rate; LFO depth; feedback 
Wah wah pedal ● Band pass filter 
Distortion ● Overdrive; fuzz 
● Gain/drive; tone 
● Amp modelling parameters: 
amps and speaker types; virtual 
mic type/placement 
Tremolo ● LFO rate; LFO depth 
Vocal effects ● Vocoder; Talk Box 
1.10 Balance and 
blend 
 
Balance ● The relative balance of parts 
(tracks, instruments and/or 
vocals) 
Blend ● How blend is affected by 
compression, EQ and effects 
1.11 Mastering Perceived volume ● Limiting  
Understanding how EQ is used 
in the mastering process  
● Master EQ, e.g. high shelf boost 
and rumble (high pass) filter 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
12 
Assessment Information 
● First assessment summer 2019. 
● Centres must ensure that recordings submitted are valid for the series in which they are 
submitted. 
Assessment setting, taking and marking 
Assessment setting 
Students must choose one song from the list of 10 songs or artists released for the correct 
series and produce a stereo mix of that song that meets the requirements listed below.  
A list of 10 new songs or artists will be released every year. 
The list will be released: 
● on 1st June in the calendar year preceding the year in which the qualification is to be 
awarded 
● via the Pearson website. 
The length of the recording must be between 3–3½ minutes. The recording should be 
captured and produced in the student’s academic year of certification. 
In order to be assessed, the recording must meet the following instrumentation 
requirements: 
 
Instrumentation requirements 
Compulsory audio instruments 
You must record all of the instruments in this list. 
Each must be played for a total of at least  
2 minutes. 
Additional audio instruments 
You must record at least two different 
instruments from this list. 
Each must be played for a total of at 
least 1 minute. 
Drum kit recorded with a minimum of four 
microphones 
Bass guitar or double bass 
Electric guitar 
Lead vocal 
Backing vocal 
Acoustic melody instrument 
Acoustic guitar 
Keyboard 
Additional instances of any of the instruments listed above may be used in the recording, if 
appropriate to the instrumentation of the chosen song, for example additional guitar and/or 
keyboard part. 
Additional unpitched percussion instruments (including electronic percussion) must not be 
included in the recording. 
You may capture keyboard instruments using microphones, DI, or plug-in virtual 
instruments. It is not acceptable to use plug-in virtual instruments to replace any of the 
other instruments required in the minimum instrumentation. This includes drum 
replacement software and other virtual instrument player software. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology – 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
13 
 
The playing times stated above for the compulsory and additional instruments do not have to 
be in one continuous section; the time may be made up of a number of shorter sections. 
The purpose of the minimum timings is to avoid very short tracks inserted purely to satisfy 
the requirements. The additional instruments should make a significant contribution to the 
texture of the song. An example of what will not meet the requirements would be a brass 
section playing only a few stabs in an introduction. 
Any instrument(s) not achieving the minimum playing time requirement will only have access 
to levels 1 and 2 of assessment grid 5 (balance and blend) (see page 18). 
If additional unpitched percussion instruments are used then 0 marks will be awarded for 
grids 5 (balance and blend) and 7 (production) (see pages 18 and 19). 
For the purposes of this recording, the drum kit must consist of a minimum of: 
● kick 
● snare 
● hi-hats 
● crash cymbal. 
The two instruments chosen from the additional audio instruments list must be different. 
An example of an allowed combination would be: drum kit, bass guitar, electric guitar, lead 
vocal, backing vocal, acoustic guitar and electric piano. 
An example of a disallowed combination would be: drum kit, bass guitar, electric guitar, lead 
vocal, backing vocal, two acoustic guitars. 
The recording should be high quality, with careful attention to avoid noise and distortion. 
Contemporary standards are expected regarding clarity of EQ and the handling of stereo. 
Students must ensure that the instrument requirements for the task, as presented in the 
table, are met. If necessary, the song should be adapted to be 3-3½ minutes long. 
Assessment taking 
Students may:  
● replicate the instruments as present on the original song for their chosen song or 
● adapt the instrumentation to suit available performers, including transposing the song to 
suit the range of a vocalist 
● use drop-ins/overdubs and double tracking technique 
● compile performances from several complete takes of a track 
● use editing techniques to correct timing and pitch errors 
● capture keyboard parts using live recording techniques, or by MIDI sequencing techniques 
using virtual instruments. Any MIDI editing techniques (with the exception of looping) may 
be used to improve the interpretation of keyboard parts. 
Students must not use looping techniques to construct tracks from short sections of audio or 
MIDI. However, it is acceptable to correct occasional performance mistakes using short 
sections of audio from elsewhere in the song. 
Drum replacement techniques must not be used; the drums must be captured live and the 
resulting recording processed to create the final drum mix.  
During the recording sessions, the student must be the sole person in control of the entire 
recording process from capture to mixdown. The student may record as many takes as is 
practical in the time available. The recording must be made at the centre under the 
supervision of the teacher, and may not be made under professional guidance in a 
commercial studio. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
14 
Students must complete a logbook detailing the equipment and techniques used in the 
recording. 
Recording task completion 
● The recording task may take place over multiple sessions. 
● The completed task must be submitted by 15th May. 
● A stereo mix must be produced. 
● The recording must be worked on and produced in the student’s academic year of 
certification. 
● The overall length of the submission must be 3–3½ minutes.  
● Songs on the list that are longer than the maximum time of 3½ minutes should be 
arranged to fade or finish within the given time of 3–3½ minutes by omitting, for example 
a verse, chorus or middle eight.  
● The mark for under-length recordings will be reduced proportionally according to the 
percentage that the recording is under length. For example, a recording of 1½ minutes is 
50% of 3 minutes, therefore if the raw mark is 48, the scaled total would be 24. 
● In over length recordings, any content up to 3½ minutes will be assessed; content after 
3½ minutes will not be assessed and no higher than level 2 will be awarded for production 
in assessment grid 7 
● Students who submit recordings with additional unpitched percussion instruments 
(including electronic percussion) present will be awarded 0 for balance and blend in 
assessment grid 5 and 0 for production in assessment grid 7.  
● Students who submit songs not on the list for the series will receive 0 marks. 
Collaboration 
Students may work together on their preparation but group recordings are not allowed. 
While preparation may be carried out by the student in or out of the centre, the final 
recording and logbook must be completed in the centre under teacher supervision. 
Group recordings are not acceptable for which the capture and mixing is the work of more 
than one student. Each individual student must do their own tracking and mixing. 
The sharing of audio files between students is not permitted. 
Resources 
Students must have access to: 
● a selection of good quality microphones intended for music recording 
● an acoustically suitable recording space large enough to accommodate a number of 
performers 
● an acoustically suitable control room with recording hardware and software, to include a 
set of studio grade monitor speakers. 
Authenticity 
Students and teachers must sign the logbook. Teachers must be satisfied that the work is 
the student’s own and should sign the logbook to this effect. 
Teachers can give support and guidance at the development stage of the recording but not 
during the recording. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology – 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
15 
Teachers are allowed to: 
● help students with interpreting information, for example explaining assessment criteria 
and the requirements of the component 
● intervene if a health and safety issue arises 
● intervene if a risk to security of evidence arises 
● undertake a management role in relation to managing time, space, resources 
● ask questions to stimulate independent thought without leading students. 
Teachers are not allowed to: 
● direct students 
● undertake an artistic/creative role 
● give solutions to artistic/creative problems 
● make artistic/creative decisions. 
The recording must be completed in the centre under teacher supervision. 
Items for submission for assessment 
1. Recording 
The complete recording must be submitted via the online submission platform Learner Work 
Transfer (LWT). Each student's work should be clearly labelled with their name, centre 
number, candidate number and component code. 
2. Recording logbook 
The logbook must be completed and detail the equipment, techniques and instrument 
playing times used in the recording, and is essential to facilitate the accurate marking of the 
work. 
The authentication form at the back of the logbook must be completed by the teacher, and 
signed by the student and teacher, authenticating that the work is the student’s own. A copy 
of the logbook can be found on the Pearson website. 
If the logbook and authentication form are not submitted, examiners will be unable to mark 
the recording. Logbooks that are incomplete may result in examiners being unable to award 
marks in the levels of the assessment grids. 
Assessment marking 
Recordings will be externally assessed for all students. All assessment materials must be 
sent to the examiner to arrive by 15th May in the year of certification. 
There are 60 marks available for this assessment. 
Recordings will be assessed individually, using the assessment grids on the following pages. 
These criteria assess students’ skills in audio capture, processing (EQ, dynamics and effects), 
and managing the final mix regarding balance and blend, noise and distortion, and use of 
stereo. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
16 
Recording assessment grids 
In the case of assessment grids 1–4, marks are awarded in the three categories shown 
below: 
● drum kit 
● vocals (lead and backing) 
● other parts as required by the task, and handling across entire mix. 
In the case of assessment grids 5–7, marks are awarded for all tracks in the mix. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology – 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
17 
Assessment grid 1 
 Drum kit Vocals Other 
parts 
Capture 
Use of microphones and DI to capture live 
performance. 
Level Mark Mark Mark  
 0 0 0 No rewardable material; no live capture using 
microphones or DI  
Level 1 1 1 1 Limited success of capture; misjudgements 
detract from the clarity throughout 
Level 2 2 2 2 Inconsistent capture; misjudgements 
occasionally detract from clarity 
Level 3 3 3 3 Competent capture; misjudgements do not 
impact significantly on clarity 
Level 4 4 4 4 Excellent capture throughout 
 TOTAL for Capture – 12 marks 
 
Assessment grid 2 
 Drum kit Vocals Other 
parts 
Editing – processing EQ (drum kit, vocals, 
other parts) 
Assessment of other parts must also consider 
distribution of frequencies across entire mix 
Level Mark Mark Mark  
 0 0 0 No rewardable material, including extreme 
uncontrolled variation in EQ in a number of 
places 
Level 1 1 1 1 Limited success in shaping EQ; misjudgements 
detract from the overall mix throughout 
Level 2 2 2 2 Inconsistent shaping of EQ; misjudgements 
occasionally detract from the overall mix 
Level 3 3 3 3 Competent shaping of EQ; misjudgements do 
not impact significantly on the overall mix 
Level 4 4 4 4 Excellent shaping of EQ throughout 
 TOTAL for Processing EQ – 12 marks 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
18 
Assessment grid 3 
 Drum kit Vocals Other 
parts 
Editing – dynamic processing (drum kit, 
vocals and other parts) 
Assessment of other parts must also consider 
management of dynamics across the entire 
mix 
Level Mark Mark Mark  
 0 0 0 No rewardable material, including extreme 
uncontrolled variation in dynamics in a 
number of places 
Level 1 1 1 1 Limited success in management of dynamics; 
misjudgements detract from the overall mix 
throughout 
Level 2 2 2 2 Inconsistent management of dynamics; 
misjudgements occasionally detract from the 
overall mix 
Level 3 3 3 3 Competent management of dynamics; 
misjudgements do not impact significantly on 
the overall mix 
Level 4 4 4 4 Excellent management of dynamics 
throughout 
 TOTAL for Processing Dynamics – 12 marks 
 
Assessment grid 4 
 Drum kit Vocals Other 
parts 
Editing – use of effects, including 
ambience (drum kit, vocals, other parts) 
assessment of other parts must also consider 
distribution of effects across entire mix 
Level Mark Mark Mark  
 0 0 0 No rewardable material, including extreme 
misjudgements in effects use in most parts 
Level 1 1 1 1 Limited success in use of effects; 
misjudgements detract from the overall mix 
throughout 
Level 2 2 2 2 Inconsistent use of effects; misjudgements 
occasionally detract from the overall mix 
Level 3 3 3 3 Competent use of effects; misjudgements do 
not impact significantly on the overall mix 
Level 4 4 4 4 Excellent use of effects throughout 
 TOTAL for Processing Effects – 12 marks 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology – 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
19 
Assessment grid 5 
Marking instructions 
No higher than level 2 will be awarded if any instrument does not meet the minimum playing 
time. 
0 marks will be awarded if unpitched percussion instruments (including electronic percussion) 
are present. 
Level Mark Production – balance and blend 
 0 No rewardable material, including extreme misjudgements in balance 
and blend in most parts; parts missing or inaudible.  
Level 1 1 Limited success with balance and blend; misjudgements detract from 
the overall mix 
Level 2 2 Inconsistent balance and blend; misjudgements occasionally detract 
from the overall mix 
Level 3 3 Competent balance and blend; misjudgements do not impact 
significantly on the overall mix 
Level 4 4 Excellent balance and blend throughout 
 
Assessment grid 6 
Level Mark Production – use of stereo 
 0 No rewardable material, including completely mono submission or only 
one channel present 
Level 1 1 Limited success in use of stereo; misjudgements detract from the 
overall mix throughout 
Level 2 2 Inconsistent use of stereo; misjudgements occasionally detract from the 
overall mix 
Level 3 3 Competent use of stereo; misjudgements do not impact significantly on 
the overall mix 
Level 4 4 Excellent use of stereo throughout 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
20 
Assessment grid 7 
Marking instructions 
No higher than level 2 will be awarded if the student submission is longer than the required 
maximum length.  
0 marks will be awarded if additional unpitched percussion instruments (including electronic 
percussion) are present. 
Level Mark Production – management of noise, distortion, master level 
and audio editing (including compiling, pitch correction, 
handling of fades, top and tail) 
 0 No rewardable material 
Level 1 1 Limited success in management of noise, distortion, master level and 
audio editing; misjudgements detract from the overall mix 
Level 2 2 Inconsistent management of noise, distortion, master level and audio 
editing; misjudgements occasionally detract from the overall mix 
Level 3 3 Competent management of noise, distortion, master level and audio 
editing; misjudgements do not impact significantly on the overall mix 
Level 4 4 Excellent management of noise, distortion, master level and audio 
editing throughout 
 
Security and backups 
Centres must keep backup copies of the recording software project files (including all audio 
files) for each student’s recording, as was submitted, for a period of six months after the 
results are released. 
It is also the centre’s responsibility to keep the work that students have submitted for 
assessment secure. Secure storage is defined as a securely locked cabinet or cupboard. 
The rules on storage also apply to electronic data. For example, centres should collect 
memory sticks for secure storage between sessions or restrict student access to specific 
areas of the centre’s IT network. 
For materials stored electronically, centres are strongly advised to utilise firewall protection 
and virus-checking software, and to employ an effective backup strategy, so that an up-to-
date archive of students’ evidence is maintained. 
Further information 
For up-to-date advice on teacher involvement and administration of non-examination 
assessments, please refer to the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ) document Instructions 
for conducting non-examination assessments (new GCE and GCSE specifications) available 
on the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology – 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
21 
Component 2: Technology-based Composition 
Overview 
The purpose of this component is to assess students’ skills in creating, editing and 
structuring sounds with increased sensitivity and control to develop a technology-based 
composition. Students will develop the skills to create and manipulate sounds in imaginative 
and creative ways in order to communicate effectively with listeners. 
The technology-based composition relates to Area of Study 1, recording and production 
techniques for both corrective and creative purposes. 
Students will use technology to explore a range of techniques for developing ideas. They will 
then turn their ideas into completed technology-based compositions. 
Students should develop in-depth knowledge and understanding of musical elements and 
musical language, and apply these, where appropriate, to their own technology-based 
compositions. 
Content 
Skills, knowledge and understanding 
Students will be required to demonstrate the ability to: 
● compose music that is musically convincing and shows a sophisticated use of musical and 
technological elements in combination, responding to a brief supplied by others 
● apply musical elements and language, for example structure, timbre, texture, tempo and 
rhythm, melody, harmony and tonality and dynamics within the context of music 
technology 
● manipulate existing sounds and music with technical control and style to produce  
technology-based compositions 
● use synthesis and sampling to create and manipulate sound in imaginative and creative 
ways 
● develop effectiveness as a music producer and sound engineer by producing technology-
based compositions 
● use music production tools and techniques to create new sounds and music with technical 
control and style 
● use processing techniques effectively to produce a balanced final mix 
● use aural discrimination and technical skill to evaluate music technology elements to refine 
technology-based compositions. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
22 
 
Area of Study 1: Recording and production techniques for both corrective and 
creative purposes 
Topic Content Skills, knowledge and 
understanding 
1.1 Software and 
hardware 
The core and advanced functions 
of a digital audio workstation 
(DAW) 
● Functions are detailed below in 
this table 
A range of hardware  ● Microphones; audio interfaces; 
microphone pre-amps; DI 
boxes; mixing desks; outboard 
effects; guitar pedals 
Other programming environments 
and new and emerging software 
● MIDI, OSC or any other 
programming environments 
may be used 
1.2 Capture of 
sound (may be 
required for some 
briefs) 
Gain structure and how it affects 
noise and distortion 
 
● Setting gain to maximise 
signal-to noise-ratio 
● Avoiding clipping, interference 
and hiss 
● Pre-amp controls: phantom 
power; gain; pad; high pass 
filter; polarity; clip/activity LED 
Characteristics and suitability of 
microphones 
 
 
● Dynamic; condenser 
● Directional microphones; 
(cardioid, hypercardioid and 
figure of eight polar patterns); 
omnidirectional microphones 
● Proximity effect 
● Microphone frequency 
responses 
● Sensitivity 
Microphone techniques  
 
● Single and multiple microphone 
techniques 
● Placement distance and angle  
● Managing spill and background 
noise 
● Eliminating plosives 
1.3 Synthesis How synthesis is used to create 
sounds 
● Selecting and mixing different 
waveforms; white noise; low 
frequency oscillator (LFO); 
filters; envelopes  
How timbre is affected by a wider 
range of parameters 
● How timbre is affected by cut-
off frequency and resonance 
● Mapping envelope and LFO to 
filter cut-off and pitch 
● Oscillator octave, coarse and 
fine tuning 
● Pitch bend  
● Portamento; arpeggiator 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology – 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
23 
 
Area of Study 1: Recording and production techniques for both corrective and 
creative purposes continued 
Topic Content Skills, knowledge and 
understanding 
1.4 Sampling Editing samples ● Cutting/trimming 
● Tuning  
Looping ● Loop points 
● Crossfades  
Pitch mapping ● Transposing 
Other sampling parameters 
 
● Reversing samples; stuttering 
● Using synthesis parameters on 
samples, e.g. filter and envelope 
● Setting pitch and key zones 
● Velocity layering 
Context ● Use of samples in new contexts 
to create new meanings or 
effects 
1.5 Sequencing Real-time input ● Using a MIDI controller keyboard 
Non real-time input ● Step grid (drum editor) 
● Using a pencil tool to draw in 
notes 
Quantise ● Hard quantise values 
● Swing/percentage quantise 
● Groove templates 
Editing skills  ● Piano roll and list editor 
● Velocity and note length 
● Cutting, looping and duplicating  
1.6 Audio editing Truncating ● Scissor tool/split 
How to remove clicks and noise ● Fades and cross fades 
Audio editing functions ● Normalising and inverting 
waveforms 
1.7 Pitch and 
rhythm 
correction and 
manipulation 
How to correct inaccuracies in 
pitch 
 
● For example, re-tuning a vocal 
part with automatic tuning 
● Manually tuning individual notes 
by drawing in pitch, playing via 
MIDI or offline pitch shift process 
Parameters that allow greater 
control and creativity 
● Pitch: use of automatic tuning as 
a creative effect; formant shifts; 
fine tuning in cents 
● Rhythm: groove templates; time 
stretching 
1.8 Automation 
 
Volume and pan automation ● Fades and movement in the 
stereo field 
Automating parameters of plug-ins ● For example, cut-off frequency 
and delay feedback 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
24 
 
Area of Study 1: Recording and production techniques for both corrective and 
creative purposes continued 
Topic Content Skills, knowledge and 
understanding 
1.9 Dynamic 
processing 
Uses of compression and gating ● Situations when you would use 
a compressor and or/gate 
● Limiting; expansion; de-essing 
● Pumping 
Core and advanced parameters of 
a compressor and gate 
● Compressor threshold, ratio, 
make-up gain, attack, release, 
knee and side-chain 
● Gate threshold, attack, release, 
reduction/range 
1.10 Stereo 
 
Pan  ● Setting pan positions for 
individual parts (tracks, 
instruments and/or vocals) in a 
recording 
1.11 EQ Different types of EQ in a 
recording 
● Low shelf; high shelf; band; 
low pass filter; high pass filter; 
band pass filter 
● Parametric EQ; graphic EQ 
● Correcting problems including 
sibilance, noise and resonances 
How different parameters affect 
sound 
● Gain; cut-off frequency 
resonance; Q; slope  
1.12 Effects Core and advanced parameters ● Wet/dry and bypass settings 
● Using sends and inserts 
● Core and advanced parameters 
as listed for each effect 
Reverb ● Room; hall; plate; spring, 
gated; reversed 
● Reverb time 
Delay ● Single and multi-tap; slapback; 
timed; ping pong 
● Delay time; feedback 
● Automatic double tracking 
(ADT) 
Modulated delay ● Flange; chorus; phaser 
● LFO rate; LFO depth; feedback 
Wah wah pedal ● Band pass filter 
Distortion ● Overdrive; fuzz 
● Gain; drive; tone 
● Amp modelling parameters: 
amps and speaker types; 
virtual mic type/placement 
Tremolo ● LFO rate; LFO depth 
Vocal effects ● Vocoder; Talk Box 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology – 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
25 
 
Area of Study 1: Recording and production techniques for both corrective and 
creative purposes continued 
Topic Content Skills, knowledge and 
understanding 
1.13 Balance and 
blend 
 
Balance ● The relative balance of parts 
(tracks, instruments and/or 
vocals) 
Blend ● How blend is affected by 
compression, EQ and effects 
1.14 Mastering Perceived volume ● Limiting  
Understanding how EQ is used in 
the mastering process  
● Master EQ, e.g. high shelf boost 
and rumble (high pass) filter 
 
Assessment Information 
● First assessment summer 2019. 
● Centres must ensure that technology-based compositions submitted are valid for the 
series in which they are submitted. 
Assessment setting, taking and marking 
Assessment setting 
Three new technology-based composition briefs will be released each year. 
The briefs will be released: 
● on 1st September in the calendar year preceding the year in which the qualification is to 
be awarded 
● via the Pearson website. 
Students should choose one technology-based composition brief released for that series with 
the support of their teacher. 
The format of the briefs will be the same each year but the specific content will vary.  
The options will be: 
1. To produce music for a supplied stimulus. The stimulus may be a short film clip, computer 
game footage, or a descriptive scenario such as an art installation. If the stimulus is a 
video clip, only the version of the video supplied by Pearson should be used. Audio must 
not be sampled from any other version of the video. It should be remembered that this is 
a composition task, and a Foley soundtrack and/or dialogue must not be included. 
2. To use a text supplied by Pearson as the basis for a technology-based composition, which 
may be implemented as a song, or may use readings of the text, or samples made from 
portions of the text. The meaning of the text must be reflected in the music. 
3. To use ‘sound bites’ (i.e. samples) in a structured way to create a technology-based 
composition concerning a topic set out by Pearson. 
The technology-based composition must be 3 minutes long, and must contain at least six 
separate vocal/instrumental/sample-based parts. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
26 
Assessment taking 
Students must use synthesis and sampling/audio manipulation techniques, as well as 
creative effects processing to create their own unique sounds for use within their technology-
based composition. 
Virtual instruments and live recorded audio may also be used. 
While live recording may be used, it should be remembered that simply doing a live 
recording of a song in response to one of the briefs would be unlikely to meet the 
requirements for synthesis, sampling and audio manipulation. 
Automation must be used to create real-time control over features such as volume, panning 
and plug-in parameters. 
Any samples used must be manipulated in order to gain credit. 
The technology-based composition briefs will make demands in terms of the treatment of 
ideas, techniques and structures but between them will be sufficiently open ended to allow 
students the freedom to work in any technology-based style or genre. 
Technology-based composition task completion 
● The technology–based composition task may be completed over multiple sessions.  
● The completed task must be submitted by 15th May.  
● A stereo recording must be produced. 
● Centres must ensure that the technology-based compositions submitted are valid for the 
series in which they are submitted.  
● The technology-based composition must be worked on and produced in the student’s 
intended year of certification.  
● The overall length of the submission must be 3 minutes.  
● The mark for under-length technology-based compositions will be reduced proportionally 
according to the percentage that the composition is under length. For example, a 
composition of 1½ minutes is 50% of 3 minutes, therefore if the raw mark is 48, the 
scaled total would be 24.  
● In over length technology-based compositions, any content up to 3 minutes will be 
assessed; content after 3 minutes will not be assessed and no higher than level 2 will be 
awarded for response to brief in assessment grid 5. 
Collaboration 
Students may work together on their preparation, but group compositions are not allowed. 
While preparation may be carried out by the student in or out of the centre, the final 
technology-based composition and logbook must be completed in the centre under teacher 
supervision. 
Resources 
Students must have access to: 
● DAW with sequencing and audio editing software, including access to effects plug-in suites 
● comprehensive synthesis and sampling packages 
● an acoustically suitable room with studio grade monitor speakers for mixing down the final 
recording. 
Students may also require access to: 
● MIDI–controlled virtual instruments 
● hardware synths/keyboards and samplers 
● facilities for recording live audio. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology – 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
27 
Technology-based composition recording 
Technology-based compositions will be realised through music technology. The production 
and quality of the recording will be integral to the concept and impact of the technology-
based compositions and will be assessed along with the musical content of the technology-
based composition. Students should pay attention to all aspects of the production – capture, 
balance and blend, EQ, dynamics, creative effects and use of the stereo field. 
Authenticity 
Students and teachers must sign the logbook. Teachers must be satisfied that the work is 
the student’s own and should sign the logbook to this effect. 
Teachers can give support and guidance at the development stage of the technology-based 
composition but not during the production of the final technology-based composition. 
Teachers are allowed to: 
● help students with interpreting information, for example explaining assessment criteria 
and the requirements of the component 
● intervene if a health and safety issue arises 
● intervene if a risk to security of evidence arises 
● undertake a management role in relation to managing time, space, resources 
● ask questions to stimulate independent thought without leading students. 
Teachers are not allowed to: 
● direct students 
● undertake an artistic/creative role 
● give solutions to artistic/creative problems 
● make artistic/creative decisions. 
The final recording must be completed in the centre under teacher supervision.  
Items for submission for assessment 
1. Recording 
The complete technology-based composition must be submitted via the online submission 
platform LWT. Each student's work should be clearly labelled with their name, centre 
number, candidate number and component code. 
2. Technology-based composition logbook 
The logbook must be completed and detail the original sound design that has been carried 
out using synthesis, sampling and creative effects. It must also list the sources for all 
samples that have been used. 
The authentication form at the back of the logbook must be completed by the teacher, and 
signed by the student and teacher, authenticating that the work is the student’s own. A copy 
of the logbook can be found on the Pearson website. 
If the logbook and authentication form are not submitted, examiners will be unable to mark 
the technology-based composition. Logbooks that are incomplete may result in examiners 
being unable to award marks in the levels of the assessment grids. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
28 
Assessment marking 
Technology-based compositions will be externally assessed for all students. All assessment 
materials must be sent to the examiner to arrive by 15th May in the year of certification. 
There are 60 marks available for this assessment. 
Compositions will be assessed individually, using the assessment grids on the following 
pages. 
These criteria assess students’ skills in creating and developing sounds using synthesis, 
sampling and creative effects, production of the mix, response to brief and coherence, and 
demonstrating technical control over musical elements (melody/harmony/rhythm/texture/ 
structure). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology – 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
29 
Technology-based composition assessment grids 
The use of technology and the structural elements of the composition must be clearly audible 
in the submitted recording to gain credit. 
Assessment grid 1 
Synthesis – designing own sounds, and manipulating using automation or real-time control 
of LFO, filter, envelopes; cut-off and resonance, attack, decay, sustain, release; mapping 
envelopes. 
Level Mark Create and edit sounds – synthesis  
 0 No rewardable material  
Level 1 1–2 • Limited use of synthesis techniques 
• Synthesis use is ineffective and does not make a significant 
contribution to the piece overall 
Level 2 3–4 • Inconsistent use of synthesis techniques 
• Use of synthesis is evident but with some misjudgements 
Level 3 5–6 • Competent use of a range of synthesis techniques 
• Use of synthesis is evident and makes a positive contribution to the 
piece overall 
Level 4 7–8 • Excellent use of a range of synthesis techniques throughout 
• Synthesis has been used creatively with a high level of skill and 
control to develop an original sonic palette 
Assessment grid 2 
Sampling – using short audio files to develop new sonic elements; pitch-mapping, 
cutting/trimming, looping; creating new meanings or effect; sample rate and bit-depth; 
manipulation using sampling. 
 
Level Mark Create and edit sounds – sampling 
 0 No rewardable material  
Level 1 1–2 ● Limited use of sampling techniques 
● Sample use is ineffective and does not make a significant contribution 
to the piece overall 
Level 2 3–4 ● Inconsistent use of sampling techniques 
● Sample use is evident but with some misjudgements 
Level 3 5–6 ● Competent use of a range of sampling techniques 
● Sample use is evident and makes a positive contribution to the piece 
overall 
Level 4 7–8 ● Excellent use of a range of sampling techniques throughout 
● Samples have been used creatively with a high level of skill and 
control to develop an original sonic palette 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
30 
Assessment grid 3 
Creative effects – adding time-based effects or processors to modify existing sounds; control 
of core and detailed parameters. 
 
Level Mark Create and edit sounds – creative effects 
 0 No rewardable material  
Level 1 1–2 ● Limited use of creative effects techniques 
● Creative effects use is ineffective and does not make a significant 
contribution to the piece overall 
Level 2 3–4 ● Inconsistent use of creative effects techniques 
● Creative effects use is evident but with some misjudgements 
Level 3 5–6 ● Competent use of a range of creative effects techniques 
● Creative effects use is evident and makes a positive contribution to 
the piece overall 
Level 4 7–8 ● Excellent use of a range of creative effects techniques throughout 
● Creative effects have been used imaginatively with a high level of skill 
and control to develop an original sonic palette 
 
Assessment grid 4 
Editing of mix must consider balance and processing to include stereo, EQ, dynamics, mix 
effects, master level, top and tail. 
Level Mark Create and edit sounds 
Editing of mix – control of processing and balance 
 0 No rewardable material. Parts missing or inaudible  
Level 1 1–2 Unconvincing editing of mix 
Handling of processing and balance is limited 
Level 2 3–4 Generally convincing editing of mix 
Handling of processing and balance is mostly successful 
Level 3 5–6 Excellent editing of mix 
All aspects of processing and balance are handled successfully 
throughout 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology – 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
31 
Assessment grid 5 
Marking instructions 
No higher than level 2 will be awarded if the submission is longer than the required length.  
Level Mark Structure sounds 
Response to brief – sonic and musical ideas combined to reflect 
the requirements of the brief 
 0 No rewardable material 
Level 1 1–2 Unconvincing combination of sonic and musical ideas 
Sonic and musical ideas are limited in meeting the requirements of the 
brief 
Level 2 3–4 Generally convincing combination of sonic and musical ideas 
Sonic and musical ideas meet mostly the requirements of the brief 
Level 3 5–6 Excellent combination of sonic and musical ideas 
All aspects of the brief are successfully reflected throughout 
 
Assessment grid 6 
Level Mark Structure sounds 
Style and coherence – use of stylistic conventions and control of 
flow and direction of ideas 
 0 No rewardable material  
Level 1 1–2 • Unconvincing flow and direction to the piece 
• Use of stylistic conventions is limited  
Level 2 3–4 • Generally convincing flow and direction to the piece 
• Use of stylistic conventions is mostly successful 
Level 3 5–6 • Excellent flow and direction to the piece 
• Stylistic conventions are used successfully throughout  
 
For the following five assessment grids, all will be assessed but only the three 
highest marks will be used to calculate the total. 
Assessment grid 7 
Level Mark Structure sounds – melody 
 0 No rewardable material  
Level 1 1–2 ● Limited or repetitive melodic ideas 
● Melodies are underdeveloped and lack shape, fluency and direction 
Level 2 3–4 ● Melodic ideas are developed in some places 
● Melodies are generally effective but may lack shape, fluency or 
direction 
Level 3 5–6 ● Consistent development of melodic ideas throughout  
● Melodies have shape, fluency and a sense of direction 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
32 
Assessment grid 8 
Level Mark Structure sounds – harmony 
 0 No rewardable material  
Level 1 1–2 • Limited or misjudged harmonic ideas 
• Harmonies are underdeveloped and lack variety 
Level 2 3–4 • Harmonic ideas are mostly suitable 
• Harmonies are functional and show some development 
Level 3 5–6 • Harmonic ideas are imaginative 
• Harmony is well handled throughout with variety and development 
Assessment grid 9 
Level Mark Structure sounds – rhythm 
 0 No rewardable material  
Level 1 1–2 ● Limited or repetitive rhythmic ideas 
● Rhythms are underdeveloped and lack shape, fluency and direction 
Level 2 3–4 ● Rhythmic ideas are developed in some places 
● Rhythms are generally effective but may lack shape, fluency or 
direction 
Level 3 5–6 ● Consistent development of rhythmic ideas throughout 
● Rhythms have shape, fluency and a sense of direction 
Assessment grid 10 
Level Mark Structure sounds – texture 
 0 No rewardable material  
Level 1 1–2 ● Limited or misjudged use of texture 
● Texture is underdeveloped and lacks variety 
Level 2 3–4 ● Use of texture is mostly suitable 
● Texture is functional and shows some development 
Level 3 5–6 ● Use of texture is imaginative 
● Texture is well handled throughout with variety and development 
Assessment grid 11 
Level Mark Structure sounds – form and structure 
 0 No rewardable material  
Level 1 1–2 ● Limited or repetitive structural ideas 
● Structure is underdeveloped and lacks variety 
Level 2 3–4 ● Structural ideas are mostly suitable 
● Structure is functional and shows some development 
Level 3 5–6 ● Structural ideas are imaginative 
● Structure is well handled throughout with variety and development 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology – 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
33 
Security and backups 
Centres must keep backup copies of the software project files for each student’s technology-
based composition, as submitted, for a period of six months after the results are released. 
It is also the centre’s responsibility to keep the work that students have submitted for 
assessment secure. Secure storage is defined as a securely locked cabinet or cupboard. 
The rules on storage also apply to electronic data. For example, centres should collect 
memory sticks for secure storage between sessions or restrict student access to specific 
areas of the centre’s IT network. 
For materials stored electronically, centres are strongly advised to utilise firewall protection 
and virus-checking software, and to employ an effective backup strategy, so that an up-to-
date archive of students’ evidence is maintained.  
Further information 
For up-to-date advice on teacher involvement and administration of non-examination 
assessments, please refer to the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ) document Instructions 
for conducting non-examination assessments (new GCE and GCSE specifications) available 
on the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
34 
Component 3: Listening and analysing 
Overview 
The purpose of this component is for students to develop listening and analysing skills 
through the study of a range of music production techniques used in unfamiliar commercial 
recordings. The production stages of capture and creating sounds, editing and arranging 
sounds and mixing will be covered in the examination. Content is grouped according to three 
of the areas of study. 
This component gives students the opportunity to identify, analyse and evaluate a range of 
creative music production techniques, as applied to the unfamiliar commercial recordings 
supplied in the examination. As well as identifying effects and their associated parameter 
settings, students will explain the principles behind the choice of the effects heard on each 
recording, and their sonic character, in a series of written responses.  
Through the deconstruction and analysis of a final, commercial product, students will expand 
their knowledge of the recording and production practices associated with a number of 
historical eras. 
Content 
Skills, knowledge and understanding 
Students will be required to demonstrate the ability to: 
● comment on the music production tools and techniques used to capture sounds, including 
musical instruments 
● use aural discrimination to identify and evaluate music technology elements in unfamiliar 
works 
● analyse critically and comment perceptively on music production techniques from a range 
of source material and their impact on music styles 
● apply musical elements and language, for example structure, timbre, texture, tempo and 
rhythm, melody, harmony, tonality and dynamics within the context of music technology 
● produce informed written responses about equipment used in unfamiliar commercial 
recordings by identifying effects used and associated parameter settings 
● understand the wider context of music technology and how it has influenced trends in 
music. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology – 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
35 
Music styles 
Students should have knowledge and understanding of the instruments, the sounds 
associated with them and the combination of instruments and voices used in the following 
styles: 
● jazz 
● blues 
● rock ’n’ roll 
● rock 
● metal 
● punk 
● soul 
● disco and funk 
● reggae 
● acoustic and folk 
● commercial pop 
● urban 
● electronic and dance 
● music for the media 
● computer game and film. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
36 
Students need to understand a range of recording and production techniques, identifying and 
discussing their use in the context of a series of unfamiliar commercial recordings. The 
techniques, which are further defined in the Area of Study 1 content section below. 
 
Area of Study 1: Recording and production techniques for both corrective and 
creative purposes 
Topic Content Skills, knowledge and 
understanding 
1.1 Capture of 
sound 
Gain structure and how it 
affects noise and 
distortion 
● Setting gain to maximise signal-to-
noise ratio 
● Avoiding clipping, interference and 
hiss 
● Checking input and output levels 
when several effects/pieces of 
hardware are chained together 
The characteristics and 
suitability of microphone 
types  
● Dynamic; condenser; ribbon 
The suitability of 
microphone placement 
techniques 
● Suitable distances and angles 
● Recording instruments using multiple 
microphones, e.g. drum kit  
The advantages and 
disadvantages of 
microphone types in 
terms of polar pattern 
and frequency response 
● Directional: cardioid; hypercardioid;  
figure of 8 
● Proximity effect 
● Omnidirectional 
● Frequency response and transient 
response 
Advanced microphone 
techniques 
● Coincident and spaced stereo pairs 
How microphones work ● Sensitivity 
● Microphone switches: pad; high pass 
filter; polar pattern switch 
● Microphone accessories: pop shield; 
elastic suspension/cradle 
1.2 Synthesis How synthesis is used to 
create sounds 
● Selecting and mixing sine, square and 
saw waveforms; white noise; low 
frequency oscillator (LFO); low pass 
and high filters; envelopes  
How timbre is affected by 
a wider range of 
parameters 
● How timbre is affected by cut-off 
frequency, resonance, attack, decay, 
sustain and release (amplitude 
envelope) 
● Oscillator octave, coarse and fine 
tuning 
● Pitch bend range 
● Monophonic; polyphonic  
● Portamento; arpeggiator 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology – 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
37 
 
Area of Study 1: Recording and production techniques for both corrective and 
creative purposes continued 
Topic Content Skills, knowledge and understanding 
1.3 Sampling Pitch mapping ● Transposing 
Editing samples ● Cutting and trimming 
Looping ● Loop points 
Advanced parameters ● Sample rate and bit depth 
● Reversing samples 
1.4 Sequencing Quantise ● Hard quantise values, e.g. 8, 12, 16, 
24, 32 (and note length equivalents) 
● Swing/percentage quantise 
Editing skills  ● Velocity and note length 
● Piano roll editor 
● Cutting, looping and duplicating  
1.5 Audio editing How to remove clicks 
and noise 
● Removing hiss, hum and plosives 
1.6 Pitch and 
rhythm correction 
and manipulation 
How to correct 
inaccuracies in pitch 
● For example, re-tuning a vocal part with 
automatic tuning 
● Manually tuning individual notes using 
pitch shift 
How to correct 
inaccuracies in rhythm 
● For example, tightening drum parts 
using audio quantise manually cutting 
and moving notes that are out of time 
Parameters that allow 
greater control and 
creativity 
● Pitch: use of automatic tuning as a 
creative effect; response time; selecting 
notes/scales; fine tuning  in cents 
● Rhythm: time-stretch 
1.7 Automation How to use volume and 
pan automation 
● Fades and movement in the stereo field 
Automating parameters 
of plug-ins 
● For example, cut-off frequency and 
delay feedback 
1.8 Dynamic 
processing 
Uses of compression 
and gating 
● Situations when you would use a 
compressor and or/gate 
● Limiting; expansion; de-essing 
● Pumping 
Core and advanced 
parameters of a 
compressor and gate 
● Compressor threshold, ratio and make-
up gain, attack, release and side-chain 
● Gate threshold and reduction/range 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
38 
 
Area of Study 1: Recording and production techniques for both corrective and 
creative purposes continued 
Topic Content Skills, knowledge and understanding 
1.9 Stereo Pan ● How to identify pan positions of 
individual parts (tracks, instruments 
and/or vocals) in a recording 
1.10 EQ Different types of EQ 
used in a recording 
● Low shelf; high shelf; band; low pass 
filter; high pass filter; band pass filter 
● Correcting problems, including sibilance, 
noise and resonance 
How parameters affect 
the sound  
● Gain; frequency/cut-off; resonance; Q; 
slope 
1.11 Effects Core and advanced 
parameters 
● Wet/dry and bypass settings 
● Core and advanced parameters as listed 
for each effect 
Reverb  ● Room; hall; plate; spring; gated; 
reversed 
● Reverb time 
Delay ● Single and multi-tap; slapback; timed; 
ping pong 
● Delay time; feedback 
● Automatic double tracking (ADT) 
Modulated delay ● Flange, chorus and phaser 
● LFO rate; LFO depth; feedback 
Wah wah pedal ● Band pass filter 
Distortion ● Overdrive; fuzz 
● Gain/drive; tone 
Tremolo ● LFO rate; LFO depth 
Vocal effects ● Vocoder; Talk Box 
Lo-fi ● Bit-crushing; vinyl surface noise/crackle 
effects; telephone effect; vocal 
distortion; ambient/found sound 
1.12 Balance and 
blend 
Balance ● The relative balance of parts (tracks, 
instruments and/or vocals) 
Blend ● How blend is affected by compression, 
EQ and effects 
1.13 Mastering Perceived volume ● Limiting 
Mastering parameters ● Stereo width; master reverb wet/dry 
mix 
Understanding how EQ 
is used in the mastering 
process  
● Master EQ, e.g. high shelf boost and 
rumble (high pass) filter 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology – 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
39 
Students will also need to study the technical principles that underpin recording and 
production techniques, with a focus on how the acoustics of the recording space, 
interconnection of equipment and signal path all affect the recorded signal. Furthermore, 
students will be required to apply an understanding of units of measurement and scales 
when analysing effects parameters. These principles are defined in the Area of Study 2 
content table below. 
 
Area of Study 2: Principles of audio and sound technology 
Topic Content Skills, knowledge and understanding 
2.1 Acoustics How the live room 
acoustics affect the 
recording 
● Room size; absorption; reflection; 
diffusion 
● Isolation booths for vocals, drums and 
amps; using natural and chamber reverb 
Acoustics parameters ● Describing a reverb tail; pre-delay time; 
reverb time (RT60) 
2.2 Leads and 
signals 
Connectivity including 
signal path and signal 
types 
● Discussing signal path in context of the 
effects heard on commercial recordings 
The different types and 
uses of leads 
 
● Jack; XLR 
● Use of balanced connections to avoid 
noise problems, e.g. hiss, hum and 
rumble 
● DI boxes 
Impedance ● Signal levels: mic; line; instrument 
2.3 Numeracy Technical numeracy ● Parameter settings and associated units 
of measurement: levels in decibels; 
frequency in Hertz; delay time in 
milliseconds/note values; tempo in bpm; 
synthesiser octave settings in feet; 
coarse tuning in semitones; fine tuning in 
cents; feedback and effects mix 
percentages 
2.4 Levels Principles of levels and 
metering 
● Management of levels to prevent 
distortion and maximise signal-to-noise 
ratio 
Levels and metering 
scales 
● Psycho-acoustics related to perceived 
volume 
 
Students are required to develop knowledge and understanding of the history and 
development of recording and production technology, from current digital technologies back 
to the mono, analogue recording technologies in the 1930s, through the following eras: 
● Digital audio workstations (DAW) and emerging technologies (c.1996 – present day) 
● Digital recording and sequencing (c.1980 – present day) 
● Large-scale analogue multitrack (c.1969 – 1995) 
● Early multitrack recording (c.1964 – 1969) 
● Direct to tape mono recording (c.1930 – 1963). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
40 
 
Area of Study 3: The development of recording and production technology 
Topic Content Skills, knowledge and understanding 
3.1 Software 
and hardware: 
digital 
Digital hardware/software 
attributes 
● The differences between digital and 
analogue recordings 
● The advantages and disadvantages of 
digital hardware/software 
● Graphical user interfaces (GUI) 
● Sampling theory and converters 
Digital sequencing and 
digital audio workstations 
(DAW) 
● Core and advanced functions of a digital 
audio workstation 
● Real-time (native) processing; software 
instruments 
● Non-destructive and non-linear editing 
● Convolution reverb; amp modelling 
Digital consumer formats ● CD; mp3/m4a; high definition masters; 
emerging technologies 
● Data bit rate 
Digital recording and 
sampling hardware 
● Digital multitrack formats 
● Sampling with limited available memory 
3.2 Hardware: 
analogue 
Analogue hardware 
attributes 
 
● The differences between analogue and 
digital recordings 
● The advantages and disadvantages of 
analogue recordings 
● Valves; soft clipping; tape saturation 
● Solid state (transistor) 
amplifiers/distortion for hard-clipping 
● Maintenance issues and variations in 
frequency/pitch 
Tape machines ● Editing and splicing 
● Multitrack tape formats 
Analogue consumer 
formats 
● Vinyl; cassette tape 
● Mono and stereo releases 
● Mixing and mastering principles for 
analogue formats, e.g. vinyl; cassette 
Analogue effects 
 
● Delay: tape; bucket brigade 
● Mechanical reverbs: plate; spring  
● Rotary speaker (Leslie cabinet) 
● Vinyl scratching 
● Pitch changes and reversing using vinyl 
and tape 
Analogue synthesisers 
 
● Advantages and disadvantages  
● Modules and patching 
Electric instruments ● Electric guitar; bass guitar 
● Theremin; Mellotron; electric organ; 
electric piano; Clavinet 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology – 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
41 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2019. 
● The assessment is 1 hour 30 minutes. 
● The assessment is marked out of 75 marks. 
● There are two sections in the examination: 
o Section A (40 marks) – four written questions, each based on an unfamiliar commercial 
recording supplied by Pearson 
o Section B (35 marks) – two essay questions based on unfamiliar commercial recordings 
supplied by Pearson. 
• Students must answer all questions. 
● The paper may include multiple-choice, gap-fill, diagrammatic, short-open, open and 
extended open response questions. 
● Each student will have seven audio files. 
● Each student will need access to headphones and an individual audio player to hear the 
audio files. 
● Students must not have access to music production (DAW) software or the internet. 
Section A 
Section A will consist of four questions of 10 marks each, which may include multiple-choice, 
gap-fill, diagrammatic, short-open and open response questions (see Appendix 2 for further 
details) using unfamiliar commercial recordings as a stimulus. 
Section B 
Section B will consist of two extended open response questions (see Appendix 2 for further 
details). The first will be comparative and based on production techniques and effects 
processing used on two unfamiliar commercial recordings (15 marks).  
The second will be based on one recording and ask the student to consider the wider musical 
context (20 marks). 
Synoptic assessment 
Synoptic assessment requires students to work across different parts of a qualification and to 
show their accumulated knowledge and understanding of a topic or subject area. 
Synoptic assessment enables students to show their ability to combine their skills, knowledge 
and understanding with breadth and depth of the subject.  
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and mark scheme for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 
Advanced GCE in Music Technology Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Please see Appendix 1 for a description of what the command words used in the SAMs mean. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
42 
Component 4: Producing and analysing 
Overview 
This component assesses students’ knowledge of the techniques and principles of music 
technology through a series of written and practical tasks, in the context of audio and MIDI 
materials provided by Pearson. The production stages of sound creation, audio editing and 
mixing will be covered. The content is grouped into two of the areas of study. 
Students will work with unedited audio and MIDI materials provided by Pearson that have 
been captured using microphone, DI and sequencing techniques. The examination will assess 
the ability to process and correct these materials using a range of production skills, 
culminating in a series of audio bounces/exports for individual instrumental/vocal parts, plus 
a final stereo mix. Students will refine and combine pre-existing ‘ingredients’ of a mix to 
form a convincing final product. 
Students will also comment on sonic characteristics of the materials provided, interpreting 
the underlying theory associated with these as well as justifying decisions they have made in 
respect of selecting processes and parameters when undertaking the practical tasks. 
Content 
Skills, knowledge and understanding 
Students will be required to demonstrate the ability to: 
● comment on the music production tools and techniques used to capture sounds including 
musical instruments 
● use music production tools and techniques to create new sounds 
● Use processing techniques to edit, correct and process audio and MIDI tracks 
● use aural discrimination to identify and evaluate music technology elements in unfamiliar 
works and to refine recordings 
● use processing techniques effectively to produce a final, balanced mix 
● apply musical elements and language, for example structure, timbre, texture, tempo and 
rhythm, melody, harmony, tonality and dynamics within the context of a music technology 
production 
● make informed decisions about equipment by analysing and interpreting a range of data, 
graphical representations and diagrams, for example relating to frequency response, 
microphone polar patterns and dynamic response 
● apply technical numeracy to make calculations within the context of music technology. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology – 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
43 
Music styles 
Students should have knowledge and understanding of the instruments, the sounds 
associated with them and the combination of instruments and voices used in the following 
styles: 
● jazz 
● blues 
● rock ’n’ roll 
● rock 
● metal 
● punk 
● soul 
● disco and funk 
● reggae 
● acoustic and folk 
● commercial pop 
● urban 
● electronic and dance. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
44 
The examination focuses on the techniques required to edit, process and mix audio and MIDI 
materials, as well as the creation of sounds using microphones and DI, synthesis and MIDI 
techniques. Students will apply appropriate techniques and effects processing, providing a 
technical justification for the parameters chosen. The following techniques will be covered, 
which are defined in the Area of Study 1 content table below. 
 
Area of Study 1: Recording and production techniques for both corrective and 
creative purposes 
Topic Content Skills, knowledge and understanding 
1.1 Software and 
hardware 
The core and advanced 
functions of a digital audio 
workstation (DAW)  
● Functions are detailed below in this 
table 
A range of hardware  ● Microphones; audio interfaces;  
microphone pre-amps; DI boxes; 
mixing desks; outboard effects; guitar 
pedals; controller keyboard 
Other programming 
environments and new and 
emerging software 
● Awareness of new, alternative software 
environments used in music 
production* 
The impact of new and 
emerging software on music 
production 
● The contribution of new technology to 
music production practices* 
1.2 Capture of 
sound 
Gain structure and how it 
affects noise and distortion 
● Setting gain to maximise signal-to-
noise ratio 
● Avoiding clipping, interference and hiss 
● Checking input and output levels when 
several effects/pieces of hardware are 
chained together 
● Pre-amp controls: phantom power; 
gain; pad; high pass filter; polarity; 
clip/activity LED 
The characteristics and 
suitability of microphone 
types 
● Dynamic; condenser; ribbon 
The suitability of 
microphone placement 
techniques 
● Suitable distances and angles 
● Recording instruments using multiple 
microphones, e.g. drum kit 
● On-axis and off-axis frequency 
responses 
 
* Pearson will review any new and emerging music technology on an ongoing annual basis 
and advise centres of any changes via the Pearson website on June 1.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology – 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
45 
 
Area of Study 1: Recording and production techniques for both corrective and 
creative purposes continued 
Topic Content Skills, knowledge and understanding 
1.2 Capture of 
sound 
continued 
The advantages and 
disadvantages of 
microphone types in terms 
of polar pattern and 
frequency response 
● Advantages and disadvantages of 
different polar patterns 
● Directional: cardioid; hypercardioid; 
figure of 8 
● Proximity effect 
● Omnidirectional 
● Frequency response and transient 
response 
Advanced microphone 
techniques 
● Understanding phase relationships 
between multiple microphones 
● Coincident and spaced stereo pairs 
How microphones work ● Sensitivity; electromagnetic induction; 
capacitance 
● Diaphragms; moving coil; plates 
● Phantom power 
● Microphone switches: pad; high pass 
filter; polar pattern switch 
● Microphone accessories: pop shield; 
elastic suspension/cradle 
1.3 Synthesis How synthesis is used to 
create sounds 
● Selecting and mixing sine, triangle, 
pulse, square and saw waveforms; 
white noise; low frequency oscillator 
(LFO); low pass and high pass filters; 
envelopes  
How timbre is affected by a 
wider range of parameters 
● How timbre is affected by cut-off 
frequency, resonance, attack, decay, 
sustain and release (amplitude 
envelope) 
● Mapping envelope and LFO to filter  
cut-off and pitch 
● Oscillator octave; coarse; fine tuning  
● Pitch bend range 
● Monophonic; polyphonic  
● Portamento; arpeggiator 
1.4 Sampling Pitch mapping ● Transposing 
Editing samples ● Cutting and  trimming 
Looping ● Loop points 
● Zero crossings; cross-fade looping 
Advanced parameters ● Sample rate and bit depth 
● Using synthesis parameters on 
samples, e.g. filter and envelope 
● Setting pitch and key zones 
● Velocity layering 
● Time-stretch 
● Reversing samples 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
46 
 
Area of Study 1: Recording and production techniques for both corrective and 
creative purposes continued 
Topic Content Skills, knowledge and understanding 
1.5 Sequencing Real-time input ● Using a MIDI controller keyboard 
Non real-time input ● Step grid (drum editor) 
● Using a pencil tool to draw in notes 
Quantise ● Hard quantise values, e.g. 8, 12, 16, 
24, 32 (and note length equivalents) 
● Swing/percentage quantise 
● Snap/grid 
Editing skills  ● Velocity and note length 
● Piano roll and list editor 
● Cutting, looping and duplicating  
How MIDI works by studying 
data bytes 
● Note on/off; pitch; controllers; pitch 
bend; LSB and MSB; tempo data in 
bpm 
● Setting a fixed tempo and applying 
tempo changes 
1.6 Audio editing Truncating ● Scissor tool/split 
● Lead-in and lead-out times 
How to remove clicks and 
noise 
● Removing hiss, hum and plosives 
● Fades and cross-fades 
How and why clicks and 
other noises occur 
● For example, discontinuous waveforms 
and plosives 
Audio editing functions ● Normalising and inverting waveforms 
1.7 Pitch and 
rhythm 
correction and 
manipulation 
How to correct inaccuracies 
in pitch 
● For example, re-tuning a vocal part 
with automatic tuning 
● Manually tuning individual notes by 
drawing in pitch, playing via MIDI or 
offline pitch shift process 
How to correct inaccuracies 
in rhythm 
● For example, tightening drum parts 
using audio quantise  
● Manually cutting and moving notes that 
are out of time 
Parameters that allow 
greater control and 
creativity 
● Pitch: use of automatic tuning as a 
creative effect; response time; 
selecting different algorithms; formant 
shifts; fine tuning in cents; polyphonic 
re-tuning 
● Rhythm: transient detection threshold; 
groove templates; selecting different 
algorithms; time-stretch 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology – 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
47 
 
Area of Study 1: Recording and production techniques for both corrective and 
creative purposes continued 
Topic Content Skills, knowledge and understanding 
1.8 Automation How to use volume and pan 
automation 
● Fades and movement in the stereo field 
Automating parameters of 
plug-ins 
● For example, cut-off frequency and 
delay feedback 
1.9 Dynamic 
processing 
Uses of compression and 
gating 
● Situations when you would use a 
compressor and or/gate 
● Limiting; expansion; de-essing 
● Pumping  
Core and advanced 
parameters of a compressor 
and gate 
● Compressor threshold, ratio,  
make-up gain, attack, release,  
knee and side-chain 
● Gate threshold, reduction/range attack, 
release, hold and side-chain  
● Drawing graphs of compression and 
gating 
1.10 Stereo Pan ● Setting pan positions for individual 
parts (tracks, instruments and/or 
vocals) in a recording 
1.11 EQ Different types of EQ used in 
a recording 
● Low shelf; high shelf; band; low pass 
filter; high pass filter; band pass filter 
● Parametric EQ; graphic EQ 
● Correcting problems, including 
sibilance, noise and resonances  
How different parameters 
affect the sound 
● Gain; cut-off frequency; Q; slope; 
resonance 
● Drawing graphs of EQ 
1.12 Effects Core and advanced 
parameters 
● Wet/dry and bypass settings 
● Using sends and inserts 
● Core and advanced parameters as 
listed for each effect 
Reverb  ● Room; hall; plate; spring; gated; 
reversed 
● Reverb time; pre-delay time; high 
frequency damping 
Delay ● Single and multi-tap; slapback; timed; 
ping pong 
● Delay time; feedback; number of 
repeats; delay pan and EQ 
● Automatic double tracking (ADT) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
48 
 
Area of Study 1: Recording and production techniques for both corrective and creative 
purposes continued 
Topic Content Skills, knowledge and understanding 
1.12 Effects 
continued 
Modulated delay ● Flange, chorus and phaser 
● LFO rate; LFO depth; feedback 
● Comb filtering 
 Wah wah ● Band pass filter 
● How the pedal controls the centre 
frequency 
Distortion ● Overdrive; fuzz 
● Gain; drive; tone 
● Amp modelling parameters: amps and 
speaker types; virtual mic 
type/placement 
Tremolo ● LFO rate; LFO depth 
Vocal effects ● Vocoder; Talk Box 
Lo-fi ● Bit-crushing; vinyl surface noise/crackle 
effects; telephone effect; vocal 
distortion; ambient/found sound 
1.13 Balance and 
blend 
Balance ● The relative balance of parts (tracks, 
instruments and/or vocals) 
Blend ● How blend is affected by compression, 
EQ and effects 
1.14 Mastering Perceived  volume ● Limiting 
Mastering parameters ● Limiter gain 
● Fade in/fade out 
Understanding how EQ is 
used in the mastering 
process  
● Master EQ, e.g. high shelf boost and 
rumble (high pass) filter 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology – 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
49 
Students will also need to study the technical principles that underpin recording and 
production techniques, with a focus on how acoustics of a recording space contribute to the 
production process as well as supplementing the study of software and hardware in Area of 
Study 1. Students will study how such technology works and is operated, applying this 
knowledge to written tasks in the examination. Students will also need to understand the 
units of measurement associated with effects and other signal processes, including the 
graphical representation of these processes. 
 
Area of Study 2: Principles of audio and sound technology 
Topic Content Skills, knowledge and understanding 
2.1 Acoustics How the live room 
acoustics affect the 
recording 
 
● Room size; absorption; reflection; 
diffusion 
● Isolation booths for vocals, drums and 
amps 
Acoustics parameters ● Describing a reverb tail: pre-delay time; 
early and late reflections; reverberation 
time (RT60); resonant frequencies 
2.2 Monitor 
speakers 
The characteristics of 
different monitor 
speakers 
● The frequency ranges handled by 
tweeters, woofers and subwoofers 
How monitor speakers 
work 
● Electromagnetic induction 
How different types of 
monitor speakers affect 
mix translation 
● Checking mixes on different monitoring, 
e.g. headphones, speakers with 
pronounced mid range and systems with 
subwoofers 
2.3 Leads and 
signals 
How leads work ● Balanced and unbalanced connections 
Connectivity including 
signal path and signal 
types 
● Aux sends; insert points; sub-groups; 
mixer channel strips 
The different types and 
uses of leads 
 
● Jack; XLR; MIDI cable; digital ins/outs; 
computer data cables e.g. Firewire and 
USB 
● Using balanced connections to avoid 
noise problems, e.g. hiss, hum and 
rumble 
● DI boxes 
Impedance ● Signal levels: mic; line; instrument 
The advantages and 
disadvantages of 
different leads and 
connectivity 
● Comparing balanced and unbalanced; 
analogue versus digital connections; 
comparing computer data connections 
● Comparing computer data connections 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
50 
 
Area of Study 2: Principles of audio and sound technology continued 
Topic Content Skills, knowledge and understanding 
2.4 Digital and 
analogue 
 
The differences between 
digital and analogue 
technologies 
● Frequency response; signal-to-noise ratio 
(dynamic range); headroom 
● Digital and analogue clipping 
● How components such as valves and 
transistors affect the sound 
The specifications of 
digital recordings and 
how they affect sound 
quality 
● A/D and D/A conversion; sample rate; bit 
depth; streaming bit rate; uncompressed 
PCM audio formats; data compressed 
formats, e.g. mp3 
2.5 Numeracy How to display and 
interpret information 
graphically 
● Waveforms; EQ curves; compressor 
responses; amplitude envelopes 
● Interpreting frequency response and 
polar response graphs, to understand 
how sound quality is affected 
Technical numeracy 
 
● Parameter settings and associated units 
of measurement: levels in decibels; 
frequency in Hertz; delay time in 
milliseconds/note values; tempo in bpm; 
synthesiser octave settings in feet; 
coarse tuning in semitones; fine tuning in 
cents; feedback and effects mix 
percentages 
● Understanding binary, formulae and 
logarithms and how they are used in 
music technology 
How to make calculations 
to describe sound waves 
● Waveform frequency, phase and 
amplitude 
2.6 Levels Principles of levels and 
metering 
● Management of levels to prevent 
distortion and maximise signal-to-noise 
ratio 
Levels and metering 
scales 
● Decibel scales: when to use peak and  
RMS metering 
● Psycho-acoustics related to perceived 
volume 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology – 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
51 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2019. 
● The assessment is 2 hours 15 minutes, plus an additional 10 minutes setting–up time. 
● Each student will need access to a computer workstation, music production (DAW) 
software, MIDI keyboard and headphones. 
● Students must not have access to the internet or use a calculator. 
● Each student will have the audio/MIDI materials required for the examination. 
● The assessment is marked out of 105 marks. 
● There are two sections in the examination: 
o Section A (85 marks) – five questions with a selection of written and practical 
responses based on the audio/MIDI materials 
o Section B (20 marks) – one essay question based on a specific effects process or music 
technology hardware unit. 
• Students must answer all questions. 
● The paper may include multiple-choice, gap-fill, diagrammatic, short-open, open and 
extended open response questions (see Appendix 2 for further details). 
● The paper will also include a range of practical tasks, for which four audio exports/bounces 
will be submitted for assessment (three individual instrument/vocal bounces plus a final 
mix). 
● Audio bounces/exports will be in the format of 16-bit /44.1kHz stereo PCM wave file 
(wav). 
Section A 
Questions 1-4 will be related to the audio and MIDI materials provided and students will 
create written responses as well as an individual audio bounce/export for each instrument or 
vocal part that has been edited (61 marks). 
Question 5 will be an extended practical response (24 marks). The question asks students to 
complete a series of mixing and production tasks and then combine all the instrument/vocal 
parts to create a finished stereo mix. 
Section B 
Section B will feature one extended open response question (see Appendix 2 for further 
details) focusing on a specific recording or mixing scenario, signal path, effect or music 
technology hardware unit (20 marks). 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper, audio/MIDI materials, mark scheme and exemplar audio extracts for this 
paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology 
Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Please see Appendix 1 for a description of what the command words used in the SAMs mean. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
52 
Assessment Objectives 
 
Students must: 
% in GCE 
A Level 
AO1 Demonstrate use of music technology to capture, edit and produce 
recordings 
35 
AO2 Demonstrate use of music technology to create, edit and structure 
sounds to develop a technology based-composition 
20 
AO3 Demonstrate and apply knowledge and understanding of music 
technology 
27-30 
AO4 Use analytical and appraising skills to make evaluative and critical 
judgements about the use of music technology 
15-18 
Total 100% 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
Component  Assessment Objectives Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives AO1 % AO2 % AO3 % AO4 % 
Component 1: Recording 20 - - - 20% 
Component 2: Technology-
based composition 
- 20 - - 20% 
Component 3: Listening and 
analysing 
- - 14–16 9–11 25% 
Component 4: Producing and 
analysing 
15 - 13–16 5–7 35% 
Total for GCE A Level 35% 20% 27–30% 15–18% 100% 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology – 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
53 
3 Administration and general information 
Entries 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for this qualification can be found in 
our UK Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations officers and is 
available on our website: qualifications.pearson.com 
Discount code and performance tables 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more than one GCE qualification with 
the same discount code will have only one of the grades they achieve counted for the 
purpose of the school and college performance tables. This will be the grade for the larger 
qualification (i.e. the A Level grade rather than the AS grade). If the qualifications are the 
same size, then the better grade will be counted (please see Appendix 7: Codes). 
Students should be advised that if they take two GCE qualifications with the same discount 
code, the colleges, universities and employers to which they wish to progress are likely to 
take the view that this achievement is equivalent to only one GCE. The same view may be 
taken if students take two GCE qualifications that have different discount codes but which 
have significant overlap of content. Student or their advisers who have any doubts about 
their subject combinations should check with the institution they wish to progress to before 
embarking on their programmes. 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, 
special consideration and malpractice 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality policy requires all students to 
have equal opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our qualifications 
to be awarded in a way that is fair to every student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the Equality Act 2010) are not, 
when they are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in comparison to 
students who do not share that characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification and that 
this achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their peers. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be available in English. All student work must be in 
English.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
54 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with special 
educational needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to:  
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the assessment. 
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an individual 
student with a disability, without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding bodies comply with the duty under the 
Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students will 
then know what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for assessment. 
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable adjustments 
where a person with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in undertaking an 
assessment. The awarding organisation is required to take reasonable steps to overcome 
that disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be unique to that individual and 
therefore might not be in the list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of factors, 
including: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding 
organisation, or affects timeframes or the security or integrity of the assessment. This is 
because the adjustment is not ‘reasonable’. 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student's mark or grade to 
reflect temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the examination/ 
assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a material effect on a 
candidate’s ability to take an assessment or demonstrate their level of attainment in an 
assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to apply for access arrangements 
and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special 
consideration, please refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology – 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
55 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that compromises or seeks to 
compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in examinations must be reported to Pearson using a JCQ Form M1 
(available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form should be emailed to 
candidatemalpractice@pearson.com. Please provide as much information and supporting 
documentation as possible. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies 
with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice constitutes staff or centre malpractice. 
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and maladministration of 
our qualifications. As with candidate malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is any act that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the 
integrity of the qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported 
immediately, before any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson on a  
JCQ Form M2(a) (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form, 
supporting documentation and as much information as possible can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate  
sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the document 
General and Vocational Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments Policies and Procedures, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice. 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to comply with the requirements of 
Ofqual's General Conditions of Recognition. 
This A Level qualification will be graded and certificated on a six-grade scale from A* to E 
using the total subject mark. Individual components are not graded. 
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum judged by Pearson to be of 
sufficient standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U result. 
The first certification opportunity for this qualification will be 2019. 
Student recruitment and progression 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
56 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this qualification. 
Students who would benefit most from studying this qualification are likely to have a Level 2 
qualification such as a GCSE in Music. 
Progression 
Students can progress from this qualification to: 
● music schools and university courses that relate to music technology 
● university courses that will benefit from the skills acquired from this GCE  
● employment where music technology skills are essential, for example trainee producer or 
engineer, studio manager 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology – 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
57 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Command word taxonomy 59 
Appendix 2: Question types 60 
Appendix 3: List of acronyms 61 
Appendix 4: The context for the development of this qualification 62 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 64 
Appendix 6: Level 3 Extended Project qualification 65 
Appendix 7: Codes 67 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
58 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology – 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
59 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 1: Command word taxonomy 
The following table lists the command words that will appear in question papers, along with 
their definitions. Not all command words will appear in each paper. 
 
Command word Definition 
State, give, name, list Give one or more points. Recall or find factual information. 
Identify Give one or more points. Find factual information in given 
stimulus. 
Complete, label, draw Questions, for example, that require a table to be filled in, or a 
graph/diagram to be labelled. 
Calculate Questions that require calculation. 
Describe Give points which may or may not be linked. 
Explain Give points that are linked to a justification or extension. 
Compare Make points about the similarities and differences. 
Make relative judgements. 
Discuss Identify the issue/situation/problem/argument that is being 
assessed within the question. 
Explore all aspects of an issue/situation/problem/argument. 
Investigate the issue/situation/problem/argument by reasoning or 
argument. 
Analyse Examine, dissect elements in detail. 
Focus on individual elements and how they combine to create an 
effect/achieve a purpose. 
Evaluate Make judgements against parameters. 
Draw conclusions, justify opinions or making comparisons. 
 
Please refer to the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology Sample 
Assessment Materials (SAMs) for the application of some of these command words. 
In addition, command words will be used that relate to the functions of a DAW in  
Component 4: Producing and analysing.  
 
 

 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
60 
Appendix 2: Question types 
The following table contains the types of questions used in the examination papers and the 
assessment objectives (AO) associated with these questions.  
 
Question type  Expected responses 
Practical 
questions 
These questions will be used to assess AO1 and range from creating or 
correcting a sound to producing a final stereo mix. 
Multiple choice 
questions  
Multiple choice questions (MCQs) will be used to assess standalone 
knowledge recall (AO3) and to identify information from stimulus 
materials (AO3). MCQs will require students to select the correct 
answer from four options.  
Gap fill and line 
matching 
These questions will be used to assess AO3, and involve filling in 
missing words in a sentence or matching pieces of information by 
drawing a line between them.   
Diagrammatic These questions will be used to assess AO3, and involve drawing and 
labelling a graph or labelling a diagram. 
Calculation These questions will be used to assess AO3, and involve obtaining a 
numerical answer, showing relevant working when requested, such as 
calculating the frequency. 
Completion of a 
table 
These questions will be used to assess AO3. They will require 
candidates to give or identify information in the form of completing a 
table. 
Short open 
response 
questions  
These questions will be used to assess AO3. They will be low tariff 
items of 1 mark from short answer recall questions (AO3) such as 
identifying a feature of a stimulus. 
Open response 
questions  
These questions will be used to assess AO3 or AO4. They will range in 
mark tariff from 2-4 marks such as describing what… or to explain 
how… 
Long Open 
response 
These questions will be used to assess AO3 and AO4 in equal 
proportions, and will be higher mark tariff questions (e.g 8 marks), 
such as explaining a process. 
Extended open 
response 
questions  
Extended open response questions will be used to give students 
opportunities to show higher-order thinking skills and to stretch and 
challenge them through application of knowledge and understanding. 
This question type will target a combination of Assessment Objectives 
in order to assess breadth of knowledge and depth of understanding. 
Extended open response questions will always require candidates to 
draw on underpinning knowledge and understanding (AO3) and either 
apply this knowledge and understanding in order to make judgements 
and/or reach conclusions (AO4) or to analyse (AO4) stimulus material 
to find connections and logical chains of reasoning between elements 
(AO4). 
In either case the emphasis will be on the application, conclusion, 
analysis, connection and logical chains of reasoning in order to elicit 
the higher order thinking skills being drawn out. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology – 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
61 
Appendix 3: List of acronyms 
 
Term  Definition 
A/D conversion Analogue-to-digital conversion 
ADT Automatic double tracking or artificial double tracking 
D/A conversion Digital-to-analogue conversion  
DAW Digital audio workstation 
dB scales Decibel scales 
EQ Equalisation 
LFO Low frequency oscillator 
LPF and HPF Low pass filter and high pass filter 
LSB and MSB Least significant byte and most significant byte 
MIDI Musical Instrument Digital Interface 
OSC Open Sound Control 
Q Quality 
RMS Root-mean-square 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
62 
Appendix 4: The context for the 
development of this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] and our 
ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
● reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with those 
taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
● consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including learned bodies, 
subject associations, higher-education academics, teachers and employers to ensure this 
qualification is suitable for a UK context 
● reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in their 
documents GCE Qualification Level Conditions and Requirements and GCE Subject Level 
Conditions and Requirements for Music Technology, published in March 2016.  
 
 
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification Principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
● demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning and 
measuring higher-order skills 
● rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and valid 
assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in end users of the knowledge, skills 
and competencies of certified students 
● inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students develop at 
different rates and have different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
● empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills, see Appendix 5. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology – 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
63 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
All titles correct as at May 2014 
 The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important change to the 
education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications will assist them in 
helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an ‘Expert 
Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or because of 
our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the world as diverse as 
Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification development 
process that has included: 
● establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-specific 
expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
● subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future oriented. The 
design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, meaning learner outcomes 
have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a learner’s 
success in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident that we have 
supported the development of qualifications that are outstanding for their coherence, 
thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as representing world-class best 
practice. 
”    
  
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Lee Sing Kong  
Director, National Institute of Education, 
Singapore 
  
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
  
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
 
All titles are correct as of May 2014. 
“ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
64 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently flagged the 
need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable them to respond with 
confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines skills, or 
competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that can be learned and 
that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform an activity or task and can be 
built upon and extended through learning.’ 
[1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected and 
evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this process, we 
identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the most evidence-based and 
robust skills framework. We adapted the framework slightly to include the Program for 
International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT Literacy and Collaborative Problem Solving 
(CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves: [2]  
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve general 
cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and communicate.[3]  
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, oral communication, written communication, assertive 
communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, service 
orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared understanding, 
taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team organisation. 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work stress, 
adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, and physical 
adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual teams, 
work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and able to acquire 
new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher education, 
as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the teaching and learning of 
this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning materials, developed with 
stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
 
[1]  OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012) 
[2]  Koenig J A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop (National 
Academies Press, 2011) 
[3]  PISA – The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy (2011) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology – 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
65 
Appendix 6: Level 3 Extended Project 
qualification 
What is the Extended Project?  
The Extended Project is a standalone qualification that can be taken alongside GCEs. It 
supports the development of independent learning skills and helps to prepare students for 
their next step – whether that be higher education or employment. The qualification: 
● is recognised by higher education for the skills it develops  
● is worth half of an Advanced GCE qualification at grades A*–E  
● carries UCAS points for university entry. 
The Extended Project encourages students to develop skills in the following areas: research, 
critical thinking, extended writing and project management. Students identify and agree a 
topic area of their choice for in-depth study (which may or may not be related to a GCE 
subject they are already studying), guided by their teacher. 
Students can choose from one of four approaches to produce: 
● a dissertation (for example an investigation based on predominately secondary research)  
● an investigation/field study (for example a practical experiment)  
● a performance (for example in music, drama or sport)  
● an artefact (for example creating a sculpture in response to a client brief or solving an 
engineering problem). 
The qualification is non-examination assessment based and students are assessed on the 
skills of managing, planning and evaluating their project. Students will research their topic, 
develop skills to review and evaluate the information, and then present the final outcome of 
their project. 
The Extended Project has 120 guided learning hours (GLH) consisting of a 40-GLH taught 
element that includes teaching the technical skills (for example research skills) and an 80-
GLH guided element that includes mentoring students through the project work. The 
qualification is 100% internally assessed and externally moderated. 
How to link the Extended Project with music technology 
The Extended Project creates the opportunity to develop transferable skills for progression to 
higher education and to the workplace, through the exploration of either an area of personal 
interest or a topic of interest from within the music technology qualification content. 
Through the Extended Project, students will develop skills that support their study of music 
technology, including: 
● conducting, organising and using research 
● independent reading in the subject area 
● planning, project management and time management 
● defining a hypothesis to be tested in investigations or developing a design brief 
● collecting, handling and interpreting data and evidence 
● evaluating arguments and processes 
● critical thinking. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
66 
In the context of the Extended Project, critical thinking refers to the ability to identify and 
develop arguments for a point of view or hypothesis and to consider and respond to 
alternative arguments. This supports the development of evaluative skills, through 
evaluating music technology arguments and using qualitative and quantitative evidence to 
support informed judgements and propose evidence-based solutions to music technology 
issues. 
Types of Extended Project related to music technology 
The Extended Project creates the opportunity to develop transferable skills for progression to 
higher education and to the workplace, through the exploration of either an area of personal 
interest or a topic of interest from within the music technology qualification content. 
Students can use the Extended Project to build in-depth knowledge and understanding of a 
music producer or engineer, or of a specific recording or production technique. 
Here are some suggestions: 
● in-depth investigation into a music producer or engineer and the impact they had on a 
musical style 
● investigating production methods and how thy have changed over a period of time 
● producing a recording using contrasting studio techniques and making an in-depth 
comparison of them. 
Using the Extended Project to support breadth and depth 
In the Extended Project, students are assessed on the quality of the work they produce and 
the skills they develop and demonstrate through completing this work. Students should 
demonstrate that they have extended themselves in some significant way beyond what they 
have been studying in business. Students can demonstrate extension in one or more 
dimensions:  
● deepening understanding – where a student explores a topic in greater depth than in 
the specification content. This could be an in-depth exploration of one aspect of the broad 
pre-release context 
● broadening skills – where a student learns a new skill. This might be learning a new 
recording or production technique or process that can be used in the analysis of either 
primary or secondary data collected by the student 
● widening perspectives – where the student’s project spans different subjects. A student 
studying music technology with mathematics may wish to use statistical techniques to 
analyse recording data and research one aspect in more detail. 
A wide range of information to support the delivery and assessment of the Extended Project, 
including the specification, \teacher guidance for all aspects, an editable scheme of work and 
exemplars for all four approaches, can be found on our website. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Technology – 
Specification – Issue 3 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 
67 
Appendix 7: Codes 
 
Type of code Use of code Code 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for 
performance tables is assigned a 
discount code indicating the subject 
area to which it belongs. 
Discount codes are published by the 
DfE. 
Please see the GOV.UK 
website* 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes  
Each qualification title is allocated an 
Ofqual Regulated Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) code. 
The RQF code is known as a 
Qualification Number (QN). This is the 
code that features in the DfE 
Section 96 and on the LARA as being 
eligible for 16–18 and 19+ funding, 
and is to be used for all qualification 
funding purposes. The QN will appear 
on students’ final certification 
documentation. 
The QN for this qualification 
is: 
603/0188/0 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to 
enter students for a qualification. 
Centres will need to use the entry 
codes only when claiming students’ 
qualifications. 
A Level – 9MT0 
 
Component codes These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be 
entered for individual components. 
Component 1: 9MT0/01 
Component 2: 9MT0/02 
Component 3: 9MT0/03 
Component 4: 9MT0/04 
 
*https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/16-to-19-qualifications-discount-codes-and-
point-scores 
 
 
 
 
DB031221 9781446952467_GCE2017_AL_MUSICTECH_ISSUE3.DOC.1–74/0 

 
 
Edexcel, BTEC and LCCI qualifications 
Edexcel, BTEC and LCCI qualifications are awarded by Pearson, the UK’s largest awarding 
body offering academic and vocational qualifications that are globally recognised and 
benchmarked. For further information, please visit our qualifications website at 
qualifications.pearson.com. Alternatively, you can get in touch with us using the details on 
our contact us page at qualifications.pearson.com/contactus 
About Pearson 
Pearson is the world's leading learning company, with 22,500 employees in more than  
70 countries working to help people of all ages to make measurable progress in their lives 
through learning. We put the learner at the centre of everything we do, because wherever 
learning flourishes, so do people. Find out more about how we can help you and your 
learners at qualifications.pearson.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References to third party materials made in this specification are made in good faith. Pearson 
does not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may be 
subject to change, or any opinions expressed therein. (Materials may include textbooks, journals, 
magazines and other publications and websites.) 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
 
ISBN 978 1 446 95246 7  
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2021 
 
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office:  80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121
