Specification
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese
(spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) (9CN0)
First teaching from September 2017
First certification from 2019 Issue 4
A Level 
Chinese

 
About Pearson 
We are the world’s leading learning company operating in countries all around the world. We 
provide content, assessment and digital services to learners, educational institutions, employers, 
governments and other partners globally. We are committed to helping equip learners with the 
skills they need to enhance their employability prospects and to succeed in the changing world of 
work. We believe that wherever learning flourishes so do people. 
References to third party materials made in this specification are made in good faith. Pearson does 
not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may be subject to 
change, or any opinions expressed therein. (Materials may include textbooks, journals, magazines 
and other publications and websites.) 
 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
 
ISBN 978 1 446 93398 5 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2024 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese 
(spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) specification  
Issue 4 changes 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this current issue Page 
number 
References to AS level have been removed to reflect the withdrawal of the Pearson 
Edexcel Level 3 Advanced Subsidiary GCSE in Chinese. The text under the Continuous 
progression section has changed from “Key Stage 4 and AS Level..” to “Key Stage 4...”.  
In addition, the paragraph titled “AS and A Level qualification that are co-teachable" 
has been removed. 
3 
The website location of the Getting Started Guide in the Planning section has been 
provided. The text has been rephrased from  
“Our Getting Started Guide, available on our website, gives you an overview of the new 
A level qualification to help you get to grips with the changes to content and 
assessment and to help you understand what these changes mean for you and your 
students” 
to  
“Our Getting Started Guide, available on our website, gives you an overview of the 
Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) qualification to 
help you understand the content and assessment”. 
4 
The first bullet point in the Preparing for exams section has been updated for accuracy 
from “specimen papers to support formative assessments and mock exams” to “access 
to past papers, including formative assessment and mock exams”. 
4 
The Subject advisor name has been removed from the Get help and support section to 
reflect staff changes. The text has changed from  
“Our subject advisor service, led my Alistair Drewery, and online community...”  
to  
“Our subject advisor service and online community...”. 
4 
The language of comprehension questions in Paper 1 has been updated from Chinese to 
English. The new text reads: 
“For Section A (listening), 50 minutes (recommended timing), 30 marks: 
● There are three questions in this section made up of multiple choice and open 
response questions, including questions resting summary skills. All questions are set 
in English and must be answered in English.” 
“For Section B (reading), 50 minutes (recommended timing), 30 marks: 
● students respond to four questions based on the Chinese texts provided 
● questions comprise both multiple-choice questions and open-response questions; all 
questions are set in English and must be answered in English.” 
12 
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this current issue Page 
number 
The language of questions and answers in Paper 2 has been updated from  
“All questions will be set in Chinese and must be answered in Chinese.”  
to  
“Questions in Section A will be set in English and must be answered in Chinese. 
Questions in Section B and C will be set in both English and Chinese and must be 
answered in Chinese.” 
13 
The language of assessment has been updated from “Assessment of this qualification 
will be in Chinese. For the speaking assessment, students have a choice between 
speaking in Mandarin or Cantonese. All student work must be in Chinese, except the 
translation in Paper 1 (Section C), which requires a response in English.” 
to “Assessment of this qualification will be in Chinese and English. For the speaking 
assessment, students have a choice between speaking in Mandarin or Cantonese. All 
student work must be in Chinese, except for comprehension questions in Paper 1 
(Sections A and B) which are set and require a response in English, and the translation 
in Paper 1 (Section C), which requires a response in English.” 
43 
To reflect the withdrawal of the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced Subsidiary GCE in 
Chinese, the reference to AS level has been removed from the Progression section. The 
text has been updated from “This qualification offers a suitable progression route from 
GCSE and AS Level,...”   
to “This qualification offers a suitable progression route from GCSE,...” 
46 
The hard-copy form in Appendix 1: Independent research project form (RP3) has been 
replaced with an editable Word version with the following explanatory text: 
“Please use the editable version of the Independent research project form (RP3) 
available here to facilitate digital upload to Learner Work Transfer after the assessment. 
Scanned copies will not be accepted. 
If you need any help locating the form, please email: 
Teachinglanguages@pearson.com. 
Additional guidance can be found in the Administrative Support Guide here”. 
49 
A footnote has been added to Appendix 2: Prescribed literary texts and films to make it 
absolutely clear that both〈惠安馆〉and〈爸爸的花儿落了〉have to be studied for the 
literary text 《城南旧事》. 
50 
In Appendix 3: Grammar list, the suffix -性 and the complement 到 have been added 
because they are commonly used grammatical constructions at this level. 
51, 56 
The following bullet point has been added to Appendix 4: The context for the 
development of this qualification: “updating the qualification based on market and 
subject content changes”. 
60 
 
If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, contact us via our website at: 
qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/contact-us.html. 
 
Contents 
1 Introduction 2 
Why choose the Pearson Edexcel Level 3  Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken 
Mandarin/ spoken Cantonese)? 2 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this qualification 4 
Qualification at a glance 5 
2 Subject content and assessment information 8 
Themes and sub-themes 9 
Paper 1: Listening, reading and translation 11 
Paper 2: Written response to works and translation 13 
Paper 3: Speaking 21 
Assessment Objectives 42 
3 Administration and general information 43 
Entries 43 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special consideration and 
malpractice 43 
Student recruitment and progression 46 
Appendix 1: Independent research project form (RP3) 49 
Appendix 2: Prescribed literary texts and films 51 
Appendix 3: Grammar list 52 
Appendix 4: The context for the development of this qualification 60 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 62 
Appendix 6: Level 3 Extended Project qualification 63 
Appendix 7: Codes 65 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
2 
1 Introduction 
Why choose the Pearson Edexcel Level 3  
Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/ 
spoken Cantonese)? 
We believe languages should appeal to all students. Our new Pearson Edexcel Level 3 
Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) has been developed to 
inspire all students who have an appreciation of the language, literature, film and culture of 
the Chinese-speaking world. 
We’ve listened to feedback from the languages community – subject associations, academics 
and advisors, together with teachers and students – and have designed a motivating course 
of study that will enable your students to develop an advanced level knowledge and 
understanding of the Chinese language, the culture of China and other Chinese-speaking 
countries, as well as practical and valuable language and transferable study skills. This 
specification will help to prepare students for higher education and enhance their 
employability profile. 
Inspiring and engaging themes – our qualification features familiar and popular themes 
as well as some new content that provides clear links to some of the most fundamental and 
interesting aspects of the culture of the Chinese-speaking world. 
Popular literary texts and films – we offer a choice of literary texts and films that includes 
contemporary and more classical titles, together with authentic source materials from China 
and the wider Chinese-speaking world. 
Rewards creativity – our assessments place an emphasis on spontaneity and grammar, as 
well as providing plenty of opportunities for students to apply their knowledge independently 
and creatively. Clear mark schemes encourage students to develop ideas and use language 
to persuade and analyse and give critical responses in their writing and speaking. 
Clear and coherent structure – our qualification has a straightforward structure with four 
engaging themes: 
 
Theme 1 Theme 2 
Traditional characters 
當代華人社會變遷 中國文化 
Simplified characters 
当代华人社会变迁 中国文化 
 
Theme 3 Theme 4 
Traditional characters 
演變中的華人社會 1978 年改革開放對中國的影響 
Simplified characters 
演变中的华人社会 1978 年改革开放对中国的影响 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
3 
The four themes are studied alongside two works (either two literary texts or one literary 
text and one film) assessed through two externally-examined papers (Papers 1 and 2) and 
one teacher-examiner conducted speaking assessment (Paper 3). 
Manageable content – we have worked closely with teachers and students to ensure that 
our content is manageable and appropriate, so that you and your students can be confident 
that you have enough time to cover what you need to at the appropriate depth. 
Continuous progression – our content builds on the understanding developed at 
Key Stage 4 and gives students the opportunity to learn and apply important transferable 
skills in critical thinking and analysis, enabling them to make a smooth transition to the next 
level of study. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
4 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this 
qualification 
Planning 
● Our Getting Started Guide, available on our website, gives you an overview of the Level 3 
Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) qualification to help you 
understand the content and assessment. 
● We will give you an editable course planner and scheme of work that you can adapt to 
suit your department. 
● Our mapping documents highlight key differences between the new and 
2008 qualification. 
Teaching and learning 
There will be lots of free teaching and learning support to help you deliver the new 
qualifications, including: 
● support with the new literary text and film elements 
● suggested resource lists to help with the teaching of society and culture 
● support for the independent research project 
● support for spontaneous speaking. 
Preparing for exams 
We will also provide a range of resources to help you prepare your students for the 
assessments, including: 
● access to past papers, including formative assessment and mock exams 
● marked exemplars of student work with examiner commentaries 
ResultsPlus 
ResultsPlus provides the most detailed analysis available of your students’ exam 
performance. It can help you identify the topics and skills where further learning would 
benefit your students. 
Get help and support 
Our subject advisor service and online community will ensure that you receive help and 
guidance from us, and that you can share ideas and information with other teachers. You can 
sign up to receive e-newsletters to keep up to date with qualification updates and product 
and service news. 
Learn more at qualifications.pearson.com 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
5 
Qualification at a glance 
Content and assessment overview 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
consists of two externally-examined papers assessing listening, reading and writing and a 
speaking assessment. The speaking assessment is externally set and conducted by a teacher-
examiner. All assessments are marked by Pearson. 
The assessment will be available in traditional and simplified characters. All questions and 
texts are printed twice, once with texts using traditional/full characters and once with texts in 
simplified characters. 
Students must complete their speaking assessment in April/May and all other assessments in 
May/June in any single year. 
 
Paper 1: Listening, reading and translation (**Paper code: 9CN0/01) 
Written examination: 2 hours 
40% of the qualification 
80 marks 
Content overview 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all four themes listed on pages 9-10. 
Themes are based on the society and culture of Chinese-speaking countries. 
Assessment overview 
Students are not permitted access to a dictionary during the examination. 
The examination is made up of: 
Section A: Listening (30 marks) 
A listening assessment based on a recording, featuring male and female Chinese speakers. 
Students will respond to comprehension questions based on a variety of contexts and 
sources. 
Recordings of spoken Chinese will be available in Mandarin and Cantonese.  
The listening audio files for the sample assessment materials are available on our website. 
Section B: Reading (30 marks) 
A reading assessment based on a variety of text types and genres where students will 
respond to comprehension questions. 
Section C: Translation into English (20 marks) 
An unseen passage to be translated from Chinese to English. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
6 
 
Paper 2: Written response to works and translation (**Paper code: 9CN0/02)  
Written examination: 2 hours and 40 minutes 
30% of the qualification 
120 marks 
Content overview 
This paper requires students to translate a previously unseen passage from English into 
Chinese. 
This paper also draws on the study of two discrete Chinese works: either two literary texts, 
or one literary text and one film. The works must be taken from the list provided in 
Appendix 2: Prescribed literary texts and films. The literary texts listed include novels and 
short stories. All of the films are feature length. 
Assessment overview 
This paper includes a translation exercise and two extended responses to either two literary 
texts, or one literary text and one film (students must not answer questions on two films). 
Students are not permitted access to a dictionary or any documentation relating to the works 
during the examination. 
Section A: Translation (20 marks) 
Students translate an unseen passage from English into Chinese. 
Section B: Written response to works (literary texts) (50 marks) 
Students must write an extended response on either one or two of the literary texts listed in 
Appendix 2: Prescribed literary texts and films. 
If a student answers questions on two literary texts then they do not complete Section C. 
Section C: Written response to works (films) (50 marks) 
Students who answer only one question on a literary text in Section B must write an 
extended response on one of the films listed in Appendix 2: Prescribed literary texts 
and films. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
7 
 
Paper 3: Speaking (**Paper code: 9CN0/03M/03C) 
Internally conducted and externally assessed 
Total assessment time: between 21 and 23 minutes, which includes a single period 
of 5 minutes’ formal preparation time 
30% of the qualification 
72 marks 
Content overview 
Task 1 draws on vocabulary and structures across all four themes (listed on pages 9-10).  
Task 2 is based on independent research selected and carried out by the student. The research 
may be based on one of the themes or on the student’s own subject of interest related to the 
society and culture of the Chinese-speaking world. 
Students will be assessed on their ability to use a range of language accurately, communicate 
and interact effectively, summarise and analyse findings from written sources relating to their 
research subject, and show knowledge and understanding about the society and culture of the 
Chinese-speaking world. 
Assessment overview 
Students complete two tasks. Task 1 is worth 30 marks and Task 2 is worth 42 marks. 
Task 1 (discussion on a Theme) 
Students discuss one Theme from the specification based on a stimulus containing a short 
statement. 
Task 2, Part 1 (independent research presentation) 
Students present a summary of at least two of the written sources they have used for their 
research and give a personal response to what they have read. 
Task 2, Part 2 (discussion on independent research) 
Students answer questions on their presentation and then have a wider discussion on their 
research. 
The assessment will be available in Mandarin and Cantonese. The option chosen for each 
student is indicated by entry code: 
Mandarin – 9CN0/03M 
Cantonese – 9CN0/03C 
 
**See Appendix 7: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to this 
qualification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
8 
2 Subject content and assessment information 
Qualification aims and objectives 
The aims and objectives of this qualification are to enable students to: 
● enhance their linguistic skills and promote and develop their capacity for critical thinking on 
the basis of their knowledge and understanding of the language, culture and society of the 
country or countries where the language is spoken 
● develop control of the language system to convey meaning, using spoken and written skills, 
including an extended range of vocabulary, for both practical and intellectual purposes as 
increasingly confident, accurate and independent users of the language 
● develop their ability to interact effectively with users of the language in speech and in 
writing, including through online media 
● develop language learning skills and strategies, including communication strategies to 
sustain communication and build fluency and confidence 
● engage critically with intellectually stimulating texts, films and other materials in the 
original language, developing an appreciation of sophisticated and creative uses of the 
language and understanding them within their cultural and social context 
● develop knowledge about matters central to the society and culture, past and present, of 
the country or countries where the language is spoken 
● mediate between cultures and between speakers of the language and speakers of English 
● foster their ability to learn other languages 
● equip themselves with transferable skills such as autonomy, resourcefulness, creativity, 
critical thinking, and linguistic, cultural and cognitive flexibility that will enable them to 
proceed to further study or employment 
● develop their capacity for critical and analytical thinking through the language of study 
● develop as independent researchers through the language of study. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
9 
Themes and sub-themes 
Papers 1 and 3 will be based on content from the following four themes. 
The four themes address a range of social issues and trends, as well as aspects of the political 
and artistic culture of the Chinese-speaking world. 
Each theme is broken into two sub-themes (highlighted in bold). These sub-themes are each 
exemplified further. 
 
Theme 1 
當代華人社會變遷 当代华人社会变迁 
Traditional characters 
家庭 
家庭結構和代溝；家庭計劃
和人口老齡化。 
 
教育與工作 
學校生活和學生議題；工作
機會；工作和生活的平衡
。  
Simplified characters 
家庭 
家庭结构和代沟；家庭计划
和人口老龄化。 
 
教育与工作 
学校生活和学生议题；工作
机会；工作和生活的平衡。 
 
 
Theme 2 
中國文化 中国文化 
Traditional characters 
傳統 
節日（春節；端午節； 
中秋節；清明節）和習俗。  
文化活動 
電影；電視；音樂和閱讀。 
(與中國文化有關) 
 
Simplified characters 
传统 
节日（春节；端午节； 
中秋节；清明节）和习俗。 
 
文化活动 
电影；电视；音乐和阅读。
(与中国文化有关) 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
10 
 
Theme 3 
演變中的華人社會 
 
演变中的华人社会 
 
Traditional characters 
通訊與科技 
互聯網和社交媒體。 
 
經濟與環境 
經濟發展；環境保護。 
 
Simplified characters 
通讯与科技 
互联网和社交媒体。 
 
经济与环境 
经济发展；环境保护。 
 
 
Theme 4 
1978 年改革開放對中國的影
響 
1978 年改革开放对中国的影
响 
Traditional characters 
變革 
貧富差距；超級大都市；城
市移民。  
中英關係 
貿易；文化交流；教育交
流。  
Simplified characters 
变革 
贫富差距；超級大都市；城
市移民。 
 
中英关系 
贸易；文化交流；教育交
流。 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
11 
Paper 1: Listening, reading and translation 
Content 
Students will be assessed on their understanding of spoken and written Chinese from a variety 
of types of authentic texts and listening material, as well as their ability to translate accurately 
from Chinese into English. 
Texts and recordings vary in length to include some extended passages. All spoken and 
written materials are culturally relevant to China and Chinese-speaking countries and are 
drawn from the four themes (listed on pages 9–10). 
Students should be able to: 
● understand main points, gist and detail from spoken and written material 
● infer meaning from complex spoken and written material 
● assimilate and use information from spoken and written sources, including material from 
online media 
● summarise information from spoken sources, reporting key points and subject matter 
● translate from Chinese into English. 
Listening 
The listening section will be made up of spoken passages covering different registers and 
types, including authentic communication involving one or more male and female speakers. 
Sources will include material from online media. 
Reading 
The reading section will be made up of texts containing both factual and abstract content and 
will be authentic or adapted from authentic sources, written for different purposes and 
audiences. 
Translation into English 
The content of the translation will be taken from one of the four themes. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
12 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2019. 
● The total assessment time is 2 hours. Recommended timings for each section are given 
below. 
● The assessment is out of 80 marks. 
● There are three sections in the paper. They cover the assessment of listening, reading and 
translation skills in Chinese. 
● Students must answer all questions in each section (A, B and C). 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted. 
● For Section A (listening), 50 minutes (recommended timing), 30 marks: 
o there are three questions in this section made up of multiple choice and 
open response questions, including questions testing summary skills. All questions are 
set in English and must be answered in English 
o students will listen to a recording featuring Chinese-language speakers who will speak at 
a speed appropriate for the expected understanding at this level 
o recordings will be issued as audio files via our Secure Download Service (SDS) prior to 
the exam. The recordings will be available in Mandarin and Cantonese 
o students will have individual control of the recording and may stop, revisit and replay 
sections of the recording as they wish. 
● For Section B (reading), 50 minutes (recommended timing), 30 marks: 
o students respond to four questions based on the Chinese texts provided 
o questions comprise both multiple-choice questions and open-response questions; all 
questions are set in English and must be answered in English. 
● For Section C (translation into English), 20 minutes (recommended timing), 20 marks: 
o students must translate one unseen text from Chinese into English. 
The recommended timings have been provided to enable the student to complete each section 
in sufficient time. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and mark scheme for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 
Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) Sample Assessment Materials 
(SAMs) document. 
The listening audio files are available on our website. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
13 
Paper 2: Written response to works and translation 
Content 
Students should be able to: 
● develop a detailed understanding and appreciation of the works studied, by writing critical 
and analytical responses in the language of study to the works, taken from the prescribed 
list provided (see Appendix 2: Prescribed literary texts and films) 
● produce responses that relate to aspects such as the form and the technique of 
presentation, key concepts and issues and the social context, as appropriate to the work 
studied 
● present viewpoints; develop arguments; persuade; and analyse and evaluate in writing 
● manipulate language accurately through translating an unseen passage from English 
into Chinese. 
Students must study two discrete Chinese works: either two literary texts, or one literary text 
and one film. The works must be taken from the list in Appendix 2: Prescribed literary texts 
and films. The literary texts listed include novels and short stories. All of the films are feature 
length. The content of the translation will be a passage based on one of the four themes. 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2019. 
● The total assessment time is 2 hours and 40 minutes. Recommended timings for each 
section are given below. 
● The assessment is out of 120 marks. 
● There are three parts to this paper, Section A (translation into Chinese) and Sections B and 
C (written response to works). 
● For Section A (translation into Chinese), 30 minutes (recommended timing), 20 marks: 
o students must translate one unseen text from English into Chinese. 
● For Sections B and C (written response to works), 2 hours and 10 minutes, 100 marks: 
o students must write two essays selected from Section B (literary texts) or one selected 
from Section B (literary texts) and one from Section C (films) 
o it is recommended that students write between 250–350 Chinese characters for each 
essay in order to give a detailed analysis of the works. Students should justify points of 
view, arguments and conclusions with evidence from the work. However, the whole essay 
will be marked regardless of length 
o students are expected to provide a critical and analytical response by selecting relevant 
material form the works, presenting and justifying points of view, developing arguments, 
drawing conclusions based on understanding, and evaluating issues, themes and cultural 
and social contexts related to the works studied. 
o no credit will be given for essays on literary texts that are based on film versions adapted 
from the literary texts. Evidence given in the essay to justify viewpoints and arguments 
must be based on the original literary text. 
● Questions in Section A will be set in English and must be answered in Chinese. Questions in 
Section B and C will be set in both English and Chinese and must be answered in Chinese. 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted. 
● Students must not take any documentation relating to the works into the examination. 
The recommended timings have been provided to enable the student to complete each section 
in sufficient time. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
14 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and marking criteria (including guidance on how these criteria are applied) for 
this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese  
(spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Marking guidance 
Marking guidance has been written to accompany the SAMs and is included with the SAMs 
booklet. Please note that this guidance is for the use of the Pearson-appointed external 
examiners. It is printed for reference in the specification to aid understanding of how the 
assessment criteria will be applied. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
15 
Marking guidance for Paper 2: Written response to works and 
translation 
This marking guidance is for the use of Pearson-appointed external examiners. The guidance 
has been included for teacher reference to aid understanding of how the assessment criteria 
will be applied. 
Section A – Question 1 (translation) into Chinese 
This task is marked using a points-based mark scheme in which 1 mark is given for each 
correct individual section of language. Please see the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE 
in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) 
document for an example of how the translation will be marked. 
Sections B and C – Questions 2-7 (written response to works) 
There are three levels-based mark grids to be applied to each individual essay that makes up 
the written responses to works. The mark grids are: 
● critical and analytical response (AO4) 
● range of grammatical structures and vocabulary (AO3) 
● accuracy of language (AO3). 
General guidance on using levels-based mark schemes 
Step 1: Decide on a marking band 
● First of all, the examiner will consider the answer as a whole and then decide which 
descriptors most closely match the answer and place it in that band. The descriptors for 
each band indicate the different features that will be seen in the student’s answer for that 
band. 
● When assigning a level, the examiner will look at the overall quality of the answer and not 
focus disproportionately on small and specific parts of the answer where the student has not 
performed quite as well as the rest. If the answer covers different aspects of different bands 
of the mark scheme, the examiner will use a ‘best fit’ approach for defining the level and 
then use the variability of the response to help decide the mark within the level, for 
example if the response is predominantly band 5–8 with a small amount of band 9–12 
material, it would be placed in band 5–8 but be awarded a mark near the top of the band 
because of the  
band 9–12 content. 
Step 2: Decide on a mark 
● Once the examiner has decided on a band they will need to decide on a mark within the 
band. 
● The examiner will decide on the mark to award based on the quality of the answer; they will 
award a mark towards the top or bottom of that band depending on how the student has 
evidenced each of the descriptor bullet points. 
● The examiner will modify the mark based on how securely the trait descriptors are met at 
that band. 
● The examiner will need to go back through the answer as they apply the mark scheme to 
clarify points and assure themselves that the band and the mark are appropriate. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
16 
Critical and analytical response (AO4) 
This mark grid assesses students’ ability to respond critically and analytically to the aspect of 
the literary work or film outlined in the question. To provide a critical and analytical response, 
students should select relevant material, present and justify points of view, develop 
arguments, draw conclusions based on understanding and evaluate issues, themes and 
cultural and social contexts. 
This grid should be applied twice, once for each essay individually. 
When deciding how to reward an answer, examiners will consult this mark grid as well as the 
indicative content associated with each question which can be found in the document Pearson 
Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) Sample 
Assessment Materials (SAMs). Indicative content contains points that students might use to 
construct their answer. It is possible for an answer to be constructed without mentioning some 
or all of these points as long as students provide alternative responses that fulfil the 
requirements of the question. 
Marks Description 
0 No rewardable material. 
1–4 ● Response relates to the work but limited focus on the question. 
● Points of view relating to issues/themes/cultural or social contexts are presented 
with simplistic justification; limited interpretation with frequent misunderstanding 
or confusion; any evidence from the work is descriptive. 
● Limited ability to form arguments or draw conclusions. 
5–8 ● Response relates to the work but often loses focus on the question. 
● Points of view relating to issues/themes/cultural or social contexts are presented, 
with attempts made at interpretation, but they occasionally show misunderstanding 
or confusion; evidence selected from the work for justification is occasionally 
appropriate but often descriptive. 
● Arguments are made but with inconsistencies; conclusions are drawn but do not 
fully link to arguments. 
9–12 ● Response is relevant to particular aspects of the question, occasional loss 
of focus. 
● Critical analysis of issues/themes/cultural or social contexts is evident in relation to 
particular aspects of the question, with some appropriate interpretations and points 
of view, sometimes justified by appropriately selected evidence from the work. 
● Logical arguments are followed through on particular aspects of the question, 
occasionally detailed and with linked conclusions; some points are made without 
exploration. 
13–16 ● Predominantly relevant response to the question. 
● Critical analysis of issues/themes/cultural or social contexts is frequently 
demonstrated, with some convincing interpretations and points of view, 
predominantly justified with appropriately selected evidence from the work. 
● Generally detailed, logical arguments are made, with some persuasive conclusions 
that mostly link together. 
17–20 ● Relevant response to the question throughout. 
● Critical analysis of issues/themes/cultural or social contexts is demonstrated 
through convincing interpretations and points of view, consistently justified with 
appropriately selected evidence from the work. 
● Detailed, logical arguments and conclusions are made that consistently link 
together. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
17 
Range of grammatical structures and vocabulary (AO3) 
This mark grid assesses students’ ability to use a range of grammatical structures and 
vocabulary in order to produce articulate written communication with a range of expression. 
This grid will be applied twice, once for each essay individually. 
 
Marks Description 
0 No rewardable language. 
1–4 ● Limited variation of straightforward grammatical structures with much repetition, 
producing writing that is often restricted and stilted. 
● Limited range of vocabulary resulting in repetitive expression. 
● Limited use of terminology appropriate to literary and cinematic analysis. 
5–8 ● Occasional variation in use of mostly straightforward grammatical structures, 
infrequent use of complex language, producing writing that is sometimes stilted. 
● Vocabulary is mostly high frequency with occasional variation, expression is 
frequently repetitive. 
● Occasional use of terminology appropriate for literary and cinematic analysis. 
9–12 ● Some variation in the use of grammatical structures, including some recurrent 
examples of complex language; sections of articulate writing with occasionally 
stilted phrasing. 
● Some variation in use of vocabulary, resulting in variation of expression but this 
is not sustained. 
● Some use of terminology appropriate for literary and cinematic analysis. 
13–16 ● Frequent variation in use of grammatical structures, including different types of 
complex language, producing writing that is articulate throughout the majority of 
the essay. 
● Frequently varied use of vocabulary, resulting in regular variation of expression. 
● Frequent use of terminology appropriate for literary and cinematic analysis. 
17–20 ● Consistent variation in use of grammatical structures, including in use of complex 
language, producing consistently articulate writing. 
● Consistently varied use of vocabulary, allowing ideas to be conveyed in a variety 
of different ways. 
● Consistent use of terminology appropriate for literary and cinematic analysis. 
Additional guidance 
Variation of vocabulary and grammatical structures: the traits in the mark grid 
differentiate between the variation of grammatical structures and vocabulary used by 
students. Examiners will judge which mark band to place students in and which mark to 
award, based on the effect that the variety of grammatical structures and vocabulary has on 
the quality of the communication; the wider the variety, the more articulate the 
communication will become (see definition of ‘articulate’ below). 
Examples of a variety of grammatical structures and vocabulary are: a selection of complex 
language (see definition below) for a variety of purposes, including to present and justify 
points of view, develop arguments, draw conclusions based on understanding. 
Articulate: articulate communication is fluent, effective and coherent as students 
control/manipulate the language to say what they want to say rather than what they can say, 
for a number of different purposes. If students are restricted to what they can say, they may 
not be able to express themselves for all purposes, for example to develop arguments. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
18 
Complex language: considered to include the following. 
● use of aspect markers 
● passive voice 
● relative constructions 
● comparative constructions 
● precision and accuracy 
● using conjunctions to express abstract ideas or convey justified arguments that require a 
range of lexis and structures 
● using synonyms and a variety of expressions. 
Straightforward language: considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● a lack of variety of expressions 
● frequent repetition of ideas 
Terminology for literary and cinematic analysis: vocabulary for critical analysis according 
to the work being studied, for example ‘plot’, ‘character’, ‘metaphor’, ‘similes’ and ‘use of black 
and white’. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
19 
Accuracy of language (AO3) 
This mark grid assesses students’ ability to apply grammar and syntax accurately. 
This grid will be applied twice, once for each essay individually. 
 
Marks Description 
0 No rewardable language. 
1–2 ● Limited sequences of accurate language resulting in lapses in coherence. 
● Errors occur that often prevent meaning being conveyed. 
3–4 ● Some accurate sequences of language resulting in some coherent writing. 
● Errors occur that sometimes hinder clarity of communication and occasionally 
prevent meaning being conveyed. 
5–6 ● Frequent sequences of accurate language resulting in generally 
coherent writing. 
● Errors occur that occasionally hinder clarity of communication  
7–8 ● Accurate language throughout most of the essay, resulting in mostly coherent 
writing. 
● Errors occur that rarely hinder clarity of communication. 
9–10 ● Accurate language throughout, resulting in consistently coherent writing. 
● Any errors do not hinder clarity of communication. 
Additional guidance 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example the misuse of measure words 
● missing strokes in characters as long as it is not ambiguous (for example 图 written as 
 would not be penalised) 
● infrequent use of mixed simplified and traditional forms (for example 我們来英國学习) 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate use of near synonyms, such as 满意 instead of 满足
as in 老师对你的作业很满意 /老师对你的作业很满足 
● using English word order (for example 我学习在图书馆) 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they distract the reader from the content of the writing. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
20 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB These are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
21 
Paper 3: Speaking 
Content 
Students should be able to demonstrate: 
● knowledge and understanding of the cultural context by giving ideas, examples and 
information on one of the themes and on a chosen subject of interest they have researched 
linked to the social and cultural context of the Chinese-speaking world 
● the ability to analyse aspects of the cultural context by presenting and justifying valid 
arguments, viewpoints and conclusions 
● the ability to interact and hold a natural and fluent discourse 
● skill in manipulating language accurately 
● the ability to respond to written language in speech. 
These aspects are assessed via two distinct tasks conducted in Chinese, which are carried out 
in consecutive order in one session. 
Task 1 (discussion on a Theme) 
Content for this task will be based on any one of the eight sub-themes from one of the four 
overall themes listed on pages 9- 10. Stimulus cards will be given as a springboard to the 
discussion. 
Task 2 (presentation and discussion on student’s independent research project) 
This task is in two parts. Content for this task will be based on the subject of interest that 
students have chosen for their independent research project. This may be based on any of the 
four themes of study listed on pages 9-10 or on a subject of interest of the student’s choosing. 
However, it must relate to the cultural and social context of the Chinese-speaking world. 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: April/May 2019. 
● Timing for the speaking assessment (recommended): 
o Task 1: 6 to 7 minutes 
o Task 2: 10 to 11 minutes 
o Total assessment time: 21 to 23 minutes, (16 to 18 minutes of speaking plus 5 minutes’ 
preparation time for Task 1). 
Recommended timings have been given for each task to enable the student to complete 
each one in sufficient time to access the full range of assessment criteria for both tasks. 
● The assessment is out of 72 marks. 
● Students complete two tasks – Task 1 is worth 30 marks and Task 2 is worth 42 marks. 
● Assessments will be conducted by teacher-examiners in centres in one session within a 
prescribed five-week assessment period. This will take place in April and May in any single 
year. Dates for the assessment period will be confirmed in the UK Information Manual at the 
start of each academic year. The assessment period will not always be continuous or be the 
same period each year, for example it will need to accommodate the Easter break, which 
changes each year. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
22 
Allocation of stimulus cards 
● The invigilator uses the sequencing grid provided by Pearson to allocate the choice of sub-
themes to the student. The stimulus cards based on the sub-themes are issued in the order 
prescribed by Pearson. Neither the invigilator nor the teacher-examiner chooses the order 
of the cards. 
● The invigilator gives the student a choice in English of two sub-themes, using the wording 
for the sub-themes given on the sequencing grid, for example: ‘You may choose 'Family' or 
'Communications and technology'. The student does not see the content of the stimulus 
card at this stage. 
● The sub-themes will come from two of the four overall Themes listed on pages 9–10. There 
is a stimulus card for each sub-theme. There are 8 stimulus cards in total (two per theme). 
● Once the student has chosen their sub-theme, the invigilator gives the student the 
corresponding stimulus card. This happens immediately before the preparation time begins. 
Roles of the teacher-examiner and invigilator 
● As well as supervising students during their 5 minutes’ preparation time, the invigilator is 
responsible for giving students the choice of two sub-themes for the assessment, based on 
the sequencing grid provided by Pearson (see example sequencing grid in General 
instructions to the teacher-examiner included in the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE 
in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) 
document). 
● The teacher-examiner is responsible for conducting the assessment. They are not 
responsible for providing the stimulus cards. 
Preparation time and notes 
● The preparation time of 5 minutes begins immediately after the student receives the card. 
Students have 5 minutes to prepare to speak about their card. 
● The preparation time must be supervised and must take place immediately before the 
assessment takes place. It must take place outside of the examination room with an 
invigilator. 
● Each stimulus card contains a statement on the sub-theme. Students give their views on 
the statement during the discussion. 
● Students are permitted to make notes (up to a maximum of one side of A4) during the  
5-minute preparation time. Students may refer to these notes during the assessment. The 
notes should be used for reference only, and students should not read out whole, prepared 
sentences. Students are not permitted to write on the stimulus cards. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
23 
Task 1 (discussion on a theme)  
● Task 1 follows immediately after the 5 minutes’ preparation time so students can recall their 
prepared thoughts easily. 
● Students have approximately 6 to 7 minutes’ discussion time for this task. 
● There are two parts to the discussion. 
o Part 1: The teacher-examiner asks the two compulsory questions on the card. The 
compulsory questions may be repeated but rephrasing is not allowed. The teacher-
examiner then helps to develop the discussion by asking appropriate follow-up questions 
relating to the statement on the stimulus card. 
o Part 2: The teacher-examiner then broadens the discussion to cover other aspects of the 
overall theme. Optional generic questions are provided by Pearson as a guide to the 
questions the teacher-examiner should ask in order to enable the student to meet the 
requirements of the assessment criteria, i.e. to elicit examples and information to 
demonstrate their knowledge and understanding of the cultural and social context and to 
analyse aspects of the Theme by developing and justifying arguments and forming 
conclusions. 
Task 2 (presentation and discussion on student’s independent research 
project) 
● Students have approximately 10 to 11 minutes for this task. 
● There are two parts to this task. 
o Part 1: The discussion must open with a presentation from the student in which they 
provide a summary of at least two of the written sources they have used as part of their 
research, outlining the authors’ main points/ideas and giving a personal response to what 
they have read. The presentation must not exceed two minutes. In this part of the task, 
students are assessed on their ability to respond in speech to written sources. 
o Part 2: The discussion must be broadened out to a wider exploration of the content of 
the student’s presentation and of their research as a whole. The teacher-examiner should 
use the key findings and list of sources on the RP3 Form in Appendix 1: Independent 
research form (RP3) to help them formulate their own questions. Optional generic 
questions are provided by Pearson as a guide to the questions the teacher-examiner 
should ask in order to enable the student to meet the requirements of the assessment 
criteria, i.e. to elicit examples and information to demonstrate their knowledge and 
understanding of the cultural and social context and to analyse aspects of the Theme by 
developing and justifying arguments and forming conclusions. 
In both tasks, students are expected to ask questions that elicit opinions as part of the 
natural discourse and to confirm that their own points of view have been understood (see 
guidance provided on Elicit points of view/check for understanding beneath the mark grids for 
Interaction (AO1) in the specification and the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in 
Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) 
document. Students are also expected to take the lead in the discussions. 
The teacher-examiner will cover all parts of each task and ask appropriate questions to ensure 
that the student is able to access the maximum amount of marks available. The speaking 
assessment will last between 16 to 18 minutes in total and the teacher-examiner must ensure 
that timings are followed. The timing of the assessment begins with the student’s first 
utterance in relation to Task 1. Once the maximum stipulated assessment time has passed, 
the teacher-examiner will bring the assessment to a natural end, allowing the student to 
complete their last sentence. They will turn off the recording device at that point. Centres 
should be aware that students will not receive any marks for any conversation that takes place 
beyond the maximum time allowed. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
24 
Guidance on the independent research project 
For the purposes of the assessment, independent research means research carried out without 
the help or instruction of others, including teachers. 
The independent research project must relate to the cultural and/or social context of the 
Chinese-speaking world. It should be based on a subject of interest of the student’s choosing, 
but may be based on any of the four themes of study from the specification. 
The independent research project must not be based on one of the literary works or films 
studied for Paper 2 but can focus on a wider exploration of the author or film-maker of those 
works studied. For example, if studying a novel by a particular author for Paper 2, the 
independent research must not focus on that novel as it would represent a duplication of 
content. However, it could focus on the life of the author or the aspects that motivated the 
author in a broader sense. 
The independent research project must: 
● be based on a question or statement defined and developed by the student individually to 
investigate a particular area of interest specifically related to the culture and/or society of 
the Chinese-speaking world 
● include evidence of the student’s research findings, investigated independently, from a 
range of authentic sources, including the internet 
● enable the student independently to contextualise, analyse and summarise findings 
● enable the student to identify at least two written sources, which they can summarise and 
give a personal response to in their presentation. 
The table below gives guidance on the process that could be followed. 
 
Stage Description 
1 Pre-independent 
Research  
● Teacher instruction on how to conduct research, teacher gives 
advice on suitable resources and how to analyse information. 
● Initial conversations with the teacher on possible questions or 
statements that the student may use for their independent research 
project. 
● Subsequent to the above, the student should independently develop 
the focus of their question or statement. 
● The teacher checks that the student’s question or statement will 
allow the student to access the full range of marks. 
2 Independent 
Research 
● The student conducts research to find and select appropriate 
sources (including written sources). 
● The teacher monitors the project by giving general feedback. 
3 Analysis of 
information 
● Students record the 6–10 key findings of their research on the RP3 
form and prepare to give information about and analyse their 
findings, ensuring that all material is clearly linked to the target 
language culture. 
● In preparation for their two-minute presentation, students prepare 
to summarise the main points/ideas from at least two of the written 
sources they have used as part of their research and to give a 
relevant personal response. 
It is recommended that students begin the identification stage as early as possible in the 
academic year. However, learning hours for the independent research project are not specified 
because the process of information collation and investigation are undertaken independently. 
Students should be prepared to talk in detail about their subject of interest for 10-11 minutes. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
25 
Controls relating to student independence and teacher guidance to 
students for the independent research project 
Teachers can: 
● give guidance on developing research skills (including methodology and analytical tools) 
● give guidance on selecting a subject and question or statement for the student’s 
independent research project 
● explain what independence means (see definition in Guidance on the independent research 
project) 
● comment on the suitability of the area of research (availability of resources, time 
constraints) 
● give guidance and advice on completing RP3 form 
● advise and direct students to the assessment objectives 
● provide a selection of resources for student access. 
 
Teachers must: 
● confirm that the question or statement has the potential to meet the requirements of the 
assessment criteria and offer general guidance on any necessary amendments 
● ensure that the question or statement does not correspond with one of the literary works or 
films that the student has studied for Paper 2. Teachers will be able to identify this from the 
information given on the RP3 form. Students will receive a mark of zero for Task 2 if their 
independent research project focuses on a work studied for Paper 2 
● review each student’s RP3 form. Teachers should ensure that the research can suitably 
access the specification requirements and give general guidance on the methodology and 
analytical tools that the student could use 
● promote good practice such as referencing and using a bibliography system 
● sign the student’s RP3 form before the examination to declare that the independent 
research project is wholly the student’s work 
● monitor the different research projects being undertaken in a centre to ensure that 
independence is being maintained. If more than one student chooses to research the same 
topic, the teacher must ensure that each student has a different question or statement and 
therefore an independent focus. 
 
Teachers must not: 
● give students a choice of questions or statements from which they then choose, including a 
group question or statement for whole-class research 
● give detailed feedback or guidance to individual students about how to improve their work 
to meet the requirements of the assessment criteria. The guidance provided should only 
enable students to take the initiative in making amendments, rather than detailing what 
amendments should be made 
● rehearse or provisionally assess the student’s presentation and give feedback so that the 
student may then improve it 
● provide access to, or rehearse, questions that will be used in the assessment of the 
student’s independent research. 
If the above is not adhered to, the awarding organisation will investigate this as a potential 
case of malpractice. If malpractice is found to have taken place, a penalty will be applied 
dependent on the circumstances and severity of the malpractice. 
For full information regarding malpractice, please see the section entitled Malpractice on 
page 47 of the specification and the JCQ document Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments 2016–17. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
26 
Students must: 
● initiate and conduct their own research and develop their research skills when investigating 
their subject of personal interest 
● include written sources for their research which are in Chinese (students must refer to at 
least two written sources in their presentation). These could include newspaper and 
magazine articles, online written sources, journals, literary texts and any other suitable 
written source that can be referenced. However, students can use and refer to other 
authentic sources they have used in their research during the discussion that follows the 
presentation. These could include films, television, radio, online audio-visual material and 
interviews 
● complete and sign the independent research project form and submit it no later than three 
weeks in advance of the date of the assessment (see Appendix 1: Independent research 
project form (RP3)). 
Support for teachers 
Pearson will provide exemplar material relating to student performance. In order to support 
teachers in preparing for the speaking component, Pearson will provide a video on how to 
conduct the speaking assessment. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
27 
Marking guidance for Paper 3: Speaking 
This marking guidance is for the use of Pearson-appointed external examiners. The guidance 
has been included for teacher reference to aid understanding of how the assessment criteria 
will be applied. 
There are a number of levels-based mark schemes to be applied to Tasks 1 and 2. 
General guidance on using levels-based mark schemes 
Step 1: Decide on a marking band 
● First of all, the examiner will consider the answer as a whole and then decide which 
descriptors most closely match the answer and place it in that band. The descriptors for 
each band indicate the different features that will be seen in the student’s answer for that 
band. 
● When assigning a band they will look at the overall quality of the answer and not focus 
disproportionately on small and specific parts of the answer where the student has not 
performed quite as well as the rest. If the answer covers different aspects of different bands 
of the mark scheme they will use a ‘best fit’ approach for defining the level and then use the 
variability of the response to help decide the mark within the level, for example if the 
response is predominantly band 4–6 with a small amount of band 7–9 material, it would be 
placed in band 4–6 but be awarded a mark near the top of the band because of the band 7–
9 content. 
Step 2: Decide on a mark 
● Once the examiner has decided on a band they will then need to decide on a mark within 
the band. 
● The examiner will decide the mark to award based on the quality of the answer; they will 
award a mark towards the top or bottom of that band depending on how the student has 
evidenced each of the descriptor bullet points. 
● The examiner will modify the mark based on how securely the trait descriptors are met at 
that band. 
● The examiner will need to go back through the answer as they apply the mark scheme to 
clarify points and to check that the band and the mark are appropriate. 
Guidance on timing of the speaking assessment 
It is the responsibility of the teacher-examiner to cover all parts of each task and ask 
appropriate questions to ensure that the student is able to access the maximum amount of 
marks available. The speaking assessment will last between 16 to 18 minutes in total and the 
teacher-examiner will ensure that timings are followed. The timing of the assessment begins 
with the student’s first utterance in relation to Task 1. Once the maximum stipulated 
assessment time has passed, the teacher-examiner will bring the assessment to a natural end, 
allowing the student to complete their last sentence. They will turn off the recording device at 
that point. Centres should be aware that students will not receive any marks for any 
conversation that takes place beyond the maximum time allowed. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
28 
Task 1 (discussion on a Theme)  
Three mark grids are applied to Task 1: 
● knowledge and understanding of society and culture (AO4) 
● accuracy and range of language (AO3) 
● interaction (AO1). 
Knowledge and understanding of society and culture (AO4) 
This grid assesses students’ ability to communicate information about and demonstrate 
appreciation of different aspects of the culture and society of the Chinese-speaking world.  
Students are also assessed on their ability to respond critically and analytically to different 
aspects of the culture and society by selecting relevant material, presenting and justifying 
points of view, developing arguments, drawing conclusions based on understanding and 
evaluating issues, themes and cultural and social contexts. 
When deciding how to reward an answer, examiners will consult this mark grid and  
the A Level speaking Task 1: indicative content associated with each question.  
This is included in the document Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese 
(spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs). Indicative 
content contains points that students might use to construct their answer. It is possible for an 
answer to be constructed without mentioning some or all of these points, as long as students 
provide alternative responses that fulfil the requirements of the question. 
 
Marks Description 
0 No rewardable material. 
1–3 ● Occasionally relevant, straightforward ideas, mostly generalised, occasionally 
supported by information/examples/references; frequent loss of focus on the 
cultural and social context. 
● Occasional evidence of analysis; points of view are given with limited 
justification, arguments may be made but not developed, occasionally leading 
to straightforward conclusions that may be contradictory; mainly relies on 
description rather than analysis. 
4–6 ● Relevant, straightforward ideas sometimes supported by 
information/examples/references; some loss of focus on the cultural and social 
context. 
● Some analysis of the cultural and social context is evident, with 
straightforward arguments and points of view which are sometimes developed 
and justified, sometimes drawing straightforward conclusions; relies on 
description rather than analysis in places. 
7–9 ● Relevant, occasionally perceptive ideas frequently supported by pertinent 
information/examples/references; focus predominantly maintained on the 
cultural and social context. 
● Analysis of cultural and social context demonstrated by frequently developed 
and justified arguments and viewpoints, often drawing convincing conclusions. 
10–12 ● Relevant, perceptive ideas consistently supported by pertinent 
information/examples/references; consistently focused on the cultural and 
social context. 
● Analysis of cultural and social context demonstrated by consistently developed 
and justified arguments and viewpoints, drawing convincing conclusions. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
29 
Additional guidance 
Perceptive: demonstrates an in-depth understanding by making connections between ideas 
and information; goes beyond the standard, predictable response; shows insight/originality. 
Ideas include thoughts, feelings, impressions, opinions. 
Straightforward ideas, arguments, conclusions are deemed to be those that give the 
standard, predictable responses. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
30 
Task 1 (discussion on a Theme continued) 
Accuracy and range of language (AO3) 
This mark grid assesses students’ ability to use a range of grammatical structures and 
vocabulary in order to produce articulate communication with a range of expression. It also 
assesses accuracy of pronunciation, grammar and syntax. 
 
Marks Description 
0 No rewardable language. 
1–3 ● Limited variation in the use of grammatical structures and vocabulary, limited or 
repetitive use of complex and idiomatic language, occasional variation of 
expression; communication is sometimes restricted/stilted. 
● Limited sequences of accurate language; often errors occur that hinder clarity of 
communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed. 
● Pronunciation and intonation are inconsistent, leading to occasional impairment in 
communication. 
4–6 ● Some variation in the use of grammatical structures and vocabulary, with use of 
some repetitive complex and idiomatic language, resulting in some variation of 
expression; some sequences of articulate communication. 
● Accurate sequences of language, resulting in some coherent speech; sometimes 
errors occur that hinder clarity of communication. 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible though sometimes inaccurate. 
7–9 ● Frequent variation in use of grammatical structures and vocabulary, including 
examples of complex and idiomatic language, resulting in frequent variation of 
expression and frequent sequences of articulate communication. 
● Accurate language throughout most of the conversation, resulting in generally 
coherent speech; errors occur but rarely hinder clarity of communication. 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible and mostly accurate. 
10–12 ● Consistent variation in use of grammatical structures and vocabulary, including 
different types of complex structures and idiomatic language, expressing ideas in a 
variety of ways, resulting in articulate communication. 
● Accurate language throughout resulting in coherent speech that is immediately 
understandable; any errors do not hinder clarity of the communication. 
● Pronunciation and intonation are accurate, intelligible and authentic sounding. 
Additional guidance 
Variation in use of grammatical structures and vocabulary: the traits in the mark grid 
differentiate between the variation of grammatical structures and vocabulary used by 
students. Examiners will judge which mark band to place students in and which mark to 
award, based on the effect that the variety of grammatical structures and vocabulary has on 
the quality of the communication; the wider the variety, the more articulate the 
communication will become (see definition of ‘articulate’ below). 
Examples of a variety of grammatical structures and vocabulary are: a selection of complex 
language (see definition below) for a variety of purposes, including to present and justify 
points of view, develop arguments, draw conclusions based on understanding. 
Articulate: articulate communication is fluent, effective and coherent as students 
control/manipulate the language to say what they want to say rather than what they can say, 
for a number of different purposes. If students are restricted to what they can say, they may 
not be able to express themselves for all purposes, for example to develop arguments. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
31 
Complex language: considered to include the following. 
● use of aspect markers 
● passive voice 
● the 把 construction, for example 他把车修好了。 
● use of interrogative sentences in which 吗 is used 
● using extended sentences to express abstract ideas or convey justified arguments that 
require a range of lexis and structures, for example, conjunctions and pronouns 
● using synonyms and a variety of expressions 
● any grammar and structures included in the grammar list that are specific to A Level. 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free speech in order to access the 
top band. The mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on 
clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for the misuse of measure words 
● speaking Chinese with an accent which does not lead to misunderstanding 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the listener from the content of what is being said. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make speech difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood) or errors that force listeners to strain to understand what is meant, 
for example inappropriate use of near synonyms, such as 满意 instead of 满足 as in
老师对你的作业很满意 /老师对你的作业很满足 
● using English word order (for example 我学习在图书馆) 
● serious mispronunciation such as tones which block communication for example, 
pronouncing 看书 as 砍树;照 as 找;上午 as 下午;网上 as 晚上)  
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they distract the listener from the content of what is being 
said. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, i.e. using the incorrect person or 
the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB These are provided as examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
32 
Task 1 (discussion on a Theme continued) 
Interaction (AO1) 
This mark grid assesses students’ ability to interact with the teacher-examiner by giving 
relevant responses based on what they have heard, by initiating communication and eliciting 
points of view. 
 
Marks Description 
0 No rewardable material. 
1–2 ● Interacts with occasional spontaneity to some questions and statements, but 
requires frequent prompting; occasionally able to sustain the conversation, using 
communication strategies if necessary; frequent hesitation. 
● Occasionally initiates communication but development often relies on the 
examiner’s lead; may elicit points of view/check for understanding, though this 
may appear contrived. 
3–4 ● Interacts spontaneously for extended sections of the conversation, responding 
mostly with assurance but needing occasional prompting; able to sustain most of 
the conversation, using communication strategies if necessary; occasional 
hesitation. 
● Initiates communication by frequently taking the lead to develop the conversation; 
elicits points of view/checks for understanding although occasionally at an 
inappropriate moment. 
5–6 ● Interacts spontaneously throughout, responding with assurance to questions and 
statements; able to sustain conversation throughout, using communication 
strategies if necessary; minimal hesitation. 
● Initiates communication by consistently taking the lead to develop the 
conversation; elicits points of view/checks for understanding naturally and 
appropriately at different points in the conversation. 
Additional guidance 
Interacts spontaneously: responds to questions and statements that arise as a natural part 
of the conversation; gives a relevant, impromptu response based on what they have heard. 
Communication strategies: strategies that aid communication and allow the conversation to 
be sustained, for example rephrasing, circumlocution, adjusting the message, asking for 
clarification/repetition, repair strategies such as self-correction; these strategies enable 
students to deliver the message when exact vocabulary or expressions are not known. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
33 
Elicit points of view/check for understanding: as part of the language of genuine 
discourse, students are required to engage the examiner in the conversation by asking for 
their points of view and checking that their own point of view has been understood. They are 
expected to do this throughout the oral assessment at appropriate points during the 
conversation. This constitutes questions such as: 
 
Traditional characters Simplified characters 
你同意我的看法嗎？ 你同意我的看法吗？ 
是不是可以認為……？ 是不是可以认为……？ 
我們可以說……嗎？ 我们可以说……吗？ 
你是怎麼看……問題的？ 你是怎么看……问题的？ 
你對……有什麼看法？ 你对……有什么看法？ 
你明白我的意思嗎？ 你明白我的意思吗？ 
 
The timing of the assessment means that the teacher-examiner should contribute only brief 
opinions in response to these types of questions, in order to give students the maximum 
length of assessment time. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
34 
Task 2, Part 1 (independent research presentation) 
One mark grid is applied to this part of the task: responding to written language in 
speech (AO2). 
Responding to written language in speech (AO2) 
This mark grid is used to assess the student’s two-minute presentation only. It is not applied 
to the discussion that follows the presentation. This mark grid assesses students’ ability to 
understand and respond in speech to Chinese written language that is drawn from a variety of 
sources and to summarise information from written sources in speech. The written sources will 
be those that students read in Chinese as part of their independent research and they must 
refer to at least two named written sources during their presentation. 
For guidance on what might be included in the presentation and how it may be structured, see 
Indicative content for Task 2 Part 1, independent research presentation in the 
document Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/  
spoken Cantonese) Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) 
 
Marks Description 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Summary makes limited reference to named written sources, makes generalised 
comments rather than being focused on authors’ main points/ideas. 
● Gives a personal response with limited justification, loses focus on the written 
sources, straying into general opinion. 
Responses that refer to just one single written source can be awarded a maximum of 
3 marks only. 
4–6 ● Summary refers to named written sources but lacks clarity or is uneven in its 
coverage of authors’ main points/ideas. 
● Gives a mostly relevant personal response with occasional justification, some loss 
of focus on the written sources. 
7–9 ● Presents a mostly clear summary of named written sources, generally clear 
outline of authors’ main points/ideas. 
● Gives a relevant personal response to the written sources supported with some 
justification. 
10–12 ● Presents a clear summary of named written sources, giving a clear outline of 
authors’ main points/ideas. 
● Gives a convincing personal response to the written sources supported with clear 
justification. 
Additional guidance 
Personal response: this is considered to be giving justified opinions, demonstrating 
engagement with the written sources by making focused comments, giving a reaction 
to/expressing feelings and thoughts about the written sources. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
35 
Task 2, Part 2 (discussion on independent research) 
Three mark grids are applied to this part of the task: 
● knowledge and understanding of society and culture (AO4) 
● accuracy and range of language (AO3) 
● interaction (AO1). 
Knowledge and understanding of society and culture (AO4) 
This mark grid assesses students’ ability to communicate information about and demonstrate 
appreciation of different aspects of culture and society related to the countries/communities 
where the language is spoken. They are also assessed on their ability to respond critically and 
analytically to different aspects of the culture and society by selecting relevant material, 
presenting and justifying points of view, developing arguments, drawing conclusions based on 
understanding and evaluating issues. 
 
Marks Description 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Occasionally relevant, straightforward ideas, mostly generalised, occasionally 
supported by information/examples/references; frequent loss of focus on the 
cultural and social context. 
● Occasional evidence of analysis; points of view are given with limited justification, 
arguments may be made but not developed, occasionally, leading to 
straightforward conclusions which may be contradictory; mainly relies on 
description rather than analysis. 
4–6 ● Relevant, straightforward ideas sometimes supported by information/examples/ 
references; some loss of focus on the cultural and social context.  
● Some analysis of the cultural and social context is evident, with straightforward 
arguments and points of view that are sometimes developed and justified, 
sometimes drawing straightforward conclusions; relies on description rather than 
analysis in places. 
7–9 ● Relevant, occasionally perceptive ideas frequently supported by pertinent 
information/examples/references; focus predominantly maintained on the cultural 
and social context. 
● Analysis of cultural and social context demonstrated by frequently developed and 
justified arguments and viewpoints, often drawing convincing conclusions. 
10–12 ● Relevant, perceptive ideas consistently supported by pertinent 
information/examples/references; consistently focussed on the cultural and social 
context. 
● Analysis of cultural and social context demonstrated by consistently developed and 
justified arguments and viewpoints, drawing convincing conclusions. 
Additional guidance 
Perceptive: demonstrates an in-depth understanding by making connections between ideas 
and information; goes beyond the standard, predictable response; shows insight/originality. 
Ideas include thoughts, feelings, impressions, opinions. 
Straightforward ideas, conclusions, arguments are deemed to be those that give the 
standard, predictable responses. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
36 
Task 2, Part 2 (discussion on independent research continued) 
Task 2: Accuracy and range of language (AO3) 
This mark grid assesses students’ ability to use a range of grammatical structures and 
vocabulary in order to produce articulate communication with a range of expression. It also 
assesses accuracy of pronunciation, grammar and syntax. 
 
Marks Description 
0 No rewardable language. 
1–3 ● Limited variation in the use of grammatical structures and vocabulary, limited or 
repetitive use of complex and idiomatic language, occasional variation of 
expression; communication is sometimes restricted/stilted. 
● Limited sequences of accurate language; often errors occur that hinder clarity of 
communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed. 
● Pronunciation and intonation are inconsistent, leading to occasional impairment in 
communication. 
4–6 ● Some variation in the use of grammatical structures and vocabulary, with use of 
some repetitive complex and idiomatic language, resulting in some variation of 
expression; some sequences of articulate communication. 
● Accurate sequences of language, resulting in some coherent speech; sometimes 
errors occur that hinder clarity of communication. 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible though sometimes inaccurate. 
7–9 ● Frequent variation in use of grammatical structures and vocabulary, including 
examples of complex and idiomatic language, resulting in frequent variation of 
expression and frequent sequences of articulate communication. 
● Accurate language throughout most of the conversation, resulting in generally 
coherent speech; errors occur but rarely hinder clarity of communication. 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible and mostly accurate. 
10–12 ● Consistent variation in use of grammatical structures and vocabulary, including 
different types of complex structures and idiomatic language, expressing ideas in a 
variety of ways, resulting in articulate communication. 
● Accurate language throughout resulting in coherent speech that is immediately 
understandable; any errors do not hinder clarity of the communication. 
● Pronunciation and intonation are accurate, intelligible and authentic-sounding. 
Additional guidance 
Variation in use of grammatical structures and vocabulary: the traits in the mark grid 
differentiate between the variation of grammatical structures and vocabulary used by 
students. Examiners will judge which mark band to place students in and which mark to 
award, based on the effect that the variety of grammatical structures and vocabulary has on 
the quality of the communication; the wider the variety, the more articulate the 
communication will become (see definition of ‘articulate’ below). 
Examples of a variety of grammatical structures and vocabulary are: a selection of complex 
language (see definition below) for a variety of purposes, including to present and justify 
points of view, develop arguments, draw conclusions based on understanding. 
Articulate: articulate communication is fluent, effective and coherent as students 
control/manipulate the language to say what they want to say rather than what they can say, 
for a number of different purposes. If students are restricted to what they can say, they may 
not be able to express themselves for all purposes, for example to develop arguments. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
37 
Complex language: considered to include the following. 
● use of aspect markers 
● passive voice 
● the 把 construction, for example 他把车修好了。 
● use of interrogative sentences in which 吗 is used 
● using extended sentences to express abstract ideas or convey justified arguments that 
require a range of lexis and structures, for example, conjunctions and pronouns 
● using synonyms and a variety of expressions 
● any grammar and structures included in the grammar list that are specific to A Level. 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free speech in order to access the 
top band. The mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on 
clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for the misuse of measure words 
● speaking Chinese with an accent which does not lead to misunderstanding 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the listener from the content of what is being said. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make speech difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood) or errors that force listeners to strain to understand what is meant, 
for example inappropriate use of near synonyms, such as 满意 instead of 
满足 as in 老师对你的作业很满意 /老师对你的作业很满足 
● using English word order (for example 我学习在图书馆) 
● serious mispronunciation such as tones which block communication for example, 
pronouncing 看书 as 砍树;照 as 找;上午 as 下午;网上 as 晚上)  
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they distract the listener from the content of what is being 
said. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, i.e. using the incorrect person or the 
verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB These are provided as examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
38 
Task 2, Part 2 (discussion on independent research continued) 
Interaction (AO1) 
This mark grid assesses students’ ability to interact with the teacher-examiner by giving 
relevant responses based on what they have heard, by initiating communication and eliciting 
points of view. 
 
Marks Description 
0 No rewardable material. 
1–2 ● Interacts with occasional spontaneity to some questions and statements, but 
requires frequent prompting; occasionally able to sustain the conversation, using 
communication strategies if necessary; frequent hesitation. 
● Occasionally initiates communication but development often relies on the 
examiner’s lead; may elicit points of view/check for understanding, though this 
may appear contrived. 
3–4 ● Interacts spontaneously for extended sections of the conversation, responding 
mostly with assurance but needing occasional prompting; able to sustain most of 
the conversation, using communication strategies if necessary; occasional 
hesitation. 
● Initiates communication by frequently taking the lead to develop the conversation; 
elicits points of view/checks for understanding although occasionally at an 
inappropriate moment. 
5–6 ● Interacts spontaneously throughout, responding with assurance to questions and 
statements; able to sustain conversation throughout, using communication 
strategies if necessary; minimal hesitation. 
● Initiates communication by consistently taking the lead to develop the 
conversation; elicits points of view/checks for understanding naturally and 
appropriately at different points in the conversation. 
Additional guidance 
Interacts spontaneously: responds to questions and statements that arise as a natural part 
of the conversation; gives a relevant, impromptu response based on what they have heard. 
Communication strategies: strategies that aid communication and allow the conversation to 
be sustained, for example rephrasing, circumlocution, adjusting the message, asking for 
clarification/repetition, repair strategies such as self-correction; these strategies enable 
students to deliver the message when exact vocabulary or expressions are not known. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
39 
Elicit points of view/check for understanding: as part of the language of genuine 
discourse, students are required to engage the examiner in the conversation by asking for 
their points of view and checking that their own point of view has been understood. They are 
expected to do this throughout the oral assessment at appropriate points during the 
conversation. This constitutes questions such as: 
 
Traditional characters Simplified characters 
你同意我的看法嗎？ 你同意我的看法吗？ 
是不是可以認為……？ 是不是可以认为……？ 
我們可以說……嗎？ 我们可以说……吗？ 
你是怎麼看……問題的？ 你是怎么看……问题的？ 
你對……有什麼看法？ 你对……有什么看法？ 
你明白我的意思嗎？ 你明白我的意思吗？ 
 
The timing of the assessment means that the teacher-examiner should contribute only brief 
opinions in response to these types of questions, in order to give students the maximum 
length of assessment time. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
40 
Administration and general information about the conduct of 
the speaking assessment 
General information 
● A pack of assessment materials will be sent to centres in advance of the prescribed 
five-week assessment period, which is during April and May. This must be kept in secure 
conditions by the Examinations Officer until it is given to the teacher-examiner responsible 
for the conduct of the speaking assessment. Students must not gain access to these 
materials before the assessment commences. 
● The teacher/examiner may open the pack three working days before the prescribed five 
week assessment period, in order to be familiar with the material and to prepare questions 
in advance. The assessment materials in this pack must not be removed from the centre 
premises. 
● The teacher-examiner responsible for the conduct of the speaking assessments is required 
to preserve the confidentiality of the examining materials: these materials must be handed 
back to the Examinations Officer on completion of the tests and must be kept secure. 
● Complete, unedited recordings of all assessments must be submitted to Pearson via the 
online Learner Work Transfer (LWT) portal. 
● All assessments will be marked against assessment criteria that can be found in the 
specification and the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese  
(spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
● Centres must have procedures in place to verify the identity of all students at the time of 
the assessment. They need to confirm this in the RP3 Form in Appendix 1: Independent 
research form (RP3). Centres are required to submit to Pearson one completed RP3 Form 
for each student in the cohort. 
Preparation time and notes 
● The notes made during the preparation time should be reference only; students should not 
read out whole, prepared sentences. 
● The preparation time must be supervised. It must take place outside of the room with an 
invigilator. As well as supervising students during their 5 minutes’ preparation time, the 
invigilator is responsible for informing students in English of the two sub-themes from which 
they can make their choice and for giving them the correct stimulus card based on that 
choice. 
● A Chinese teacher, or a senior member of teaching staff who has had overall responsibility 
for the students’ preparation for the examination cannot act as an invigilator during the 
examination (JCQ document Instructions for conducting examinations, 2016-2017, 
paragraph 6.3, page 18). 
● Students are not permitted to write on the stimulus card. 
● Students must return their notes and stimulus card to the teacher-examiner at the end of 
the assessment. 
● Any notes made during the preparation time must be kept securely by the centre until the 
end of October. 
● Students cannot have access to a dictionary, or any other resource, during the preparation 
time. 
● The teacher-examiner must test that both the machine used for recording the speaking 
assessment and the backup machine are working before the assessment begins. Both 
machines should be used in order to mitigate against any problems with the recordings, and 
recordings should be checked after the assessment to ensure they have worked. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
41 
Independent research project form 
● Students must submit the RP3 Form to the teacher-examiner no later than three weeks 
before the date of the assessment, outlining the findings from the sources they have used 
for their research. 
● The list of sources must include at least two written sources. 
● The purpose of the form is to provide sufficient information for the teacher-examiner to 
conduct a discussion; students will not be assessed on the contents of the RP3 Form. 
● The summary of the 6 to 10 key research findings is to be completed by the student in 
English in advance, on the RP3 Form. 
● Students will be required to declare the literary work(s) and/or film studied for Paper 2 on 
the RP3 Form so the teacher-examiner can ensure that there is no repetition of this material 
in Task 2. Students and teachers must sign a declaration on the RP3 Form to confirm all 
work is the student’s own. 
Students are allowed to refer to their RP3 Form in Task 2, but they are not allowed to write 
additional notes on it. It will be checked by the teacher-examiner in the examination room. 
Sample assessment materials 
Sample student and teacher-examiner cards for the tasks and marking criteria (including 
guidance of how these criteria are applied) can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 
Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) Sample Assessment Materials 
(SAMs) document. 
Marking guidance has been written to accompany the SAMs and is included with the SAMs 
booklet. Please note that this guidance is for the use of the Pearson-appointed external 
examiners who will mark the assessments. It is printed for reference only to aid understanding 
of how the criteria will be applied. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
42 
Assessment Objectives 
 
Students must: 
% in GCE  
A Level 
AO1 Understand and respond: 
● in speech to spoken language including face-to-face interaction 
● in writing to spoken language drawn from a variety of sources 
20 
AO2 Understand and respond: 
● in speech to written language drawn from a variety of sources 
● in writing to written language drawn from a variety of sources 
30 
AO3 Manipulate the language accurately, in spoken and written forms, 
using a range of lexis and structure 
30 
AO4 Show knowledge and understanding of, and respond critically and 
analytically to, different aspects of the culture and society of 
countries/communities where the language is spoken 
20 
Total 100% 
 
 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
Paper 
Assessment Objectives Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives AO1 % AO2 % AO3 % AO4 % 
Paper 1: Listening, reading 
and translation 
15 25 __ __ 40% 
Paper 2: Written response to 
works and translation 
__ __ 20 10 30% 
Paper 3: Speaking 5 5 10 10 30% 
Total for GCE A Level 20 30 30 20 100% 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
43 
3 Administration and general information 
Entries 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for this qualification can be found in our 
UK Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations officers and is available 
on our website. 
Discount code and performance tables 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more than one GCE qualification with the 
same discount code will have only one of the grades they achieve counted for the purpose of 
the school and college performance tables. This will be the grade for the larger qualification 
(i.e. the A Level grade rather than the AS grade). If the qualifications are the same size, then 
the better grade will be counted (please see Appendix 7: Codes). 
Students should be advised that if they take two GCE qualifications with the same discount 
code, the colleges, universities and employers to which they wish to progress are likely to take 
the view that this achievement is equivalent to only one GCE. The same view may be taken if 
students take two GCE qualifications that have different discount codes but have significant 
overlap of content. Before embarking on their programmes, students or their advisers who 
have any doubts about their subject combinations should check with the institution to which 
they wish to progress. 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, 
special consideration and malpractice 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our Equality Policy requires all students to have 
equal opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our qualifications to be 
awarded in a way that is fair to every student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the Equality Act 2010) are not, when 
they are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in comparison to students 
who do not share that characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification and that 
this achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their peers. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be in Chinese and English. For the speaking assessment, 
students have a choice between speaking in Mandarin or Cantonese. All student work must be 
in Chinese, except for comprehension questions in Paper 1 (Sections A and B), which are set 
and require a response in English, and the translation in Paper 1 (Section C), which requires a 
response in English. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
44 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with special 
educational needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to: 
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the assessment. 
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an individual 
student with a disability, without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding bodies comply with the duty under the 
Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students will then 
know what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for assessment. 
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable adjustments 
where a person with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in undertaking an 
assessment. The awarding organisation is required to take reasonable steps to overcome that 
disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be unique to that individual and, 
therefore, might not be in the list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of factors, 
including: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding 
organisation, or affects timeframes or the security or integrity of the assessment. This is 
because the adjustment is not ‘reasonable’. 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student's mark or grade to reflect 
temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the examination/assessment, 
which has had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a material effect on a student’s ability to 
take an assessment or demonstrate their level of attainment in an assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to apply for access arrangements 
and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special 
consideration, please refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
45 
Malpractice 
Student malpractice 
Student malpractice refers to any act by a student that compromises or seeks to compromise 
the process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the qualifications or the 
validity of results/certificates. 
Student malpractice in examinations must be reported to Pearson using a JCQ Form M1 
(available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form should be emailed to 
candidatemalpractice@pearson.com. Please provide as much information and supporting 
documentation as possible. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies 
with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice constitutes staff or centre malpractice. 
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and maladministration of our 
qualifications. As with student malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is any act that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the 
integrity of the qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported immediately, 
before any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson on a JCQ Form M2a (available 
at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form, supporting documentation and as 
much information as possible should be emailed to pqsmalpractice@pearson.com. Note that 
the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the document 
General and Vocational Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and Assessments 
Policies and Procedures, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice. 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to comply with the requirements of 
Ofqual's General Conditions of Recognition. 
The raw marks for Paper 1 and 3 in this qualification will be scaled by Pearson to represent the 
relative weighting of 40% for Paper 1 and 30% for Paper 3. 
Paper  Weighting  Raw marks Scaling factor Scaling mark 
1 40% 80 2.000 160 
2 30% 120 1.000 120 
3 30% 72 1.667 120 
This A Level qualification will be graded and certificated on a six-grade scale from A* to E 
using the total subject mark. Individual papers are not graded. 
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum judged by Pearson to be of 
sufficient standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U result. 
The first certification opportunity for this qualification will be 2019. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
46 
Student recruitment and progression 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this qualification. 
Students who would benefit most from studying this qualification are likely to have a Level 2 
qualification such as a GCSE in Chinese. 
Progression 
This qualification offers a suitable progression route from GCSE, focusing on the development 
of all four language skills, listening, speaking, reading and writing. Grammar and the 
mastering of linguistic features are key elements of this qualification as is the inclusion of 
authentic written and spoken sources, responding through writing to literature and film, and 
independent research. 
Students are expected to be able to develop knowledge and understanding of the social issues 
and trends and political and artistic culture of the target language country and communities. 
They should be able to express and justify their own opinions, develop arguments, and 
persuade, in speech and writing, building on the fluency and spontaneity developed at 
Key Stages 3 and 4. 
The skill of translation will be developed from those skills practised at Key Stages 3 and 4. The 
range of topics promotes a clear progression in grammar, vocabulary, and cultural knowledge 
and understanding from Key Stages 3 and 4, and will increase linguistic and cognitive demand. 
The grammar list illustrates the level required for this qualification. 
This qualification offers a suitable progression route to further study at university level. In 
addition, the study of one language at GCE can facilitate and help promote the learning of 
other languages. The qualification may also add to an individual’s employability profile, 
particularly for UK organisations trading overseas as well as with international companies 
based in the UK and globally. Students can progress to a wide range of careers in areas such 
as journalism and media, education, science, medicine, the civil service, sales, marketing, 
retail, and charities. 
Students will be able to apply their knowledge, skills and understanding to authentic,  
real-life contexts. They will develop transferable skills that support study of other GCE 
subjects, higher education study, and the transition to employment, together with an 
understanding and appreciation of Chinese-speaking countries and their cultures. 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
47 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Independent research project form (RP3) 49 
Appendix 2: Prescribed literary texts and films 49 
Appendix 3: Grammar list 52 
Appendix 4: The context for the development of this qualification 60 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 62 
Appendix 6: Level 3 Extended Project qualification 63 
Appendix 7: Codes 65 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
48 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
49 
 
 
 
Appendix 1: Independent research project 
form (RP3) 
Please use the editable version of the Independent research project form (RP3) available 
here to facilitate digital upload to Learner Work Transfer after the assessment. Scanned 
copies will not be accepted.  
If you need any help locating the form, please email: Teachinglanguages@pearson.com.  
Additional guidance can be found in the Administrative Support Guide here. 

 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
50 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
51 
Appendix 2: Prescribed literary texts 
and films 
For Paper 2, students are required to study two works from the list below. This can be either 
two literary texts or one literary text and one film. 
Literary texts 
Traditional characters 
● 《一隻叫鳳的鴿子》（作者 曹文軒), 2014 (short story) 
● 《城南舊事》〈惠安館〉，〈爸爸的花兒落了〉 
（作者 林海音), 1960 (autobiographical novel [1]) 
● 《故鄉》（作者 魯迅), 1921 (novel) 
 
Simplified characters 
● 《一只叫凤的鸽子》（作者 曹文轩), 2014 (short story) 
● 《城南旧事》〈惠安馆〉，〈爸爸的花儿落了〉 
（作者 林海音), 1960 (autobiographical novel [1]) 
● 《故乡》（作者 鲁迅), 1921 (novel) 
 
Films 
Traditional characters 
● 《請投我一票》（導演 陳為軍), 2007 
● 《十七歲的單車》（導演 王小帥), 2001 
● 《天水圍的日與夜》(導演 許鞍華), 2008 
 
Simplified characters 
● 《请投我一票》（导演 陈为军), 2007 
● 《十七岁的单车》（导演 王小帅), 2001 
● 《天水围的日与夜》(导演 许鞍华), 2008 
 
[1] Note that both〈惠安馆〉and〈爸爸的花儿落了〉have to be studied for this set work. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
52 
Appendix 3: Grammar list 
Students at A Level are expected to have studied the grammatical system and structures of 
the language during their course. Knowledge of the grammar and structures specified for 
GCSE is assumed. 
In the examination, students will be required to use, actively and accurately, grammar and 
structures appropriate to the tasks set, drawn from the following lists. The mention of an 
item in these lists implies knowledge of both its forms and its functions at an appropriate 
level of accuracy and complexity. 
 
 Full/traditional characters Simplified characters 
Nouns 
Collective nouns  
父母，師生，男女,
老少，人口，紙張，
車輛 
父母，师生，男女老
少,人口，纸张，车辆 
Common noun suffix 
-家（專家，藝術
家，探險家）；-師
（設計師，建築
師）; -性（靈活
性，實用性） 
-家（专家，艺术
家，探险家）；-师
（设计师，建筑
师）；-性（灵活，
实用性） 
Noun phrases with 
的 
大的，紅的，塑膠
的 
大的，红的，塑料的 
Adjectives 
Reduplication of 
adjectives  清清楚楚 ,馬馬虎
虎 
清清楚楚 ,马马虎虎 
Adjective and 
collocation  
大工資 VS 高工資；
嚴格VS 嚴重 
大工资 VS 高工资； 
严格VS 严重 
Sequencing of 
attributives 
一條很漂亮的白色長裙 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
53 
 
 Full/traditional characters Simplified characters 
Numerals 
Fractions 
五分之三 五分之三 
Percentages 
百分之五十 百分之五十 
Decimals 
(三點一四) (三点一四) 
Indeterminate 
excess 一百多年 一百多年 
Approximation 
大約，左右 大约，左右 
Multiples 
倍 倍 
Juxtaposition 
兩三年，四五歲 两三年，四五岁 
Adverbs 
Referential adverbs 
就，才，都，也，
卻，還，再，又，
只,卻，而 
就，才，都，也，
却，还，再，又，
只,却，而 
Adverbs showing 
degree 太，非常，真，十
分，特別，更 
太，非常，真，十
分，特别，更 
Time 
本來，後來，即將 
Degree 
比較，相當，極
其，無比 
比较，相当，极其，
无比 
Frequency 
一連，不斷，再
三，偶爾 
一连，不断，再三，
偶尔 
Emphasise  
簡直，幾乎，尤其,
明明 
简直，几乎，尤其,
明明 
On contrary  
恰恰相反，倒 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
54 
 
 Full/traditional characters Simplified characters 
Quantifiers 
Frequency of actions 
and events 次，遍，回 次，遍，回 
Plurality of nouns 
一些，幾，不少，
許多 
一些，几，不少，许
多 
Part 一部分，大部分，大多 
Pronouns 
Self-reflective form 
自己 自己 
Others 
其他，別的 其他，别的 
Formal/ written 
pronouns 本地, 此事, 該活動 本地, 此事, 该活动 
Enumerative 
pronouns 
等等，什麼的 等等，什么的 
Verbs 
Verb + object 
disyllabic structure 
(離合詞)吃飯,唱歌,
看書,走路,游泳 
(离合词)吃饭,唱歌,
看书,走路,游泳 
Verb reduplication 
showing brief 
duration 
休息休息/休息一下 休息休息/休息一下 
Verb collocation 
*閱讀書VS 看書 *阅读书VS 看书 
Verbs with duration 
三年沒學中文 VS 學
了三年中文 
三年没学中文 VS 学了
三年中文 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
55 
 
 Full/traditional characters Simplified characters 
Prepositions/coverbs 
Time 
在，從，到，於，
自，至，當 
在，从，到，于，
自，至，当 
For beneficiary 
給，為，為了,替 给，为，为了，替 
Instrument 
用，坐,靠，依靠，
根據，據，按 
用，坐,靠，依靠，
根据，据，按 
Facing 
對，跟 对，跟 
Comparison 
比 
Distance 
離 离 
Regarding 
關於 关于 
Conjunctions 
 
和,與,跟 和,与,跟 
 
及，以及，而，並 及，以及，而，并 
 
何況，除非，儘
管，以便，以免，
隨著，萬一，可
 
何况，除非，尽管，
以便，以免，随着，
万一，可见，要么 
Clausal conjunctions 
因為……所以…… 因为……所以…… 
雖然……但是…… 虽然……但是…… 
不但……而且…… 不但……而且…… 
又……又…… 又……又…… 
如果……就…… 如果……就…… 
先……再/然後…… 先……再/然后…… 
一……就…… 一……就…… 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
56 
 
 Full/traditional characters Simplified characters 
Conjunctions (continued) 
Clausal conjunctions 
 只要……就 只要……就 
只有……才…… 只有……才…… 
既然……就…… 既然……就…… 
如果/假如/要是……
就…… 
如果/假如/要是……
就…… 
不管……還是…… 不管……还是…… 
為了…… 为了…… 
Temporal 
conjunctions 的時候；以後，以
前 
的时候；以后，以前 
當時，同時 当时，同时 
Negation 
Double negative 
不得不，不能不 不得不，不能不 
Negation for 
imperatives 
別 别 
Otherwise 
不然，否則 不然，否则 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
57 
 
 Full/traditional characters Simplified characters 
Question words 
Extended usage of 
questions words 什麼都好,哪兒都不
去；什麼都（沒）
有 
什么都好,哪儿都不
去；什么都（没）有 
Correlations and 
parallels 
誰想去誰去;想去哪
兒就去哪兒 
谁想去谁去;想去哪
儿就去哪儿 
Alternative question 
還是:你想吃蘋果還
是草莓? 
还是:你想吃苹果还
是草莓? 
Aspect markers 
Continuation marker 
在 
Progression marker 
着 
Completion marker 
了 
Usage of 了 – as imminent action/ new situation 
Past experience 
marker 過 过 
Structural markers 
Attributives with 
的:  他昨天買的水果很
好吃 
他昨天买的水果很好
吃 
Descriptive 
adverbials with 地 慢慢地說 慢慢地说 
Complement with 
得: 說得很好;流利得很 说得很好;流利得很 
Complement with
到: 听到；看到 聽到；看到 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
58 
 
 Full/traditional characters Simplified characters 
Other constructions 
Various comparative 
constructions 她說中文比我流
利。 
她说中文比我流利。 
她說中文比我流利
一點兒。 
她说中文比我流利一
点儿。 
她說中文比我流利
得多。 
她说中文比我流利得
多。 
她說中文比我更流
利。 
她说中文比我更流
利。 
她說中文和/跟我一
樣流利。 
她说中文和/跟我一
样流利。 
她說中文沒有我這
麼流利。 
她说中文没有我这么
流利。 
Existence 
有：桌子上有一本
書 
有：桌子上有一本书 
Exclusion 
除了……以外…… 
Emphasise 
連……都/也…… 
Emphasise 
是……的。 
Emphasise 
不論/無論…… 都/
也/還…… 
不论/无论…… 都/也/
还…… 
Various complements with 得 
把 construction 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
59 
Passive construction  
被/叫/讓 被/叫/让 
Verbs used in 
passive and active 
sense 
電視送來了。 电视送来了。 
 
 Full/traditional characters Simplified characters 
Discourse markers 
 
首先，其次，最
後，總而言之/總之 
首先，其次，最后，
总而言之/总之 
 
其實，因此，由此
可見，此外，直
到，從而，與此相
反，反而，結果，
果然，從而 
其实，因此，由此可
见，此外，直到，从
而，与此相反，反
而，结果，果然，从
而 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
60 
Appendix 4: The context for the 
development of this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] and our 
ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
● reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with those 
taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
● consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including higher-education 
academics and teachers to ensure this qualification is suitable for a UK context 
● reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes 
● updating the qualification based on market and subject content changes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in their 
documents GCE Qualification Level Conditions and Requirements and GCSE/GCE Subject 
Level Conditions and Requirements for Modern Foreign Languages, published in April 2016. 
 
 
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification Principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
● demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning and 
measuring higher-order skills 
● rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and valid 
assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in end users of the knowledge, skills 
and competencies of certified students 
● inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students develop at 
different rates and have different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
● empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills, see Appendix 5. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
61 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
May 2014 
“The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important change to the 
education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications will assist them in 
helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an ‘Expert 
Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or because of 
our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the world as diverse as 
Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification development 
process that has included: 
● establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-specific 
expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
● subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future oriented. The 
design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, meaning learner outcomes 
have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a learner’s 
success in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident that we have 
supported the development of qualifications that are outstanding for their coherence, 
thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as representing world-class best 
practice. ”    
 
  
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Lee Sing Kong 
Director, National Institute of Education, 
Singapore 
  
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
  
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
 
All titles correct as at May 2014 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
62 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently flagged the 
need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable them to respond with 
confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines skills, or 
competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that can be learned and 
that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform an activity or task and can be 
built upon and extended through learning.’[1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected and 
evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this process, we 
identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the most evidence-based and 
robust skills framework. We adapted the framework slightly to include the Program for 
International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT Literacy and Collaborative Problem Solving 
(CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves the following[2]. 
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve general 
cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and communicate[3]. 
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, speaking communication, written communication, 
assertive communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, service 
orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared understanding, 
taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team organisation. 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work stress, 
adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, and physical 
adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual teams, 
work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and able to acquire 
new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher education, 
as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the teaching and learning of 
this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning materials, developed with 
stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
 
[1]  OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012) 
[2]  Koenig J A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop (National 
Academies Press, 2011) 
[3]  PISA – The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy (2011) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
63 
Appendix 6: Level 3 Extended Project 
qualification 
What is the Extended Project?  
The Extended Project is a standalone qualification that can be taken alongside GCEs. It 
supports the development of independent learning skills and helps to prepare students for 
their next step – whether that be higher education or employment. The qualification:  
● is recognised by higher education for the skills it develops  
● is worth half of an Advanced GCE qualification at grades A*–E  
● carries UCAS points for university entry.  
The Extended Project encourages students to develop skills in the following areas: research, 
critical thinking, extended writing and project management. Students identify and agree a 
topic area of their choice for in-depth study (which may or may not be related to a GCE 
subject they are already studying), guided by their teacher. 
Students can choose from one of four approaches to produce: 
● a dissertation (for example an investigation based on predominantly secondary research) 
● an investigation/field study (for example a practical experiment) 
● a performance (for example in music, drama or sport) 
● an artefact (for example creating a sculpture in response to a client brief or solving an 
engineering problem). 
The qualification is coursework based and students are assessed, in English, on the skills of 
managing, planning and evaluating their project. Students will research their topic, develop 
skills to review and evaluate the information, and then present the final outcome of their 
project. 
The Extended Project has 120 guided learning hours (GLH) consisting of a 40-GLH taught 
element that includes teaching the technical skills (for example research skills) and an 
80-GLH guided element that includes mentoring students through the project work. The 
qualification is 100% internally assessed and externally moderated. 
How to link the Extended Project with languages 
The Extended Project creates the opportunity to develop transferable skills for progression to 
higher education and to the workplace, through the exploration of either an area of personal 
interest or a topic of interest from within the language qualification content. The project 
must be written in English. 
Through the Extended Project, students will develop skills that support their study of 
Chinese, including: 
● conducting, organising and using research 
● independent reading in the subject area 
● planning, project management and time management 
● defining a hypothesis to be tested in investigations or developing a design brief 
● collecting, handling and interpreting data and evidence 
● evaluating arguments and processes, including arguments in favour of alternative 
interpretations of data and evaluation of experimental methodology 
● critical thinking. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
64 
In the context of the Extended Project, critical thinking refers to the ability to identify and 
develop arguments for a point of view or hypothesis and to consider and respond to 
alternative arguments. This supports the development of evaluative skills, through 
evaluating different arguments, and using qualitative and quantitative evidence to support 
informed judgements and propose evidence-based solutions to issues. 
Types of Extended Project related to languages 
Students may produce a dissertation on any topic that can be researched and debated. 
A dissertation might involve an investigation such as: 
● the impact of Western pop culture on Chinese pop culture 
● the extent to which China can be considered a “super power” 
● the success of the education system in China, and its impact on the Western world. 
The dissertation uses secondary research sources to provide a reasoned defence or a point of 
view, with consideration of counter-arguments. 
An alternative might be an investigative project or field study involving the collection of data 
from primary research, for example: 
● a study of the impact of emigration on rural communities in China 
● the changing face of Chinese media in the digital era 
A field study might consider an issue that lends itself to primary research, for example an 
investigation into the impact of protectionism on the Chinese film industry. 
Using the Extended Project to support breadth and depth 
In the Extended Project, students are assessed on the quality of the work they produce and 
the skills they develop and demonstrate through completing this work. Students should 
demonstrate that they have extended themselves in some significant way beyond what they 
have been studying in Chinese. Students can demonstrate extension in one or more 
dimensions: 
● deepening understanding – where a student explores a topic in greater depth than in 
the specification content. This could be an in-depth exploration of one aspect of the 
themes 
● broadening skills – where a student learns a new skill. This might be learning how to 
design a website or learning a new statistical technique that can be used in the analysis of 
either primary or secondary data collected by the student 
● widening perspectives – where the student’s project spans different subjects. A student 
studying Chinese with business may wish to research the impact of tourism on a particular 
region or locality. A student studying Chinese with history may wish to analyse the impact 
of the reform and opening up policies in China in the late 1970s and early 1980s  
Information to support the delivery and assessment of the Extended Project, including the 
specification, can be found on our website. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification – Issue 4 – July 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
65 
Appendix 7: Codes 
 
Type of code Use of code Code 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for performance 
tables is assigned a discount code 
indicating the subject area to which it 
belongs. 
Please see the GOV.UK 
website* 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes  
Each qualification title is allocated an 
Ofqual Regulated Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) code. 
The RQF code is known as a Qualification 
Number (QN). This is the code that 
features in the DfE Section 96 and on the 
LARA as being eligible for 16–18 and 19+ 
funding, and is to be used for all 
qualification funding purposes. The QN will 
appear on students’ final certification 
documentation. 
The QN for this 
qualification is: 
603/1044/3 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to 
enter students for a qualification. Centres 
will need to use the entry codes only when 
claiming students’ qualifications. 
A Level – 9CN0 
Paper codes These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be 
entered for individual papers, except for 
Paper 3, for which entries must be made 
for either Mandarin or Cantonese. 
Paper 1: 9CN0/01 
Paper 2: 9CN0/02 
Paper 3: 9CN0/03M/03C 
 
*www.gov.uk/government/publications/key-stage-4-qualifications-discount-codes-and-point-
scores 
 
 
DB030724 9781446933985_GCE2017_AL_CHINESE_ISSUE4.DOC.1–70/0 
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office:  80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121
