A Level 
Physics
Specification
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics (9PH0)
First teaching from September 2015
First certification from 2017 Issue 3

 
 
Pearson Edexcel  
Level 3 Advanced GCE  
in Physics (9PH0) 
Specification 
First certification 2017 
Issue 3 
 
 
 
 
Edexcel, BTEC and LCCI qualifications 
Edexcel, BTEC and LCCI qualifications are awarded by Pearson, the UK’s largest 
awarding body offering academic and vocational qualifications that are globally 
recognised and benchmarked. For further information, please visit our qualifications 
website at qualifications.pearson.com. Alternatively, you can get in touch with us 
using the details on our contact us page at qualifications.pearson.com/contactus 
About Pearson 
Pearson is the world's leading learning company, with 35,000 employees in more 
than 70 countries working to help people of all ages to make measurable progress 
in their lives through learning. We put the learner at the centre of everything we 
do, because wherever learning flourishes, so do people. Find out more about how 
we can help you and your learners at qualifications.pearson.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References to third party material made in this specification are made in good faith. 
Pearson does not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of 
materials, which may be subject to change, or any opinions expressed therein. 
(Material may include textbooks, journals, magazines and other publications and 
websites.) 
 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
 
ISBN 978 1 446 93602 3 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2018 
 
 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
May 2014 
“The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important 
change to the education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications 
will assist them in helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an 
‘Expert Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or 
because of our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the 
world as diverse as Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries 
across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification 
development process that has included: 
• Extensive international comparability of subject content against the highest-
performing jurisdictions in the world 
• Benchmarking assessments against UK and overseas providers to ensure that 
they are at the right level of demand 
• Establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-
specific expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
• Subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future 
oriented. The design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, 
meaning learner outcomes have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a 
learner’s success in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident 
that we have supported the development of qualifications that are outstanding for 
their coherence, thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as 
representing world-class best practice.
”     
  
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Lee Sing Kong 
Director, National Institute of 
Education, Singapore 
  
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
  
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
 
All titles correct as at May 2014 
 
 
 
 
 
Summary of Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE 
in Physics specification Issue 3 changes  
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this 
current issue  
Page 
number 
Amendment to correct ‘chemistry’ to ‘physics’ 6 
Amendment to correct the use of the negative sign for Activity 23 
Amendment to correct the use of the negative sign for Activity 43 
‘Subject to confirmation in spring 2015, following trialling’ has been 
deleted. 
49 
Amendment to correct ‘fiduciary’ to ‘fiducial’ marker. 81 
Amendment to correct the use of the negative sign for Activity 101 
Amendment to replace Appendix 10 with revised version 105 
 
Earlier issue(s) show(s) previous changes. 
If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, contact us via 
our website at: qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/contact-us.html.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics is designed for use in schools 
and colleges. It is part of a suite of GCE qualifications offered by Pearson. 
Purpose of the specification 
This specification sets out: 
● the objectives of the qualification 
● any other qualifications that a student must have completed before taking the 
qualification 
● any prior knowledge and skills that the student is required to have before taking 
the qualification 
● any other requirements that a student must have satisfied before they will be 
assessed or before the qualification will be awarded 
● the knowledge and understanding that will be assessed as part of the 
qualification 
● the method of assessment and any associated requirements relating to it 
● the criteria against which a student’s level of attainment will be measured (such 
as assessment criteria). 
 
 
Rationale 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics meets the following 
purposes, which fulfil those defined by the Office of Qualifications and Examinations 
Regulation (Ofqual) for GCE qualifications in their GCE Qualification Level 
Conditions and Requirements document, published in April 2014. 
The purposes of this qualification are to: 
• define and assess achievement of the knowledge, skills and understanding that 
will be needed by students planning to progress to undergraduate study at UK 
higher education institutions, particularly (although not only) in the same 
subject area 
• set out a robust and internationally comparable post-16 academic course of 
study to develop that knowledge, skills and understanding 
• enable HE institutions to identify accurately the level of attainment of students 
• provide a basis for school and college accountability measures at age 18 
• provide a benchmark of academic ability for employers. 
Qualification aims and objectives 
The aims and objectives of the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
are to enable students to develop: 
● essential knowledge and understanding of different areas of the subject and 
how they relate to each other 
● a deep appreciation of the skills, knowledge and understanding of scientific 
methods 
● competence and confidence in a variety of practical, mathematical and problem-
solving skills 
● their interest in and enthusiasm for the subject, including developing an interest 
in further study and careers associated with the subject 
● an understanding of how society makes decisions about scientific issues and 
how the sciences contribute to the success of the economy and society. 
 
 
The context for the development of this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] 
and our ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
• reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with 
those taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
• consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including subject 
associations, higher education academics, teachers and employers to ensure 
this qualification is suitable for a UK context 
• reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in 
their document GCE Qualification Level Conditions and Requirements and by the 
Department for Education (DfE) in their GCE AS and A level regulatory 
requirements for biology, chemistry, physics and psychology document, published 
in April 2014. 
 
 
 
                                          
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification Principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
● demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning and 
measuring higher-order skills 
● rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and valid 
assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in end users of the knowledge, skills 
and competencies of certified students 
● inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students develop at 
different rates and have different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
● empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills, see Appendix 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents 
Qualification at a glance 1 
Knowledge, skills and understanding 5 
Concept-led approach 7 
Salters Horners approach 26 
Science Practical Endorsement 45 
Marking and standardisation 49 
Malpractice 50 
Assessment 53 
Assessment summary 53 
Assessment Objectives and weightings 55 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 55 
Entry and assessment information 56 
Student entry 56 
Discount code and performance tables 56 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special 
consideration 57 
Equality Act 2010 and Pearson’s equality policy 58 
Synoptic assessment 58 
Awarding and reporting 59 
Language of assessment 59 
Other information 61 
Student recruitment 61 
Prior learning and other requirements 61 
Progression 61 
Relationship between Advanced Subsidiary GCE  and Advanced 
GCE 61 
Progression from Advanced Subsidiary GCE to Advanced GCE 62 
Relationship between GCSE and Advanced GCE 62 
Progression from GCSE to Advanced GCE 62 
Appendix 1: Transferable skills 65 
Appendix 2: Level 3 Extended Project qualification 67 
Appendix 3: Codes 71 
 
 
Appendix 4: Practical competency authentication 
sheet 73 
Appendix 5: Working scientifically 75 
Appendix 5a: Practical skills identified for indirect 
assessment and developed through teaching and 
learning 77 
Appendix 5b: Practical skills identified for direct 
assessment and developed through teaching and 
learning 79 
Appendix 5c: Use of apparatus and techniques 81 
Appendix 5d: Mapping between  Appendix 5c and core 
practicals 83 
Appendix 6: Mathematical skills and exemplifications 87 
Appendix 7: Command words used in examination 
papers 93
 
Appendix 8: Formulae sheet 95 
Appendix 9: Data sheet 103 
Appendix 10: Uncertainties and practical work 105 
Appendix 11: Support from the University of York 113 
 
 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
1 
Qualification at a glance 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics consists of three externally 
examined papers and the Science Practical Endorsement. 
Students must complete all assessments in May/June in any single year. 
The content for this qualification is presented in two different ways to provide two 
distinct, flexible, teaching and learning approaches to suit the needs of different 
types of student: 
● a concept-led approach. This approach begins with a study of the laws, theories 
and models of physics and finishes with an exploration of their practical 
applications 
● the Salters Horners context-led approach. This approach begins with the 
consideration of situations and applications that each draws on one or more 
areas of physics, and then moves on to the underlying physics laws, theories 
and models. This approach is based on the Salters Horners Advanced Physics 
(SHAP) Project. 
These teaching approaches can be mixed to allow variety in course delivery. 
Teachers may select the approach that best meets the needs of their students. 
These different approaches lead to the same common assessment papers for this 
qualification. 
Paper 1: Advanced Physics I *Paper code: 9PH0/01 
● Externally assessed 
● Availability: May/June 
● First assessments: 2017 
30% of the 
total 
qualification 
Overview of content 
This paper will examine the following topics. 
Concept approach 
• Working as a Physicist 
● Mechanics 
● Electric Circuits 
● Further Mechanics 
● Electric and Magnetic Fields 
● Nuclear and Particle Physics 
Salters Horners approach 
• Working as a Physicist 
● Higher, Faster, Stronger (HFS) 
● Technology in Space (SPC) (except items 70 and  
92–95) 
● Digging up the Past (DIG) (except items 83–87) 
● Transport on Track (TRA) 
● The Medium is the Message (MDM) 
● Probing the Heart of Matter (PRO) 
Overview of assessment 
● Assessment is 1 hour 45 minutes. 
● The paper consists of 90 marks. 
● The paper may include multiple-choice, short open, open-response, calculations and 
extended writing questions. 
● The paper will include questions that target mathematics at Level 2 or above (see 
Appendix 6: Mathematical skills and exemplifications). Overall, a minimum of 40% of 
the marks across the three papers will be awarded for mathematics at Level 2 or above. 
● Students will be expected to apply their knowledge and understanding to familiar and 
unfamiliar contexts. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
2 
Paper 2: Advanced Physics II *Paper code: 9PH0/02
● Externally assessed
● Availability: May/June
● First assessments: 2017
30% of the 
total 
qualification 
Overview of content 
This paper will examine the following topics. 
Concept approach 
• Working as a Physicist
• Materials
• Waves and Particle Nature of Light
• Thermodynamics
• Space
• Nuclear Radiation
• Gravitational Fields
• Oscillations
Salters Horners approach 
• Working as a Physicist
● The Sound of Music (MUS)
● Good Enough to Eat (EAT)
● Technology in Space (SPC) (only items 70
an
d 92–95)
● Digging up the Past (DIG) (only items
83–87)
● Spare-Part Surgery (SUR)
● Build or Bust? (BLD)
● Reach for the Stars (STA)
Overview of assessment 
● Assessment is 1 hour 45 minutes. 
● The paper consists of 90 marks.
● The paper may include multiple-choice, short open, open-response, calculations and 
extended writing questions.
● The paper will include questions that target mathematics at Level 2 or above (see 
Appendix 6: Mathematical skills and exemplifications). Overall, a minimum of 40% of 
the marks across the three papers will be awarded for mathematics at Level 2 or above.
● Students will be expected to apply their knowledge and understanding to familiar and 
unfamiliar contexts.
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
3 
 
Paper 3: General and Practical Principles in Physics *Paper code: 9PH0/03 
● Externally assessed 
● Availability: May/June 
● First assessments: 2017 
40% of the 
total 
qualification 
Overview of content 
● Questions in this paper may draw on any of the topics in this specification. 
● The paper will include synoptic questions that may draw on two or more different 
topics. 
● The paper will include questions that assess conceptual and theoretical 
understanding of experimental methods (indirect practical skills) that will draw on 
students’ experiences of the core practicals. 
Overview of assessment 
● Assessment is 2 hours 30 minutes. 
● The paper consists of 120 marks. 
● The paper may include, short open, open-response, calculations and extended 
writing questions. 
● The paper will include questions that target mathematics at Level 2 or above (see 
Appendix 6: Mathematical skills and exemplifications). Overall, a minimum of 40% 
of the marks across the three papers will be awarded for mathematics at Level 2 or 
above. 
● Some questions will assess conceptual and theoretical understanding of 
experimental methods (see Appendix 5: Working scientifically). 
● Students will be expected to apply their knowledge and understanding to familiar 
and unfamiliar contexts. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
4 
 
Science Practical Endorsement** *Paper code: 9PH0/04 
• Internally assessed and externally monitored by Pearson 
• Availability: May/June 
• First assessment: 2017 
Overview of content 
The assessment of practical skills is a compulsory requirement of the course of study for 
A level physics. It will appear on all students’ certificates as a separately reported result, 
alongside the overall grade for the qualification.  
Students must carry out a minimum of 12 practical activities which, together, meet the 
requirements of Appendices 5b (Practical skills identified for direct assessment and 
developed through teaching and learning) and 5c (Use of apparatus and techniques) 
from the prescribed subject content.  
The practical activities prescribed in this specification (the "core practicals") provide 
opportunities for demonstrating competence in all the skills identified, together with the 
use of apparatus and techniques for each subject. However, students can also 
demonstrate these competencies in any additional practical activity undertaken 
throughout the course of study which covers the requirements of Appendix 5c.
 
Overview of assessment 
Students' practical work will be assessed by teachers, using common practical 
assessment criteria (CPAC) that are consistent across exam boards. These criteria can 
be found on pages 48-49. 
Students who demonstrate the required standard across all the requirements of the 
CPAC will receive a ‘pass’ grade. 
Students may work in groups but teachers who award a pass to their students need to 
be confident of individual students’ competence. 
The correct application of CPAC to students' work will be monitored through a system of 
visits to centres. These visits will be coordinated across the exam boards by JCQ, to 
ensure that all centres are visited regularly, although not necessarily in each science 
subject. 
 
*See Appendix 3: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant 
to this qualification. 
**Students will be assessed separately for the Science Practical Endorsement. The 
Endorsement will not contribute to the overall grade for this qualification, but the 
result will be recorded on the student’s certificate. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
5 
Knowledge, skills and understanding 
Overview 
This qualification may be taught using either a concept approach or a context-led 
Salters Horners (SHAP) approach. The concept approach begins with a study of the 
laws, theories and models of physics and then explores their practical applications. 
The SHAP context-led approach begins with the consideration of applications that 
draw on one or more areas of physics, and moves on to the underlying laws, 
theories and models of physics. 
These different approaches lead to the same common assessment papers for this 
qualification. 
The content in this section has been arranged to match the concept approach. The 
same content, reordered for the context-led (SHAP) approach starts on page 26. 
Content overview 
Students are expected to demonstrate and apply the knowledge, understanding and 
skills described in the content. They are also expected to analyse, interpret and 
evaluate a range of scientific information, ideas and evidence using their 
knowledge, understanding and skills. 
To demonstrate their knowledge, students should be able to undertake a range of 
activities, including the ability to recall, describe and define, as appropriate. 
To demonstrate their understanding, students should be able to explain ideas and 
use their knowledge to apply, analyse, interpret and evaluate, as appropriate. 
Students should consider ethical issues relating to the environment, evaluate risks 
and benefits of applications of physics, and evaluate ways in which society uses 
physics to inform decision making. 
Students should develop their ability to apply mathematical skills to physics 
throughout the course. These skills include the ability to change the subject of an 
equation, substitute numerical values and solve algebraic equations using decimal 
and standard form, ratios, fractions and percentages. Further details of the skills 
that should be developed are given in Appendix 6: Mathematical skills and 
exemplifications. Students should also be familiar with Système Internationale 
d’Unités (SI) units and their prefixes, be able to estimate physical quantities and 
know the limits of physical measurements. 
Core practicals will be assessed in the examination. 
Students should be encouraged to use ICT throughout the course. 
Practical assessment 
Practical work is central to any study of physics. For this reason, the specification 
includes 16 core practical activities which form a thread linking theoretical 
knowledge and understanding to practical scenarios. In following this thread, 
students will build on practical skills learned at GCSE, becoming confident practical 
physicists, handling apparatus competently and safely. Using a variety of apparatus 
and techniques, they should be able to design and carry out both the core practical 
activities and their own investigations, collecting data which can be analysed and 
used to draw valid conclusions.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
6 
One important aspect of practical work is the ability to evaluate and manage 
potential risks. The variety of different practical techniques and scenarios in the 
core practical activities give students scope to consider risk management in 
different contexts.  
Students should also consider the ethical issues presented by their work in the 
laboratory, which might include consideration for using minimum quantities of 
resources; the safe disposal of waste materials; and appropriate consideration for 
other people involved in their own work or who is working nearby. 
Also central to the development of practical skills is the ability to communicate 
information and ideas through the use of appropriate terminology and ICT. Being 
able to communicate clearly the findings of practical work is arguably as important 
as the collection of accurate data.  
In carrying out practical activities, students will be expected to use their knowledge 
and understanding to pose scientific questions which can be investigated through 
experimental activities. Such activities will enable students to collect data, analyse 
it for correlations and causal relationships, and to develop solutions to the 
questions posed.  
Questions within written examination papers will aim to assess the knowledge and 
understanding that students gain while carrying out practical activities, within the 
context of the 16 core practical activities, as well as in novel practical scenarios. 
The written papers will test the skills of students in planning practical work – both 
in familiar and unfamiliar applications – including risk management and the 
selection of apparatus, with reasons. As part of data handling, students will be 
expected to use significant figures appropriately, to process data and to plot 
graphs. In analysing outcomes and drawing valid conclusions, students should 
critically consider methods and data, including assessing measurement 
uncertainties and errors.  
Examination papers will also provide the opportunity for students to evaluate the 
wider role of the scientific community in validating new knowledge and the ways in 
which society as a whole uses science to inform decision making. Within this, they 
could be asked to consider the implications and applications of physics in terms of 
associated benefits and risks. Students may also be asked to evaluate 
methodology, evidence and data and resolve conflicting evidence. 
Success in questions that indirectly assess practical skills within written papers will 
come more naturally to those candidates who have a solid foundation of laboratory 
practice and who, having carried them out, have a thorough understanding of 
practical techniques. Therefore, where possible, teachers should consider adding 
additional experiments to the core practical activities. The 16 core practicals will 
provide the basis from which some of the Paper 3 examination questions will be 
drawn. 
Teachers should note that the completion of the 16 core practical activities can also 
provide evidence of competence for the Science Practical Endorsement (please see 
page 45) and that evidence must be provided for the 12 practical techniques listed 
in Appendix 5c through a minimum of 12 core practical activities. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
7 
Concept-led approach 
The following section shows how the course may be taught using the concept-led 
approach. The subset of content required for the Advanced Subsidiary GCE 
qualification is listed on pages 8–16, while the remainder of the content required 
for this qualification is listed on pages 17–25. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
8 
Topic 1: Working as a Physicist 
Throughout their study of physics at this level, students should develop their 
knowledge and understanding of what it means to work scientifically. They should 
also develop their competence in manipulating quantities and their units, including 
making estimates.  
Students should gain experience of a wide variety of practical work that gives them 
opportunities to develop their practical and investigative skills by planning, carrying 
out and evaluating experiments. Through studying a range of examples, contexts 
and applications of physics, students should become increasingly knowledgeable of 
the ways in which the scientific community and society as a whole use scientific 
ideas and methods, and how the professional scientific community functions.  
Students should develop their ability to communicate their knowledge and 
understanding of physics in ways that are appropriate to the content and to the 
audience. 
It is not intended that this part of the specification be taught as a discrete topic. 
Rather, the knowledge and skills specified here should pervade the entire course 
and should be taught using examples and applications from the rest of the 
specification. 
 
Students should: 
1. know and understand the distinction between base and derived quantities and 
their SI units 
2. be able to demonstrate their knowledge of practical skills and techniques for both 
familiar and unfamiliar experiments 
3. be able to estimate values for physical quantities and use their estimate to solve 
problems 
4. understand the limitations of physical measurement and apply these limitations 
to practical situations 
5. be able to communicate information and ideas in appropriate ways using 
appropriate terminology 
6. understand applications and implications of science and evaluate their associated 
benefits and risks 
7. understand the role of the scientific community in validating new knowledge and 
ensuring integrity 
8. understand the ways in which society uses science to inform decision making 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
9 
Topic 2: Mechanics 
In order to develop their practical skills, students should be encouraged to carry out 
a range of practical experiments related to this topic. Possible experiments include 
strobe photography or the use of a video camera to analyse projectile motion, 
determine the centre of gravity of an irregular rod, investigate the conservation of 
momentum using light gates and air track. 
Mathematical skills that could be developed in this topic include plotting two 
variables from experimental data, calculating rate of change from a graph showing 
a linear relationship, drawing and using the slope of a tangent to a curve as a 
measure of rate of change, distinguishing between instantaneous rate of change 
and average rate of change and identifying uncertainties in measurements, using 
simple techniques to determine uncertainty when data are combined, using angles 
in regular 2D and 3D structures with force diagrams and using sin, cos and tan in 
physical problems. 
This topic may be studied using applications that relate to mechanics, for example, 
sports. 
 
Students should: 
9. be able to use the equations for uniformly accelerated motion in one 
dimension: 
 
asuv
atuts
atuv
tvus
2
2
)(
22
2
2
1
+=
+=
+=
+=
 
10. be able to draw and interpret displacement-time, velocity-time and 
acceleration-time graphs 
11. know the physical quantities derived from the slopes and areas of 
displacement-time, velocity-time and acceleration-time graphs, including cases 
of non-uniform acceleration and understand how to use the quantities 
12. understand scalar and vector quantities and know examples of each type of 
quantity and recognise vector notation 
13. be able to resolve a vector into two components at right angles to each other 
by drawing and by calculation 
14. be able to find the resultant of two coplanar vectors at any angle to each other 
by drawing, and at right angles to each other by calculation 
15. understand how to make use of the independence of vertical and horizontal 
motion of a projectile moving freely under gravity 
16. be able to draw and interpret free-body force diagrams to represent forces on 
a particle or on an extended but rigid body 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
10 
 
Students should: 
17. be able to use the equation ∑F = ma, and understand how to use this equation 
in situations where m is constant (Newton’s second law of motion), including 
Newton’s first law of motion where a = 0, objects at rest or travelling at 
constant velocity 
Use of the term terminal velocity is expected 
18.  be able to use the equations for gravitational field strength 
m
Fg =  and weight 
W = mg 
19.  CORE PRACTICAL 1: Determine the acceleration of a freely-falling 
object. 
20. know and understand Newton’s third law of motion and know the properties of 
pairs of forces in an interaction between two bodies 
21. understand that momentum is defined as p = mv 
22. know the principle of conservation of linear momentum, understand how to 
relate this to Newton’s laws of motion and understand how to apply this to 
problems in one dimension 
23. be able to use the equation for the moment of a force, moment of force = Fx 
where x is the perpendicular distance between the line of action of the force 
and the axis of rotation  
24.  be able to use the concept of centre of gravity of an extended body and apply 
the principle of moments to an extended body in equilibrium 
25. be able to use the equation for work ∆W = F∆s, including calculations when the 
force is not along the line of motion 
26. be able to use the equation 2
2
1 mvEk =  for the kinetic energy of a body 
27. be able to use the equation ∆Egrav = mg∆h for the difference in gravitational 
potential energy near the Earth’s surface 
28.  know, and understand how to apply, the principle of conservation of energy 
including use of work done, gravitational potential energy and kinetic energy 
29.  be able to use the equations relating power, time and energy transferred or 
work done 
t
EP =  and 
t
WP =  
30.  be able to use the equations 
 
inputenergy  total
outputenergy  usefulefficiency =  
and 
 
inputpower  total
outputpower  usefulefficiency =  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
11 
Topic 3: Electric Circuits 
In order to develop their practical skills, students should be encouraged to carry out 
a range of practical experiments related to this topic. Possible experiments include 
estimating power output of an electric motor, using a digital voltmeter to 
investigate the output of a potential divider and investigating current/voltage 
graphs for a filament bulb, thermistor and diode. 
Mathematical skills that could be developed in this topic include substituting 
numerical values into algebraic equations using appropriate units for physical 
quantities and applying the equation y = mx + c to experimental data. 
This topic may be studied using applications that relate to electricity, for example, 
space technology. 
 
Students should: 
31. understand that electric current is the rate of flow of charged particles and be 
able to use the equation 
t
QI ∆
∆=   
32. understand how to use the equation 
Q
WV =   
33. understand that resistance is defined by 
I
VR =  and that Ohm’s law is a special 
case when I ∝ V for constant temperature 
34. understand how the distribution of current in a circuit is a consequence of 
charge conservation 
35. understand how the distribution of potential differences in a circuit is a 
consequence of energy conservation 
36. be able to derive the equations for combining resistances in series and parallel 
using the principles of charge and energy conservation, and be able to use 
these equations 
37. be able to use the equations P = VI, W = VIt and be able to derive and use 
related equations, e.g. P = I2R and 
R
VP
2
=  
38. understand how to sketch, recognise and interpret current-potential difference 
graphs for components, including ohmic conductors, filament bulbs, thermistors 
and diodes 
39. be able to use the equation 
A
ρlR =  
40. CORE PRACTICAL 2: Determine the electrical resistivity of a material. 
41.  be able to use I = nqvA to explain the large range of resistivities of different 
materials 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
12 
 
Students should: 
42.  understand how the potential along a uniform current-carrying wire varies with 
the distance along it 
43. understand the principles of a potential divider circuit and understand how to 
calculate potential differences and resistances in such a circuit 
44. be able to analyse potential divider circuits where one resistance is variable 
including thermistors and light dependent resistors (LDRs) 
45. know the definition of electromotive force (e.m.f.) and understand what is 
meant by internal resistance and know how to distinguish between e.m.f. and 
terminal potential difference 
46. CORE PRACTICAL 3: Determine the e.m.f. and internal resistance of an 
electrical cell. 
47. understand how changes of resistance with temperature may be modelled in 
terms of lattice vibrations and number of conduction electrons and understand 
how to apply this model to metallic conductors and negative temperature 
coefficient thermistors 
48. understand how changes of resistance with illumination may be modelled in 
terms of the number of conduction electrons and understand how to apply this 
model to LDRs. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
13 
Topic 4: Materials 
In order to develop their practical skills, students should be encouraged to carry out 
a range of practical experiments related to this topic. 
Mathematical skills that could be developed in this topic include determining the 
slope of a linear graph and calculating or estimating, by graphical methods as 
appropriate, the area between a curve and the x-axis and realising the physical 
significance of the area that has been determined. 
This topic may be studied using applications that relate to materials, for example 
spare-part surgery. 
 
Students should: 
49. be able to use the equation density 
V
m=ρ  
50. understand how to use the relationship upthrust = weight of fluid displaced 
51. a. be able to use the equation for viscous drag (Stokes’ Law), F = 6πηrv. 
 b. understand that this equation applies only to small spherical objects 
moving at low speeds with laminar flow (or in the absence of turbulent 
flow) and that viscosity is temperature dependent 
52. CORE PRACTICAL 4: Use a falling-ball method to determine the viscosity 
of a liquid. 
53. be able to use the Hooke’s law equation, ∆F = k∆x, where k is the stiffness of 
the object 
54. understand how to use the relationships 
● (tensile or compressive) stress = force/cross-sectional area 
● (tensile or compressive) strain= change in length/original length 
● Young modulus = stress/strain 
55. a. be able to draw and interpret force-extension and force-compression 
graphs 
 b. understand the terms limit of proportionality, elastic limit, yield point, 
elastic deformation and plastic deformation and be able to apply them to 
these graphs 
56. be able to draw and interpret tensile or compressive stress-strain graphs, and 
understand the term breaking stress 
57. CORE PRACTICAL 5: Determine the Young modulus of a material 
58. be able to calculate the elastic strain energy Eel in a deformed material sample, 
using the equation xFEel ∆=∆ 2
1 , and from the area under the force-extension 
graph 
  The estimation of area and hence energy change for both linear and non-linear 
force-extension graphs is expected. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
14 
Topic 5: Waves and Particle Nature of Light 
In order to develop their practical skills, students should be encouraged to carry out 
a range of practical experiments related to this topic. Possible experiments include 
determining the refractive index of solids and liquids, measuring the focal length of 
a lens, and using models of structures to investigate stress concentrations. 
Mathematical skills that could be developed in this topic include using calculators to 
handle sin x, identifying uncertainties in measurements and using simple 
techniques to determine uncertainty when data are combined. 
This topic may be studied using applications that relate to waves and light, for 
example medical physics. 
 
Students should: 
59. understand the terms amplitude, frequency, period, speed and wavelength 
60. be able to use the wave equation v = fλ 
61. be able to describe longitudinal waves in terms of pressure variation and the 
displacement of molecules 
62. be able to describe transverse waves 
63. be able to draw and interpret graphs representing transverse and longitudinal 
waves including standing/stationary waves 
64. CORE PRACTICAL 6: Determine the speed of sound in air using a  
2-beam oscilloscope, signal generator, speaker and microphone. 
65. know and understand what is meant by wavefront, coherence, path difference, 
superposition, interference and phase 
66. be able to use the relationship between phase difference and path difference 
67. know what is meant by a standing/stationary wave and understand how such a 
wave is formed, know how to identify nodes and antinodes 
68. be able to use the equation for the speed of a transverse wave on a string 
µ
Tv =  
69. CORE PRACTICAL 7: Investigate the effects of length, tension and mass 
per unit length on the frequency of a vibrating string or wire. 
70. be able to use the equation intensity of radiation 
A
PI =  
71. know and understand that at the interface between medium 1 and medium 2 
  n1sin θ1= n2 sin θ2 where refractive index is 
v
cn =  
72. be able to calculate critical angle using 
nC 1sin =  
73. be able to predict whether total internal reflection will occur at an interface 
74. understand how to measure the refractive index of a solid material 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
15 
 
Students should: 
75. understand the term focal length of converging and diverging lenses 
76. be able to use ray diagrams to trace the path of light through a lens and locate 
the position of an image 
77. be able to use the equation power of a lens 
fP 1=  
78. understand that for thin lenses in combination P = P1+P2+P3+… 
79. know and understand the terms real image and virtual image 
80. be able to use the equation 
fvu
111 =+  for a thin converging or diverging lens 
with the real is positive convention 
81. know and understand that magnification = image height/object height and 
u
vm =  
82. understand what is meant by plane polarisation 
83. understand what is meant by diffraction and use Huygens’ construction to 
explain what happens to a wave when it meets a slit or an obstacle 
84.  be able to use nλ = dsinθ for a diffraction grating 
85. CORE PRACTICAL 8: Determine the wavelength of light from a laser or 
other light source using a diffraction grating. 
86. understand how diffraction experiments provide evidence for the wave nature of 
electrons 
87.  be able to use the de Broglie equation 
p
h=λ  
88. understand that waves can be transmitted and reflected at an interface 
between media 
89. understand how a pulse-echo technique can provide information about the 
position of an object and how the amount of information obtained may be 
limited by the wavelength of the radiation or by the duration of pulses 
90. understand how the behaviour of electromagnetic radiation can be described in 
terms of a wave model and a photon model, and how these models developed 
over time 
91.  be able to use the equation E = hf, that relates the photon energy to the wave 
frequency 
92. understand that the absorption of a photon can result in the emission of a 
photoelectron 
93. understand the terms threshold frequency and work function and be able to use 
the equation 2
max2
1 mvhf += φ  
94. be able to use the electronvolt (eV) to express small energies 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
16 
 
Students should: 
95. understand how the photoelectric effect provides evidence for the particle 
nature of electromagnetic radiation 
96. understand atomic line spectra in terms of transitions between discrete energy 
levels and understand how to calculate the frequency of radiation that could be 
emitted or absorbed in a transition between energy levels. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
17 
Topic 6: Further Mechanics 
In order to develop their practical skills, students should be encouraged to carry out 
a range of practical experiments related to this topic. Possible experiments include 
investigating the effect of mass, velocity and radius of orbit on centripetal force. 
Mathematical skills that could be developed in this topic include translating between 
degrees and radians and using trigonometric functions. 
This topic may be studied using applications that relate to mechanics, for example, 
transportation. 
 
Students should: 
97. understand how to use the equation impulse = F∆t =∆p (Newton’s second law of 
motion) 
98. CORE PRACTICAL 9: Investigate the relationship between the force 
exerted on an object and its change of momentum. 
99. understand how to apply conservation of linear momentum to problems in two 
dimensions 
100. CORE PRACTICAL 10: Use ICT to analyse collisions between small 
spheres, e.g. ball bearings on a table top. 
101. understand how to determine whether a collision is elastic or inelastic 
102. be able to derive and use the equation 
m
pEk
2
2
=  for the kinetic energy of a  
non-relativistic particle 
103. be able to express angular displacement in radians and in degrees, and convert 
between these units 
104. understand what is meant by angular velocity and be able to use the equations 
rv ω= and 
ω
π2=T  
105. be able to use vector diagrams to derive the equations for centripetal 
acceleration 2
2
ωrr
va ==  and understand how to use these equations 
106. understand that a resultant force (centripetal force) is required to produce and 
maintain circular motion 
107. be able to use the equations for centripetal force 2
2
ωmrr
mvmaF ===  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
18 
Topic 7: Electric and Magnetic Fields 
In order to develop their practical skills, students should be encouraged to carry out 
a range of practical experiments related to this topic. Possible experiments include 
using a coulomb meter to measure charge stored and using an electronic balance to 
measure the force between two charges. 
Mathematical skills that could be developed in this topic include sketching 
relationships which are modelled by y = k/x, and y = k/x2, using logarithmic plots to 
test exponential and power law variations, interpreting logarithmic plots and 
sketching relationships that are modelled by y = e-x. 
This topic may be studied using applications that relate to fields, for example, 
communications and display techniques. 
 
Students should: 
108. understand that an electric field (force field) is defined as a region where a 
charged particle experiences a force 
109. understand that electric field strength is defined as 
Q
FE =  and be able to use 
this equation 
110. be able to use the equation 2
0
21
4 r
QQF πε= , for the force between two charges 
111. be able to use the equation 2
04 r
QE πε=  for the electric field due to a point 
charge 
112. know and understand the relation between electric field and electric potential 
113. be able to use the equation 
d
VE =  for an electric field between parallel plates 
114. be able to use 
r
QV
04πε=  for a radial field 
115. be able to draw and interpret diagrams using field lines and equipotentials to 
describe radial and uniform electric fields 
116. understand that capacitance is defined as 
V
QC =  and be able to use this 
equation 
117. be able to use the equation QVW 2
1= for the energy stored by a capacitor, be 
able to derive the equation from the area under a graph of potential difference 
against charge stored and be able to derive and use the equations 
2
2
1 CVW = and 
C
QW
2
2
1
=  
118. be able to draw and interpret charge and discharge curves for resistor capacitor 
circuits and understand the significance of the time constant RC 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
19 
 
Students should: 
119. CORE PRACTICAL 11: Use an oscilloscope or data logger to display and 
analyse the potential difference (p.d.) across a capacitor as it charges 
and discharges through a resistor. 
120. be able to use the equation Q = Q0e-t/RC and derive and use related equations 
for exponential discharge in a resistor-capacitor circuit, 
I = I0 e-t/RC, and V = V0 e-t/RC and the corresponding log equations 
RC
tQQ −= 0lnln , 
RC
tII −= 0lnln  and 
RC
tVV −= 0lnln   
121. understand and use the terms magnetic flux density B, flux φ and  
flux linkage Nφ 
122. be able to use the equation F = Bqv sinθ and apply Fleming’s left-hand rule to 
charged particles moving in a magnetic field 
123. be able to use the equation F = BIl sinθ and apply Fleming’s left-hand rule to 
current carrying conductors in a magnetic field 
124. understand the factors affecting the e.m.f. induced in a coil when there is 
relative motion between the coil and a permanent magnet 
125. understand the factors affecting the e.m.f. induced in a coil when there is a 
change of current in another coil linked with this coil 
126. understand how to use Lenz’s law to predict the direction of an induced e.m.f., 
and how the prediction relates to energy conservation 
127. understand how to use Faraday’s law to determine the magnitude of an induced 
e.m.f. and be able to use the equation that combines Faraday’s and Lenz's laws 
E 
t
N
d
)(d φ−=   
128. understand what is meant by the terms frequency, period, peak value and root-
mean-square value when applied to alternating currents and potential 
differences 
129. be able to use the equations 
2
0VVrms =  and 
2
0IIrms =  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
20 
Topic 8: Nuclear and Particle Physics 
Mathematical skills that could be developed in this topic include using appropriate 
units in calculations. 
 
Students should: 
130. understand what is meant by nucleon number (mass number) and proton 
number (atomic number) 
131. understand how large-angle alpha particle scattering gives evidence for a 
nuclear model of the atom and how our understanding of atomic structure has 
changed over time 
132. understand that electrons are released in the process of thermionic emission 
and how they can be accelerated by electric and magnetic fields 
133. understand the role of electric and magnetic fields in particle accelerators (linac 
and cyclotron) and detectors (general principles of ionisation and deflection 
only) 
134. be able to derive and use the equation 
BQ
pr = for a charged particle in a 
magnetic field 
135. be able to apply conservation of charge, energy and momentum to interactions 
between particles and interpret particle tracks 
136. understand why high energies are required to investigate the structure of 
nucleons 
137. be able to use the equation ∆E = c2∆m in situations involving the creation and 
annihilation of matter and antimatter particles 
138. be able to use MeV and GeV (energy) and MeV/c2, GeV/c2 (mass) and convert 
between these and SI units 
139. understand situations in which the relativistic increase in particle lifetime is 
significant (use of relativistic equations not required) 
140. know that in the standard quark-lepton model particles can be classified as: 
● baryons (e.g. neutrons and protons) which are made from three quarks 
● mesons (e.g. pions) which are made from a quark and an antiquark 
● leptons (e.g. electrons and neutrinos) which are fundamental particles 
● photons 
 and that the symmetry of the model predicted the top quark 
141. know that every particle has a corresponding antiparticle and be able to use the 
properties of a particle to deduce the properties of its antiparticle and vice versa 
142. understand how to use laws of conservation of charge, baryon number and 
lepton number to determine whether a particle interaction is possible 
143. be able to write and interpret particle equations given the relevant particle 
symbols. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
21 
Topic 9: Thermodynamics 
In order to develop their practical skills, students should be encouraged to carry out 
a range of practical experiments related to this topic. Possible experiments include 
investigating the relationship between the volume and temperature of a fixed mass 
of gas. 
Mathematical skills that could be developed in this topic include substituting 
numerical values into algebraic equations using appropriate units for physical 
quantities. 
This topic may be studied using applications that relate to thermodynamics, for 
example space technology. 
 
Students should: 
144. be able to use the equations ΔE = mcΔθ and ΔE = LΔm 
145. CORE PRACTICAL 12: Calibrate a thermistor in a potential divider circuit 
as a thermostat. 
146. CORE PRACTICAL 13: Determine the specific latent heat of a phase 
change. 
147. understand the concept of internal energy as the random distribution of 
potential and kinetic energy amongst molecules 
148. understand the concept of absolute zero and how the average kinetic energy of 
molecules is related to the absolute temperature 
149. be able to derive and use the equation ><= 2
3
1 cNmpV  using the kinetic theory 
model  
150. be able to use the equation pV = NkT for an ideal gas 
151. CORE PRACTICAL 14: Investigate the relationship between pressure 
and volume of a gas at fixed temperature. 
152. be able to derive and use the equation kTcm 2
32
2
1 =><  
153. understand what is meant by a black body radiator and be able to interpret 
radiation curves for such a radiator 
154. be able to use the Stefan-Boltzmann law equation L = σAT4 for black body 
radiators 
155. be able to use Wien’s law equation λmaxT = 2.898 x 10-3 m K for black body 
radiators. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
22 
Topic 10: Space 
Mathematical skills that could be developed in this topic include using 
approximations and sketching relationships which are modelled by y = k/x2. 
This topic may be studied using contexts such as the formation and evolution of 
stars and the history and future of the universe. 
 
Students should: 
156. be able to use the equation, intensity 24 d
LI π=  where L is luminosity  
and d is distance from the source 
157. understand how astronomical distances can be determined using trigonometric 
parallax 
158. understand how astronomical distances can be determined using measurements 
of intensity received from standard candles (objects of known luminosity) 
159. be able to sketch and interpret a simple Hertzsprung-Russell diagram that 
relates stellar luminosity to surface temperature 
160. understand how to relate the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram to the life cycle of 
stars 
161. understand how the movement of a source of waves relative to an 
observer/detector gives rise to a shift in frequency (Doppler effect) 
162. be able to use the equations for redshift 
c
v
f
fz ≈∆≈∆= λ
λ  for a source of 
electromagnetic radiation moving relative to an observer and v = H0d for 
objects at cosmological distances 
163. understand the controversy over the age and ultimate fate of the universe 
associated with the value of the Hubble constant and the possible existence of 
dark matter. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
23 
Topic 11: Nuclear Radiation 
In order to develop their practical skills, students should be encouraged to carry out 
a range of practical experiments related to this topic. Possible experiments include 
measuring the half-life of a radioactive material. 
Mathematical skills that could be developed in this topic include applying the 
concepts underlying calculus (but without requiring the explicit use of derivatives or 
integrals) by solving equations involving rates of change, for example. Δx /Δt = –λx 
using a graphical method or spreadsheet modelling and understanding probability 
in the context of radioactive decay. 
This topic may be studied using applications that relate to nuclear radiation, for 
example nuclear power stations and medical physics. 
 
Students should: 
164. understand the concept of nuclear binding energy and be able to use the 
equation ΔE = c2Δm in calculations of nuclear mass (including mass deficit) and 
energy 
165. use the atomic mass unit (u) to express small masses and convert between this 
and SI units 
166. understand the processes of nuclear fusion and fission with reference to the 
binding energy per nucleon curve 
167. understand the mechanism of nuclear fusion and the need for very high 
densities of matter and very high temperatures to bring about and maintain 
nuclear fusion 
168. understand that there is background radiation and how to take appropriate 
account of it in calculations 
169. understand the relationships between the nature, penetration, ionising ability 
and range in different materials of nuclear radiations (alpha, beta and gamma) 
170. be able to write and interpret nuclear equations given the relevant particle 
symbols 
171. CORE PRACTICAL 15: Investigate the absorption of gamma radiation by 
lead. 
172. understand the spontaneous and random nature of nuclear decay 
173. be able to determine the half-lives of radioactive isotopes graphically and be 
able to use the equations for radioactive decay: 
activity NA λ= , Nt
N λ−=d
d , 
21
2ln
t=λ , N = N0 e-λt and A = A0 e-λt and  
derive and use the corresponding log equations. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
24 
Topic 12: Gravitational Fields 
Mathematical skills that could be developed in this topic include sketching 
relationships that are modelled by y = k/x, y = k/x2. 
 
Students should: 
174. understand that a gravitational field (force field) is defined as a region where a 
mass experiences a force 
175. understand that gravitational field strength is defined as 
m
Fg =  and be able to 
use this equation 
176. be able to use the equation 2
21
r
mGmF =  (Newton’s law of universal gravitation) 
177. be able to derive and use the equation 2r
Gmg =  for the gravitational field due to 
a point mass 
178. be able to use the equation 
r
GmVgrav
−=  for a radial gravitational field 
179. be able to compare electric fields with gravitational fields 
180. be able to apply Newton’s laws of motion and universal gravitation to orbital 
motion. 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
25 
Topic 13: Oscillations 
In order to develop their practical skills, students should be encouraged to carry out 
a range of practical experiments related to this topic. Possible experiments include 
measuring gravitational field strength using a simple pendulum and measuring a 
spring constant from simple harmonic motion. 
Mathematical skills that could be developed in this topic include sketching 
relationships that are modelled by y = sin x, y = cos x. 
 
Students should: 
181. understand that the condition for simple harmonic motion is F = − kx, and hence 
understand how to identify situations in which simple harmonic motion will 
occur 
182. be able to use the equations a = − ω2x, x = Acos ωt, v = − Aω sin ωt, 
a = − Aω2 cos ωt, and 
ω
π21 == fT  and ω = 2πf as applied to a simple  
harmonic oscillator 
183. be able to use equations for a simple harmonic oscillator 
k
mT π2= , and a simple pendulum  
g
lT π2=  
184. be able to draw and interpret a displacement–time graph for an object 
oscillating and know that the gradient at a point gives the velocity at that point 
185. be able to draw and interpret a velocity–time graph for an oscillating object and 
know that the gradient at a point gives the acceleration at that point 
186. understand what is meant by resonance 
187. CORE PRACTICAL 16: Determine the value of an unknown mass using 
the resonant frequencies of the oscillation of known masses. 
188. understand how to apply conservation of energy to damped and undamped 
oscillating systems 
189. understand the distinction between free and forced oscillations 
190. understand how the amplitude of a forced oscillation changes at and around the 
natural frequency of a system and know, qualitatively, how damping affects 
resonance 
191. understand how damping and the plastic deformation of ductile materials reduce 
the amplitude of oscillation. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
26 
Salters Horners approach 
 
The following section shows how the course may be taught using the Salters 
Horners (SHAP) context-led approach. The subset of content required for the 
Advanced Subsidiary GCE qualification is listed on pages 27–35, while the 
remainder of the content required for this qualification is listed on pages 36–44. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
27 
Working as a Physicist 
Throughout their study of physics at this level, students should develop their 
knowledge and understanding of what it means to work scientifically. They should 
also develop their competence in manipulating quantities and their units, including 
making estimates. They should experience a wide variety of practical work, giving 
them opportunities to develop their practical and investigative skills by planning, 
carrying out and evaluating experiments. Through studying a range of examples, 
contexts and applications of physics, students should become increasingly 
knowledgeable of the ways in which the scientific community, and society as a 
whole, use scientific ideas and methods, and how the professional scientific 
community functions. They should develop their abilities to communicate their 
knowledge and understanding of physics in ways that are appropriate to the 
content and to the audience. 
It is not intended that this part of the specification is taught as a discrete topic. 
Rather, the knowledge and skills specified here should pervade the entire course 
and should be taught using examples and applications from throughout the rest of 
the specification. 
 
Students should: 
1. know and understand the distinction between base and derived quantities and 
their SI units 
2. be able to demonstrate their knowledge of practical skills and techniques for both 
familiar and unfamiliar experiments 
3. be able to estimate values for physical quantities and use their estimate to solve 
problems 
4.  understand the limitations of physical measurement and apply these limitations 
to practical situations 
5. be able to communicate information and ideas in appropriate ways using 
appropriate terminology 
6. understand applications and implications of science and evaluate their associated 
benefits and risks 
7. understand the role of the scientific community in validating new knowledge and 
ensuring integrity 
8. understand the ways in which society uses science to inform decision making 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
28 
Higher, Faster, Stronger (HFS) 
An exploration of the physics behind a variety of sports, using use video clips, ICT 
and laboratory practical activities: 
● graphs and equations of motion in sprinting and jogging 
● work and power in weightlifting 
● forces and equilibrium in rock climbing 
● moments and equilibrium in gymnastics 
● forces and projectiles in tennis and ski-jumping 
● force and energy in bungee jumping. 
There are opportunities for students to collect and analyse data using a variety of 
methods, and to communicate their knowledge and understanding using 
appropriate terminology. 
Students should: 
9. be able to use the equations for uniformly accelerated motion in one dimension: 
asuv
atuts
atuv
tvus
2
2
)(
22
2
2
1
+=
+=
+=
+=
 
10. be able to draw and interpret displacement-time, velocity-time and 
acceleration-time graphs 
11. know the physical quantities derived from the slopes and areas of displacement-
time, velocity-time and acceleration-time graphs, including cases of non-uniform 
acceleration, and understand how to use the quantities 
12. understand scalar and vector quantities, and know examples of each type of 
quantity and recognise vector notation 
13. be able to resolve a vector into two components at right angles to each other by 
drawing and by calculation 
14. be able to find the resultant of two coplanar vectors at any angle to each other by 
drawing, and at right angles to each other by calculation 
15. understand how to make use of the independence of vertical and horizontal 
motion of a projectile moving freely under gravity 
16. be able to draw and interpret free-body force diagrams to represent forces on a 
particle or on an extended but rigid body 
17. be able to use the equation ∑F = ma, and understand how to use this equation 
in situations where m is constant (Newton’s second law of motion), including 
Newton’s first law of motion where a = 0, objects at rest or travelling at 
constant velocity 
  Use of the term terminal velocity is expected 
18. be able to use the equations for gravitational field strength 
m
Fg =  and  
weight W = mg 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
29 
 
Students should: 
19. CORE PRACTICAL 1: Determine the acceleration of a freely-falling 
object. 
20. know and understand Newton’s third law of motion, and know the properties of 
pairs of forces in an interaction between two bodies 
21. understand that momentum is defined as p = mv 
22. know the principle of conservation of linear momentum, understand how to 
relate this to Newton’s laws of motion and understand how to apply this to 
problems in one dimension 
23. be able to use the equation for the moment of a force, moment of force = Fx 
where x is the perpendicular distance between the line of action of the force and 
the axis of rotation 
24. be able to use the concept of centre of gravity of an extended body and apply 
the principle of moments to an extended body in equilibrium 
25. be able to use the equation for work ∆W = F∆s, including calculations when the 
force is not along the line of motion 
26. be able to use the equation 2
2
1 mvEk = for the kinetic energy of a body 
27. be able to use the equation ∆Egrav = mg∆h for the difference in gravitational 
potential energy near the Earth’s surface 
28. know, and understand how to apply, the principle of conservation of energy, 
including use of work done, gravitational potential energy and kinetic energy 
29. be able to use the equations relating power, time and energy transferred or 
work done 
  
t
EP =  and 
t
WP =  
30. be able to use the equations 
 
inputenergy  total
outputenergy  useful  efficiency =  
and 
 
inputpower   total
outputpower  usefulefficiency =  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
30 
The Sound of Music (MUS) 
A study of music and recorded sound, focusing on the production of sound by 
musical instruments and the operation of a CD/DVD player: 
● synthesised and 'natural' sounds 
● travelling waves and standing/stationary waves in string and wind instruments 
● reading a CD/DVD by laser. 
Waves and photons are used to model the behaviour of light. 
There are opportunities for students to develop ICT skills and other skills relating to 
investigation and to communication. 
 
Students should: 
59.  understand the terms amplitude, frequency, period, speed and wavelength 
60.  be able to use the wave equation v = f λ 
61.  be able to describe longitudinal waves in terms of pressure variation and the 
displacement of molecules 
62.  be able to describe transverse waves 
63.  be able to draw and interpret graphs representing transverse and longitudinal 
waves including standing/stationary waves 
64. CORE PRACTICAL 6: Determine the speed of sound in air using a 2-beam 
oscilloscope, signal generator, speaker and microphone. 
65.  know and understand what is meant by wavefront, coherence, path difference, 
superposition, interference and phase 
66.  be able to use the relationship between phase difference and path difference 
67.  know what is meant by a standing/stationary wave and understand how such a 
wave is formed, know how to identify nodes and antinodes 
68.  be able to use the equation for the speed of a transverse wave on a string  
µ
Tv =  
69.  CORE PRACTICAL 7: Investigate the effects of length, tension and mass 
per unit length on the frequency of a vibrating string or wire. 
90.  understand how the behaviour of electromagnetic radiation can be described in 
terms of a wave model and a photon model, and how these models developed 
over time 
91. be able to use the equation E = hf, that relates the photon energy to the wave 
frequency 
96.  understand atomic line spectra in terms of transitions between discrete energy 
levels and understand how to calculate the frequency of radiation that could be 
emitted or absorbed in a transition between energy levels. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
31 
Good Enough to Eat (EAT) 
A case study of the production of sweets and biscuits: 
● measuring and controlling the flow of a viscous liquid 
● mechanical testing of products 
● using refractometry and polarimetry to monitor sugar concentration. 
There are opportunities for students to develop practical techniques and thus to 
carry out experimental and investigative activities. 
 
Students should: 
49.  be able to use the equation density 
V
m=ρ  
50.  understand how to use the relationship upthrust = weight of fluid displaced 
51.  a. be able to use the equation for viscous drag (Stokes’ Law), F = 6πηrv.  
b. understand that this equation applies only to small spherical objects 
moving at low speeds with laminar flow (or in the absence of turbulent 
flow) and that viscosity is temperature dependent 
52.  CORE PRACTICAL 4: Use a falling-ball method to determine the viscosity 
of a liquid. 
53.  be able to use the Hooke’s law equation, ∆F = k∆x, where k is the stiffness of 
the object 
55.  a. be able to draw and interpret force-extension and force-compression 
graphs 
b. understand the terms limit of proportionality, elastic limit, yield point, 
elastic deformation and plastic deformation and be able to apply them to 
these graphs 
71.  know and understand that at the interface between medium 1 and medium 2 
n1sinθ1= n2sinθ2 where refractive index is 
v
cn =  
72. be able to calculate critical angle using 
nC 1sin =  
73.  be able to predict whether total internal reflection will occur at an interface 
74.  understand how to measure the refractive index of a solid material 
82.  understand what is meant by plane polarisation. 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
32 
Technology in Space (SPC) 
The focus is on a satellite whose instruments are run from a solar power supply: 
● illuminating solar cells 
● operation of photocells 
● design and operation of dc circuits 
● combining sources of e.m.f. 
Mathematical models are developed to describe ohmic behaviours and the variation 
of resistance with temperature. Simple conceptual models are used for the flow of 
charge in a circuit, for the operation of a photocell, and for the variation of 
resistance with temperature. 
Waves and photons are used to model the behaviour of light and there is some 
discussion of the historical development of the photoelectric effect. 
There are opportunities to develop ICT skills using the internet, spreadsheets and 
software for data analysis and display. 
 
Students should: 
31.  understand that electric current is the rate of flow of charged particles and be 
able to use the equation 
t
QI ∆
∆=  
32.  understand how to use the equation 
Q
WV =  
33.  understand that resistance is defined by 
I
VR = and that Ohm’s law is a special 
case when I ∝V for constant temperature 
34.  understand how the distribution of current in a circuit is a consequence of 
charge conservation 
35.  understand how the distribution of potential differences in a circuit is a 
consequence of energy conservation 
36.  be able to derive the equations for combining resistances in series and parallel 
using the principles of charge and energy conservation, and be able to use 
these equations 
37.  be able to use the equations P = VI, W = VIt and be able to derive and use 
related equations, e.g. P = I2R and 
R
VP
2
=  
38.  understand how to sketch, recognise and interpret current-potential difference 
graphs for components, including ohmic conductors, filament bulbs, 
thermistors and diodes 
45.  know the definition of electromotive force (e.m.f.) and understand what is 
meant by internal resistance and know how to distinguish between e.m.f. and 
terminal potential difference 
46.  CORE PRACTICAL 3: Determine the e.m.f. and internal resistance of an 
electrical cell. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
33 
 
Students should: 
47.  understand how changes of resistance with temperature may be modelled in 
terms of lattice vibrations and number of conduction electrons and understand 
how to apply this model to metallic conductors and negative temperature 
coefficient thermistors 
48.  understand how changes of resistance with illumination may be modelled in 
terms of the number of conduction electrons and understand how to apply this 
model to LDRs 
70.  be able to use the equation intensity of radiation 
A
PI =  
92.  understand that the absorption of a photon can result in the emission of a 
photoelectron 
93.  understand the terms threshold frequency and work function and be able to use 
the equation 2
max2
1 mvhf += φ  
94.  be able to use the electronvolt (eV) to express small energies 
95.  understand how the photoelectric effect provides evidence for the particle nature 
of electromagnetic radiation. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
34 
Digging up the Past (DIG) 
The excavation of an archaeological site, from geophysical surveying to artefact 
analysis: 
● resistivity surveying 
● artefact analysis by X-ray imaging and diffraction 
● artefact analysis by electron microscopy. 
Waves are used to model the behaviour of electromagnetic radiation and electrons. 
Through a variety of practical and ICT activities, there are opportunities to revisit, 
review and build on work from previous topics. 
 
Students should: 
39.  be able to use the equation  
A
ρlR =  
40.  CORE PRACTICAL 2: Determine the electrical resistivity of a material. 
41.  be able to use I = nqvA to explain the large range of resistivities of different 
materials 
42.  understand how the potential along a uniform current-carrying wire varies with 
the distance along it 
43.  understand the principles of a potential divider circuit and understand how to 
calculate potential differences and resistances in such a circuit 
44. be able to analyse potential divider circuits where one resistance is variable 
including thermistors and light dependent resistors (LDRs) 
83. understand what is meant by diffraction and use Huygens’ construction to 
explain what happens to a wave when it meets a slit or an obstacle 
84.  be able to use nλ = dsinθ for a diffraction grating 
85.  CORE PRACTICAL 8: Determine the wavelength of light from a laser or 
other light source using a diffraction grating. 
86.  understand how diffraction experiments provide evidence for the wave nature 
of electrons 
87. be able to use the de Broglie equation 
p
h=λ  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
35 
Spare-Part Surgery (SUR) 
A study of the physics associated with spare-part surgery for joint replacements 
and lens implants: 
● mechanical properties of bone and replacement materials 
● lens implants and the optical system of the eye 
● 'designer' materials for medical use 
● ultrasound imaging. 
Through a variety of practical and ICT activities, there are opportunities to revisit, 
review and build on work from previous topics. 
Students should: 
54. understand how to use the relationships: 
● (tensile or compressive) stress = force/cross-sectional area 
● (tensile or compressive) strain = change in length/original length 
● Young modulus = stress/strain 
56.  be able to draw and interpret tensile or compressive stress-strain graphs, and 
understand the term breaking stress 
57.  CORE PRACTICAL 5: Determine the Young modulus of a material. 
58.  be able to calculate the elastic strain energy Eel in a deformed material sample, 
using the equation xFEel ∆=∆ 2
1 , and from the area under the force-extension 
graph 
  The estimation of area and hence energy change for both linear and non-linear 
force-extension graphs is expected 
75.  understand the term focal length of converging and diverging lenses 
76. be able to use ray diagrams to trace the path of light through a lens and locate 
the position of an image 
77.  be able to use the equation power of a lens 
fP 1=  
78. understand that for thin lenses in combination P = P1+P2+P3+… 
79.  know and understand the terms real image and virtual image 
80.  be able to use the equation 
fvu
111 =+  for a thin converging or diverging lens 
with the real-is-positive convention 
81.  know and understand that magnification = image height/object height and  
u
vm =  
88.  understand that waves can be transmitted and reflected at an interface 
between media 
89.  understand how a pulse-echo technique can provide information about the 
position of an object and how the amount of information obtained may be 
limited by the wavelength of the radiation or by the duration of pulses. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
36 
Transport on Track (TRA) 
A study of a modern rail transport system with an emphasis on safety and control: 
● track circuits and signalling 
● sensing speed 
● mechanical braking 
● regenerative and eddy current braking 
● crash-proofing. 
Students use mathematical models to describe the behaviour of moving vehicles 
and to model electromagnetic induction, capacitor discharge and AC circuits. 
There are opportunities to develop ICT skills. 
 
Students should: 
97.  understand how to use the equation impulse = F∆t = ∆p (Newton’s second law 
of motion) 
98.  CORE PRACTICAL 9: Investigate the relationship between the force 
exerted on an object and its change of momentum. 
101. understand how to determine whether a collision is elastic or inelastic 
116. understand that capacitance is defined as 
V
QC = and be able to use this 
equation 
118. be able to draw and interpret charge and discharge curves for resistor–capacitor 
circuits and understand the significance of the time constant RC 
119.  CORE PRACTICAL 11: Use an oscilloscope or data logger to display and 
analyse the potential difference (p.d.) across a capacitor as it charges 
and discharges through a resistor. 
120.  be able to use the equation Q = Q0e-t/RC and derive and use related equations 
for exponential discharge in a resistor-capacitor circuit, 
I = I0 e-t/RC, and V = V0 e-t/RC and the corresponding log equations 
RC
tQQ −= 0lnln , 
RC
tII −= 0lnln  and 
RC
tVV −= 0lnln  
121. understand and use the terms magnetic flux density B, flux φ and  
flux linkage Nφ 
123.  be able to use the equation F = BIl sinθ and apply Fleming’s left-hand rule to 
current carrying conductors in a magnetic field 
124. understand the factors affecting the e.m.f. induced in a coil when there is 
relative motion between the coil and a permanent magnet 
125. understand the factors affecting the e.m.f. induced in a coil when there is a 
change of current in another coil linked with this coil 
126.  understand how to use Lenz’s law to predict the direction of an induced e.m.f. 
and how the prediction relates to energy conservation 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
37 
 
Students should: 
127. understand how to use Faraday’s law to determine the magnitude of an induced 
e.m.f. and be able to use the equation that combines Faraday’s and Lenz’s laws 
E 
t
N
d
)(d φ−=  
128. understand what is meant by the terms frequency, period, peak value and root-
mean-square value when applied to alternating currents and potential 
differences 
129. be able to use the equations 
2
0VVrms =  and 
2
0IIrms =  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
38 
The Medium is the Message (MDM) 
An exploration of the physics involved in a variety of modern communication and 
display techniques: 
● fibre optics and exponential attenuation 
● CDD imaging 
● cathode ray tube 
● liquid crystal and LED displays. 
There are opportunities to develop ICT skills and use computer simulations. 
 
Students should: 
108. understand that an electric field (force field) is defined as a region where a 
charged particle experiences a force 
109. understand that electric field strength is defined as 
Q
FE = and be able to use 
this equation 
112. know and understand the relation between electric field and electric potential 
113. be able to use the equation 
d
VE = for an electric field between parallel plates 
115. be able to draw and interpret diagrams using field lines and equipotentials to 
describe radial and uniform electric fields 
117. be able to use the equation QVW 2
1= for the energy stored by a capacitor, be 
able to derive the equation from the area under a graph of potential difference 
against charge stored and be able to derive and use the equations 
2
2
1 CVW = and 
C
QW
2
2
1
=  
132. understand that electrons are released in the process of thermionic emission 
and how they can be accelerated by electric and magnetic fields. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
39 
Probing the Heart of Matter (PRO) 
An area of fundamental physics that is the subject of current research, involving 
the acceleration and detection of high-energy particles and the interpretation of 
experiments: 
● alpha scattering and the nuclear model of the atom 
● accelerating particles to high energies 
● detecting and interpreting the interactions between particles 
● the quark-lepton model. 
Students study the development of the nuclear model and the quark-lepton model 
to describe matter on a subatomic scale. 
There are opportunities to develop ICT skills. 
 
Students should: 
99. understand how to apply conservation of linear momentum to problems in 
two dimensions 
100. CORE PRACTICAL 10: Use ICT to analyse collisions between small 
spheres, e.g. ball bearings on a table top. 
102. be able to derive and use the equation 
m
pEk
2
2
= for the kinetic energy of a 
non-relativistic particle 
103. be able to express angular displacement in radians and in degrees, and 
convert between these units 
104. understand what is meant by angular velocity and be able to use the 
equations rv ω= and 
ω
π2=T  
105. be able to use vector diagrams to derive the equations for centripetal 
acceleration 2
2
ωrr
va == and understand how to use these equations 
106. understand that a resultant force (centripetal force) is required to produce 
and maintain circular motion 
107. be able to use the equations for centripetal force 
2
2
ωmrr
mvmaF ===  
110. be able to use the equation 2
0
21
4 r
QQF πε= , for the force between two charges  
111. be able to use the equation 2
04 r
QE πε=  for the electric field due to a point 
charge 
114. be able to use 
r
QV
04πε=  for a radial field 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
40 
 
Students should: 
122. be able to use the equation F = Bqv sinθ and apply Fleming’s left-hand rule 
to charged particles moving in a magnetic field 
130. understand what is meant by nucleon number (mass number) and proton 
number (atomic number) 
131. understand how large-angle alpha particle scattering gives evidence for a 
nuclear model of the atom and how our understanding of atomic structure 
has changed over time 
133. understand the role of electric and magnetic fields in particle accelerators 
(linac and cyclotron) and detectors (general principles of ionisation and 
deflection only) 
134. be able to derive and use the equation 
BQ
pr = for a charged particle in a 
magnetic field 
135. be able to apply conservation of charge, energy and momentum to 
interactions between particles and interpret particle tracks 
136. understand why high energies are required to investigate the structure of 
nucleons 
137. be able to use the equation ∆E = c2∆m in situations involving the creation 
and annihilation of matter and antimatter particles 
138. be able to use MeV and GeV (energy) and MeV/c2, GeV/c2 (mass) and 
convert between these and SI units 
139. understand situations in which the relativistic increase in particle lifetime is 
significant (use of relativistic equations not required) 
140. know that in the standard quark-lepton model particles can be classified as: 
● baryons (e.g. neutrons and protons) which are made from three quarks 
● mesons (e.g. pions) which are made from a quark and an antiquark 
● leptons (e.g. electrons and neutrinos) which are fundamental particles 
● photons 
   and that the symmetry of the model predicted the top quark 
141.  know that every particle has a corresponding antiparticle and be able to use the 
properties of a particle to deduce the properties of its antiparticle and vice 
versa 
142.  understand how to use laws of conservation of charge, baryon number and 
lepton number to determine whether a particle interaction is possible 
143. be able to write and interpret particle equations given the relevant particle 
symbols. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
41 
Build or Bust? (BLD) 
A study of some aspects of building design, including withstanding earthquake 
damage, vibration isolation and temperature control: 
● earthquake detection 
● vibration and resonance in structures 
● damping vibration using ductile materials 
● sensing temperature 
● energy, temperature change and phase change. 
The behaviour of oscillators is modelled using the mathematics of simple harmonic 
motion, and physical models are used to explore the behaviour of structures. 
Students should: 
144. be able to use the equations ΔE = mcΔθ and ΔE = LΔm 
145. CORE PRACTICAL 12: Calibrate a thermistor in a potential divider 
circuit as a thermostat. 
146. CORE PRACTICAL 13: Determine the specific latent heat of a phase 
change. 
181. understand that the condition for simple harmonic motion is F = − kx, and 
hence understand how to identify situations in which simple harmonic motion 
will occur 
182. able to use the equations a = − ω2x, x = Acos ωt, v =  − Aω sin ωt, 
a = − Aω2 cos ωt, and 
ω
π21 == fT  and ω = 2πf as applied to a simple harmonic 
oscillator 
183. be able to use equations for a simple harmonic oscillator 
k
mT π2= , and a simple pendulum  
g
lT π2=  
184. be able to draw and interpret a displacement–time graph for an object 
oscillating and know that the gradient at a point gives the velocity at that point 
185. be able to draw and interpret a velocity–time graph for an oscillating object 
and know that the gradient at a point gives the acceleration at that point 
186. understand what is meant by resonance 
187. CORE PRACTICAL 16: Determine the value of an unknown mass using 
the resonant frequencies of the oscillation of known masses. 
188. understand how to apply conservation of energy to damped and undamped 
oscillating systems 
189. understand the distinction between free and forced oscillations 
190. understand how the amplitude of a forced oscillation changes at and around 
the natural frequency of a system and know, qualitatively, how damping 
affects resonance 
191. understand how damping and the plastic deformation of ductile materials 
reduce the amplitude of oscillation. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
42 
Reach for the Stars (STA) 
The focus is on physical interpretation of astronomical observations, the formation 
and evolution of stars, and the history and future of the universe: 
● distances of stars 
● masses of stars 
● energy sources in stars 
● star formation 
● star death and the creation of chemical elements 
● the history and future of the universe. 
Students use the molecular kinetic theory of matter, and the Big Bang model of the 
universe, and carry out mathematical modelling of gravitational force and 
radioactive decay. 
Students should: 
147. understand the concept of internal energy as the random distribution of 
potential and kinetic energy amongst molecules 
148. understand the concept of absolute zero and how the average kinetic energy 
of molecules is related to the absolute temperature 
149. be able to derive and use the equation, ><= 2
3
1 cNmpV  using the kinetic 
theory model 
150. be able to use the equation pV = NkT for an ideal gas 
151. CORE PRACTICAL 14: Investigate the relationship between pressure 
and volume of a gas at fixed temperature. 
152. be able to derive and use the equation kTcm 2
32
2
1 =><  
153. understand what is meant by a black body radiator and be able to interpret 
radiation curves for such a radiator 
154. be able to use the Stefan-Boltzmann law equation L = σAT4 for black body 
radiators 
155. be able to use Wien’s law equation λmaxT = 2.898 x 10-3 m K for black body 
radiators 
156. be able to use the equation 24 d
LI π=  where L is luminosity and d is distance 
from the source 
157. understand how astronomical distances can be determined using trigonometric 
parallax 
158. understand how astronomical distances can be determined using 
measurements of intensity received from standard candles (objects of known 
luminosity) 
159. be able to sketch and interpret a simple Hertzsprung-Russell diagram which 
relates stellar luminosity to surface temperature 
160. understand how to relate the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram to the life cycle of 
stars 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
43 
 
Students should: 
161. understand how the movement of a source of waves relative to an 
observer/detector gives rise to a shift in frequency (Doppler effect) 
162. be able to use the equations for redshift 
c
v
f
fz ≈∆≈∆= λ
λ  for a source of 
electromagnetic radiation moving relative to an observer and v = H0d for 
objects at cosmological distances 
163. understand the controversy over the age and ultimate fate of the universe 
associated with the value of the Hubble constant and the possible existence of 
dark matter 
164. understand the concept of nuclear binding energy, and be able to use the 
equation ΔE = c2Δm in calculations of nuclear mass (including mass deficit) 
and energy 
165. use the atomic mass unit (u) to express small masses, and convert between 
this and SI units 
166. understand the processes of nuclear fusion and fission with reference to the 
binding energy per nucleon curve 
167. understand the mechanism of nuclear fusion and the need for very high 
densities of matter and very high temperatures to bring about and maintain 
nuclear fusion 
168. understand that there is background radiation and how to take appropriate 
account of it in calculations 
169. understand the relationships between the nature, penetration, ionising ability 
and range in different materials of nuclear radiations (alpha, beta and gamma) 
170. be able to write and interpret nuclear equations given the relevant particle 
symbols 
171. CORE PRACTICAL 15: Investigate the absorption of gamma radiation 
by lead. 
172. understand the spontaneous and random nature of nuclear decay 
173. be able to determine the half-lives of radioactive isotopes graphically and be 
able to use the equations for radioactive decay: 
activity NA λ= , Nt
N λ−=d
d , 
21
2ln
t=λ , N = N0 e-λt and A = A0 e-λt  and  
derive and use the corresponding log equations. 
174. understand that a gravitational field (force field) is defined as a region where a 
mass experiences a force 
175. understand that gravitational field strength is defined as 
m
Fg =  and be able to 
use this equation 
176. be able to use the equation 2
21
r
mGmF =  (Newton’s law of universal gravitation) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
44 
 
Students should: 
177. be able to derive and use the equation 2r
Gmg =  for the gravitational field due 
to a point mass 
178. be able to use the equation 
rVgrav
Gm−=  for a radial gravitational field 
179. be able to compare electric fields with gravitational fields 
180. be able to apply Newton’s laws of motion and universal gravitation to orbital 
motion. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
45 
Science Practical Endorsement 
Overview 
The assessment of practical skills is a compulsory 
requirement of the course of study for A level qualifications 
in biology, chemistry and physics. It will appear on all 
students’ certificates as a separately reported result, 
alongside the overall grade for the qualification. The 
arrangements for the assessment of practical skills will be 
common to all awarding organisations. These arrangements 
include: 
● A minimum of 12 practical activities to be carried out by 
each student which, together, meet the requirements of 
Appendices 5b (Practical skills identified for direct 
assessment and developed through teaching and 
learning) and 5c (Use of apparatus and techniques) 
from the prescribed subject content, published by the 
Department for Education. The required practical 
activities will be defined by each awarding organisation. 
● Teachers will assess students against Common Practical 
Assessment Criteria (CPAC) issued by the awarding 
organisations. The CPAC are based on the requirements 
of Appendices 5b and 5c of the subject content 
requirements published by the Department for 
Education, and define the minimum standard required 
for the achievement of a pass.  
● Each student will keep an appropriate record of their 
practical work, including their assessed practical 
activities 
● Students who demonstrate the required standard across 
all the requirements of the CPAC will receive a ‘pass’ 
grade 
● There will be no separate assessment of practical skills 
for AS qualifications. 
● Students will answer questions in the AS and A level 
examination papers that assess the requirements of 
Appendix 5a (Practical skills identified for indirect 
assessment and developed through teaching and 
learning) from the prescribed subject content, published 
by the Department for Education. These questions may 
draw on, or range beyond, the practical activities 
included in the specification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
46 
Setting practical work 
Teaching and learning 
Teachers should ensure that the core practicals listed in the 
subject content are incorporated into teaching and learning 
and that students carry them out. This is to support 
development of competency for the practical endorsement 
but also because students will be indirectly assessed on 
their practical skills in the examinations. Teachers should 
consider setting additional practical work to support 
teaching and learning. 
Teachers must devise and retain a teaching plan that shows 
when practicals will be covered in teaching and learning. 
Conditions for assessing practical work 
Authenticity 
Students and teachers must sign the Practical competency 
authentication sheet (see Appendix 4). 
Collaboration 
Students may work in pairs on some practicals, where this 
is appropriate, provided they are able to produce individual 
evidence to meet the competency statements. 
Feedback 
Teachers may help students to understand instructions and 
may provide feedback to support development of the 
competencies. Teachers should be confident that students 
have developed their skills and thus students should be able 
to demonstrate the competencies independently by the end 
of the course. 
Resources 
Students must have access to the equipment needed to 
carry out the core practicals. Students must also have 
access to IT and internet facilities. 
Supervision 
Teachers must ensure that students are supervised 
appropriately. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
47 
Evidence of practical work 
Evidence should be collected of practical work that is 
sufficient to show that the competencies have been 
achieved. Evidence may take a variety of forms. 
Students should attempt all 16 practicals given in the 
qualification content. 
Observations and notes by teachers 
Teachers should observe sufficient student practicals to 
ensure that competencies have been achieved. 
Student records 
Students should keep notes of their practical work sufficient 
to show evidence of the practical competencies on making 
and recording observations and researching, referencing 
and reporting. 
Assessing practical work 
Teachers should make a judgement of student practical 
competence using the Common Practical Assessment 
Criteria on the following pages. Teachers should include any 
comments on the Practical competency authentication sheet 
(see Appendix 4) to justify the decision made. 
The practical activities prescribed in the specification 
provide opportunities for demonstrating competence in all 
the skills identified, together with the use of apparatus and 
techniques for each subject. However, students can also 
demonstrate these competencies in any additional practical 
activity undertaken throughout the course of study which 
covers the requirements of Appendix 5c. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
48 
Common Practical Assessment Criteria (CPAC) 
Teachers must assess student practicals against the following competencies. 
 
Criteria for the assessment of GCE Science practical competency for 
Biology, Chemistry and Physics 
Competency The criteria for a pass 
In order to be awarded a Pass a learner must, by the end 
of the practical science assessment, consistently and 
routinely meet the criteria in respect of each competency 
listed below. 
A learner may demonstrate the competencies in any 
practical activity undertaken as part of that assessment 
throughout the course of study. 
Learners may undertake practical activities in groups. 
However, the evidence generated by each learner must 
demonstrate that he or she independently meets the 
criteria outlined below in respect of each competency. 
Such evidence: 
(a) will comprise of both the learner’s performance 
during each practical activity and his or her 
contemporaneous record of the work that he or she has 
undertaken during that activity, and  
(b) must include evidence of independent application of 
investigative approaches and methods to practical work. 
1. Follows written 
procedures 
a) Correctly follows written instructions to carry out the 
experimental techniques or procedures. 
2. Applies investigative 
approaches and 
methods when using 
instruments and 
equipment 
a) Correctly uses appropriate instrumentation, 
apparatus and materials (including ICT) to carry out 
investigative activities, experimental techniques and 
procedures with minimal assistance or prompting. 
b) Carries out techniques or procedures methodically, in 
sequence and in combination, identifying practical 
issues and making adjustments when necessary. 
c) Identifies and controls significant quantitative 
variables where applicable, and plans approaches to 
take account of variables that cannot readily be 
controlled. 
d) Selects appropriate equipment and measurement 
strategies in order to ensure suitably accurate results. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
49 
 
Criteria for the assessment of GCE Science practical competency for 
Biology, Chemistry and Physics 
3. Safely uses a range of 
practical equipment 
and materials 
a)  Identifies hazards and assesses risks associated 
with these hazards, making safety adjustments as 
necessary, when carrying out experimental 
techniques and procedures in the lab or field. 
b)  Uses appropriate safety equipment and approaches 
to minimise risks with minimal prompting. 
 
4. Makes and records 
observations 
a)  Makes accurate observations relevant to the 
experimental or investigative procedure. 
b)  Obtains accurate, precise and sufficient data for 
experimental and investigative procedures and 
records this methodically using appropriate units 
and conventions. 
5. Researches, 
references and reports 
a)  Uses appropriate software and/or tools to process 
data, carry out research and report findings. 
b)  Cites sources of information demonstrating that 
research has taken place, supporting planning and 
conclusions. 
 
 
Marking and standardisation 
The practical work is assessed by teachers. Pearson will 
support teachers in making judgements against the criteria 
for assessment. 
In coordination with other exam boards, Pearson will 
monitor how schools provide students with opportunities to 
develop and demonstrate the required practical skills and 
how they mark the assessments. 
Every school will be monitored at least once in a two-year 
period in respect of at least one of the A level science 
subjects. These monitoring visits will be coordinated by 
JCQ, who will undertake communications with centres to 
facilitate the allocation of exam board monitoring visits.  
In common with other exam boards, Pearson will require 
centres to provide a statement confirming they have taken 
reasonable steps to secure that students: 
● undertook the minimum number of practical activities, 
and  
● made a contemporaneous record of their work. 
If a school fails to provide a statement, or provides a false 
statement, this will be treated as malpractice and/or 
maladministration. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
50 
Students will only get a certificate for the practical 
assessment if they achieve at least a grade E in the 
examined part of the qualification. 
Students who do not pass the practical assessment will 
have a ‘Not Classified’ outcome included on their certificate 
unless they were exempt from the assessment because of a 
disability. 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of 
assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in controlled assessments discovered 
before the candidate has signed the declaration of 
authentication form does not need to be reported to 
Pearson. 
Candidate malpractice found in controlled assessments after 
the declaration of authenticity has been signed, and in 
examinations must be reported to Pearson on a JCQ 
Form M1 (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-
office/malpractice
). The completed form can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to Investigations 
Team, Pearson, 190 High Holborn, London, WC1V 7BH. 
Please provide as much information and supporting 
documentation as possible. Note that the final decision 
regarding appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report candidate malpractice constitutes staff or 
centre malpractice.  
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate 
malpractice and maladministration of our qualifications. As 
with candidate malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is 
any act that compromises or seeks to compromise the 
process of assessment or undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and 
maladministration must be reported immediately, before 
any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson 
on a JCQ Form M2(a) (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-
office/malpractice). The form, supporting documentation 
and as much information as possible can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to Investigations 
Team, Pearson, 190 High Holborn, London, WC1V 7BH. Note  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
51 
that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies 
with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the 
latest version of the document General and Vocational 
Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments Policies and Procedures, available at 
www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
52 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
53 
Assessment 
Assessment summary 
Summary of table of assessment 
Students must complete all assessment in May/June in any single year. 
Paper 1: Advanced Physics I  
*Paper code: 9PH0/01 
● Questions draw on content from the topics listed in the section 
Qualification at a glance. 
● Questions are broken down into a number of parts. 
● Availability: May/June 
● First assessment: 2017 
● The assessment is 1 hour 45 minutes. 
● The assessment consists of 90 marks. 
30% of the 
total 
qualification 
 
 
Paper 2: Advanced Physics II  
*Paper code: 9PH0/02 
● Questions draw on content from the topics listed in the section 
Qualification at a glance. 
● Questions are broken down into a number of parts. 
● Availability: May/June 
● First assessment: 2017 
● The assessment is 1 hour 45 minutes. 
● The assessment consists of 90 marks. 
30% of the 
total 
qualification 
 
 
Paper 3: General and Practical Principles in Physics  
*Paper code: 9PH0/03 
● Questions draw on content from any of the topics in the 
specification. 
● Questions are broken down into a number of parts. 
● Questions may involve two or more topics. 
● Availability: May/June 
● First assessment: 2017 
● The assessment is 2 hours 30 minutes. 
● The assessment consists of 120 marks. 
40% of the 
total 
qualification 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
54 
 
Science Practical Endorsement**  
*Paper code: 9PH0/04 
• Internally assessed and externally moderated by Pearson. 
• Availability: May/June 
• First assessment: 2017 
• The practical endorsement is teacher assessed against the Common Practical 
Assessment Criteria (CPAC).  
 
The sample assessment materials can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 
Advanced GCE in Physics Sample Assessment Materials document. 
*See Appendix 3: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant 
to this qualification. 
**Students will be assessed separately for the Science Practical Endorsement. 
The Endorsement will not contribute to the overall grade for this qualification, but 
the result will be recorded on the student’s certificate. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
55 
Assessment Objectives and weightings 
 
Students must: 
% in 
GCE 
AO1 Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of scientific ideas, 
processes, techniques and procedures 31–33 
AO2 Apply knowledge and understanding of scientific ideas, 
processes, techniques and procedures: 
● in a theoretical context 
● in a practical context 
● when handling qualitative data 
● when handling quantitative data 
41-43 
AO3 Analyse, interpret and evaluate scientific information, ideas and 
evidence, including in relation to issues, to: 
● make judgements and reach conclusions 
● develop and refine practical design and procedures 
25-27 
Total 100% 
 
 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
 
Paper AO1 AO2 AO3 
Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives 
Paper 1: Advanced Physics I 11–13% 12–14% 5–7% 30% 
Paper 2: Advanced Physics II 11–13% 12–14% 5–7% 30% 
Paper 3: General and 
Practical Principles in Physics 
8–10% 16–18% 13–15% 40% 
Total for this qualification 31–33% 41–43% 25–27% 100% 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
56 
Entry and assessment information 
Student entry 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for 
this qualification can be found in our UK Information 
Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations 
officers and is available on our website at: 
www.edexcel.com/iwantto/Pages/uk-information-
manual.aspx 
Discount code and performance tables 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more 
than one GCE qualification with the same discount code will 
have only one of the grades they achieve counted for the 
purpose of the school and college performance tables. This 
will be the grade for the larger qualification (i.e. the A Level 
grade rather than the AS grade). If the qualifications are 
the same size, then the better grade will be counted (please 
see Appendix 3: Codes). 
Students should be advised that if they take two GCE 
qualifications with the same discount code, colleges, 
universities and employers they wish to progress to are 
likely to take the view that this achievement is equivalent to 
only one GCE. The same view may be taken if students take 
two GCE qualifications that have different discount codes 
but have significant overlap of content. Students or their 
advisers who have any doubts about their subject 
combinations should check with the institution they wish to 
progress to before embarking on their programmes. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
57 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and 
special consideration 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. 
They allow students with special educational needs, 
disabilities or temporary injuries to:  
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the 
demands of the assessment. 
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the 
particular needs of an individual student with a disability 
without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding 
bodies comply with the duty under the Equality Act 2010 to 
make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the 
start of the course. Students will then know what is 
available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for 
assessment. 
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to 
make reasonable adjustments where a person with a 
disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in 
undertaking an assessment. The awarding organisation is 
required to take reasonable steps to overcome that 
disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be 
unique to that individual and therefore might not be in the 
list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will 
depend on a number of factors, which will include: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with 
the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves 
unreasonable costs to the awarding organisation, 
timeframes or affects the security or integrity of the 
assessment. This is because the adjustment is not 
‘reasonable’. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
58 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a 
student's mark or grade to reflect temporary injury, illness 
or other indisposition at the time of the 
examination/assessment, which has had, or is reasonably 
likely to have had, a material effect on a candidate’s ability 
to take an assessment or demonstrate their level of 
attainment in an assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to 
apply for access arrangements and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, 
reasonable adjustments and special consideration, please 
refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk. 
Equality Act 2010 and Pearson’s equality policy 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality 
policy requires all students to have equal opportunity to 
access our qualifications and assessments, and our 
qualifications to be awarded in a way that is fair to every 
student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by 
the Equality Act 2010) are not, when they are 
undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in 
comparison to students who do not share that 
characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for 
undertaking a qualification and that this achievement 
can be compared fairly to the achievement of their 
peers. 
You can find details on how to make adjustments for 
students with protected characteristics in the policy 
document Access Arrangements, Reasonable Adjustments 
and Special Considerations, which is on our website, 
www.edexcel.com/Policies. 
Synoptic assessment 
Synoptic assessment requires students to work across 
different parts of a qualification and to show their 
accumulated knowledge and understanding of a topic or 
subject area. 
Synoptic assessment enables students to show their ability 
to combine their skills, knowledge and understanding with 
breadth and depth of the subject. 
In this qualification, synoptic assessment can be found in  
Paper 3: General and Practical Principles in Physics. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
59 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to 
comply with the requirements of the current Code of 
Practice published by the Office of Qualifications and 
Examinations Regulation (Ofqual). 
This qualification will be graded and certificated on a six-
grade scale from A* to E using the total subject mark. 
Individual papers are not graded. 
The first certification opportunity for the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics will be 2017. 
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum 
judged by Pearson to be of sufficient standard to be 
recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U 
result. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be available in English. 
All student work must be in English. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
60 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
61 
Other information 
Student recruitment 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to 
our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of 
reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and 
progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this 
qualification. 
Students who would benefit most from studying this 
qualification are likely to have a Level 2 qualification such 
as a GCSE in Additional Science or Physics. 
Progression 
Students can progress from this qualification to: 
● a range of different, relevant academic or vocational 
higher education qualifications 
● employment in a relevant sector 
● further training. 
Relationship between Advanced Subsidiary GCE  
and Advanced GCE 
The content for Advanced GCE in Physics includes all the 
content studied at Advanced Subsidiary GCE. Advanced GCE 
in Physics builds on the knowledge, skills, and 
understanding achieved when studying the Advanced 
Subsidiary GCE in Physics. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
62 
Progression from Advanced Subsidiary GCE to 
Advanced GCE 
Students who have achieved the Advanced Subsidiary GCE 
in Physics can progress to the Advanced GCE in Physics. 
Students will have covered content common to both 
qualifications but the Advanced GCE has additional content 
that will need to be covered; all the assessment for the 
Advanced GCE qualification must be taken at the end of the 
course. 
Relationship between GCSE and Advanced GCE 
Students cover Key Stage 4 fundamental core concepts in 
sciences at GCSE and continue to cover these concepts and 
additional subject material in the Advanced GCE at 
Key Stage 5. 
Progression from GCSE to Advanced GCE 
Students will draw on knowledge and understanding 
achieved in GCSE Additional Science or GCSE Physics to 
progress to an Advanced GCE in Physics qualification. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
63 
 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Transferable skills 65 
Appendix 2: Level 3 Extended Project qualification 67 
Appendix 3: Codes 71 
Appendix 4: Practical competency authentication sheet 73 
Appendix 5: Working scientifically 75 
Appendix 5a: Practical skills identified for indirect assessment 
and developed through teaching and learning 77 
Appendix 5b: Practical skills identified for direct assessment 
and developed through teaching and learning 79 
Appendix 5c: Use of apparatus and techniques 81 
Appendix 5d: Mapping between Appendix 5c and core 
practicals 83 
Appendix 6: Mathematical skills and exemplifications 87 
Appendix 7: Command words used in examination papers 93 
Appendix 8: Formulae sheet 95 
Appendix 9: Data sheet 103 
Appendix 10: Uncertainties and practical work 105 
Appendix 11: Support from the University of York 113 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
64 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
65 
 
Appendix 1: Transferable skills 
 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently 
flagged the need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable 
them to respond with confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the 
world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines 
skills, or competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that 
can be learned and that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform 
an activity or task and can be built upon and extended through learning.’ 
[1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected 
and evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this 
process, we identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the 
most evidence-based and robust skills framework. We adapted the framework 
slightly to include the Program for International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT 
Literacy and Collaborative Problem Solving (CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves: [2]  
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve 
general cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and  
communicate. [3]  
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, oral communication, written 
communication, assertive communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, 
service orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and 
negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared 
understanding, taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team 
organisation. 
                                          
[1]  OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012) 
[2]  Koenig J A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop (National 
Academies Press, 2011) 
[3]  PISA – The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy (2011) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
66 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work 
stress, adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, 
and physical adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual 
teams, work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and 
able to acquire new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills are the skills that enable young people to face the demands of 
further and higher education, as well as the demands of the workplace, and are 
important in the teaching and learning of this qualification. We will provide teaching 
and learning materials, developed with stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
67 
 
Appendix 2: Level 3 Extended Project 
qualification 
 
What is the Extended Project qualification? 
The Extended Project is a standalone qualification that can be taken alongside 
GCEs. It supports the development of independent learning skills and helps to 
prepare students for their next step – whether that be university study or 
employment. The qualification: 
● is recognised by higher education for the skills it develops 
● is worth half of an Advanced GCE qualification at grades to A*–E 
● carries UCAS points for university entry. 
The Extended Project encourages students to develop skills in the following areas: 
research, critical thinking, extended writing and project management. Students 
identify and agree a topic area of their choice (which may or may not be related to 
a GCE subject they are already studying), guided by their teacher. 
Students can choose from one of four approaches to produce: 
● a dissertation (for example an investigation based on predominately secondary 
research) 
● an investigation/field study (for example a practical experiment) 
● a performance (for example in music, drama or sport) 
● an artefact (for example creating a sculpture in response to a client brief or 
solving an engineering problem). 
The qualification is non-examination assessment based and students are assessed 
on the skills of managing, planning and evaluating their project. Students will 
research their topic, develop skills to review and evaluate the information, and then 
present the final outcome of their project. 
Students: what they need to do 
The Extended Project qualification requires students to: 
● select a topic of interest for an in-depth study and negotiate the scope of the 
project with their teacher 
● identify and draft an objective for their project (for example in the form of a 
question, hypothesis, challenge, outline of proposed performance, issue to be 
investigated or commission for a client) and provide a rationale for their choice 
● produce a plan for how they will deliver their intended objective 
● conduct research as required by the project brief, using appropriate techniques 
● carry out the project using tools and techniques safely 
● share the outcome of the project using appropriate communication methods, 
including a presentation. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
68 
Teachers: key information 
● The Extended Project has 120 guided learning hours (GLH) consisting of: 
o  a taught 40-GLH element that includes teaching the technical skills (for 
example research skills) 
o  a guided 80-GLH element that includes mentoring students through the 
project work. 
● Group work is acceptable, however it is important that each student provides 
evidence of their own contribution and produces their own report. 
● 100% externally moderated. 
● Four Assessment Objectives: manage, use resources, develop and realise, 
review. 
● Can be run over 1, 1½ or 2 years. 
● Can be submitted in January or June. 
What is the Extended Project for physics? 
The Extended Project creates the opportunity to develop transferable skills for 
progression to higher education and to the workplace through the exploration of 
either an area of personal interest, or a topic of interest, from within the physics 
qualification content. 
For example, physics students could choose to carry out an investigation that would 
give them an opportunity to develop their skills in data collection, the development 
and testing of hypotheses and the application of mathematical models in data 
analysis. Alternatively, they could work on the design of an artefact or dissertation 
as a way of exploring the use of physics in engineering contexts. 
Skills developed 
Through the Extended Project students will develop skills in the following areas: 
● independent research skills, including skills in primary research and the 
selection of appropriate methods for data collection 
● extended reading and academic writing, including reading scientific literature 
and writing about trends or patterns in data sets 
● planning/project management, including the refining of hypotheses to be tested 
in investigations 
● data handling and evaluation, including the comparison of data from primary 
research with published data and exploration of the significance of results 
● evaluation of arguments and processes, including arguments in favour of 
alternative interpretations of data and evaluation of experimental methodology 
● critical thinking. 
In the context of the Extended Project, critical thinking refers to the ability to 
identify and develop arguments for a point of view or hypothesis and to consider 
and respond to alternative arguments. 
The Extended Project is an ideal vehicle to support the development of skills 
identified in Appendix 1. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
69 
Using the Extended Project to support breadth and depth 
There is no specified material that students are expected to study and, in the 
Extended Project, students are assessed on the quality of the work they produce 
and the skills they develop and demonstrate through completing this work. 
Students can use the Extended Project to demonstrate extension in one or more 
dimensions: 
● deepening understanding: where a student explores a topic in greater depth 
than in the specification content 
● broadening skills: the student learns a new skill. In a physics-based project, 
this might involve learning to assemble and manipulate an unfamiliar piece of 
apparatus or learning advanced data-handling techniques 
● widening perspectives: the student’s project spans different subjects. This 
might involve discussing historical, philosophical or ethical aspects of a physics-
based topic or making links with other subject areas such as chemistry or 
economics. 
Choosing topics and narrowing down to a question 
A dissertation, typically around 6000 words in length, involves addressing a 
research question through a literature review and argumentative discussion while 
an investigation/field study involves data collection and analysis, leading to a 
written report of around 5000 words. 
For example, consider a student with an interest in acoustics who decided to carry 
out an investigation to explore the effect of different variables such as the volume, 
density and stiffness of foam on sound absorption. The investigation involved 
secondary research to establish the theoretical background to the project and to 
find out how absorption is measured, what techniques can be used to gather data 
and to explore the context in which such physics is used (for example in industry). 
The student collected data using appropriately designed experiments. The student’s 
own data were compared with published data, and the trends and patterns in data 
analysed, with consideration of the significance of the results obtained, and an 
attempt to interpret them in the light of the mathematical models that the student 
had learned about through research. Finally, the student’s project ended with a 
review of the effectiveness of the investigation and an oral presentation of the main 
findings and arguments considered. 
Physics-based dissertation projects can cover a wide variety of topics, as these 
examples illustrate: 
● Why did the Titanic sink? 
● Are wind turbines a good solution to the energy crisis? 
● Can we justify human space exploration? 
● Is it possible to believe in God and the Big Bang? 
● How did the Copernican paradigm shift affect subsequent developments in 
cosmology? 
● Is wi-fi safe? 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
70 
Examples of possible investigation Extended Project titles include: 
● How does solar activity affect weather? 
● Do ‘sharkskin’ swimsuits give the wearer an unfair advantage? 
● Over its working lifetime, does the energy output from a photovoltaic solar 
panel exceed the energy required to make, install and operate it? 
There is also scope for physics-based artefact Extended Projects. For example, a 
student might set out to design, make and test an item of apparatus such as a 
sundial or a spectrometer. Extended Projects involving a performance or event can 
also be physics based. For example, an incident or issue could be explored through 
drama (as Bertholt Brecht did with the `Trial of Galileo’). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
71 
Appendix 3: Codes 
 
Type of code Use of code Code number 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for performance 
tables is assigned a discount code 
indicating the subject area to which it 
belongs. 
Discount codes are published by DfE. 
Please see the GOV.UK 
website* 
 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an 
Ofqual Regulated Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) code. 
The RQF code is known as a Qualification 
Number (QN). This is the code that 
features in the DfE Section 96 and on the 
LARA as being eligible for 16–18 and 19+ 
funding, and is to be used for all 
qualification funding purposes. The QN will 
appear on students’ final certification 
documentation. 
The QN for the 
qualification in this 
publication is: 
601/4848/2 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to 
enter students for a qualification. Centres 
will need to use the entry codes only when 
claiming students’ qualifications. 
Advanced GCE – 9PH0 
Paper code These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be 
entered for individual papers. 
Paper 1: 9PH0/01 
Paper 2: 9PH0/02 
Paper 3: 9PH0/03 
Science Practical 
Endorsement: 9PH0/04 
 
*www.gov.uk/government/publications/key-stage-4-qualifications-discount-codes-
and-point-scores 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
72 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
73 
 
Appendix 4: Practical competency 
authentication sheet 
 
For students to gain the Science Practical Endorsement, centres will need to: 
● ensure that there is evidence that students have completed the necessary 
practical activities, meeting the requirements of Appendix 5c 
● ensure that there is evidence that students have met the requirements of each 
of the CPAC statements, in accordance with the guidelines provided for 
achieving the 'pass' standard 
● complete an authentication sheet for their students. 
Centres will also need to have had a satisfactory monitoring visit, according to the 
guidelines for monitoring visits, as set down by the JCQ. 
Evidence for meeting practical attendance and CPAC competency may be provided 
in a variety of formats using student lab books or practical portfolios; and registers 
or tracking spreadsheets.  
A final version of the authentication statement will be made available to schools in 
time for the first submission of entries in 2017. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
74 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
75 
Appendix 5: Working scientifically 
 
Appendices 5, 5a, 5b and 5c are taken from the document GCE AS and A level 
regulatory requirements for biology, chemistry, physics and psychology published 
by the DfE April 2014. Working scientifically is achieved through practical activities. 
 
Specifications in biology, chemistry and physics must encourage the development 
of the skills, knowledge and understanding in science through teaching and learning 
opportunities for regular hands-on practical work. 
 
In order to develop the necessary skills, knowledge and understanding, students 
studying biology, chemistry and physics will be required to have carried out a 
minimum of 12 practical activities, which will contribute towards the Practical 
Endorsement. These skills, knowledge and understanding will also be assessed in 
written examinations in the context of these, and other, practical activities. 
The skills can be split into those which can be assessed through written 
examinations (Appendix 5a); and those that will be assessed by teachers through 
appropriate practical activities (Appendix 5b). 
The practical activities highlighted as the minimum requirement within 
specifications must cover the use of apparatus and practical techniques identified 
for each science (Appendix 5c). 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
76 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
77 
Appendix 5a: Practical skills identified for 
indirect assessment and developed 
through teaching and learning 
 
Question papers will assess the following student’s abilities: 
a) Independent thinking 
• solve problems set in practical contexts 
• apply scientific knowledge to practical contexts 
b) Use and application of scientific methods and practices 
• comment on experimental design and evaluate scientific methods 
• present data in appropriate ways 
• evaluate results and draw conclusions with reference to measurement 
uncertainties and errors 
• identify variables including those that must be controlled 
c) Numeracy and the application of mathematical concepts in a practical 
context 
• plot and interpret graphs 
• process and analyse data using appropriate mathematical skills as 
exemplified in the mathematical appendix for each science 
• consider margins of error, accuracy and precision of data 
d) Instruments and equipment 
• know and understand how to use a wide range of experimental and practical 
instruments, equipment and techniques appropriate to the knowledge and 
understanding included in the specification 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
78 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
79 
 
Appendix 5b: Practical skills identified for 
direct assessment and developed through 
teaching and learning 
 
Practical work carried out throughout the course will enable students to develop the 
following skills. 
a) Independent thinking 
• apply investigative approaches and methods to practical work 
b) Use and apply scientific methods and practices 
• safely and correctly use a range of practical equipment and materials 
• follow written instructions 
• make and record observations 
• keep appropriate records of experimental activities 
• present information and data in a scientific way 
• use appropriate software and tools to process data, carry out research and 
report findings 
c) Research and referencing 
• use online and offline research skills including websites, textbooks and other 
printed scientific sources of information 
• correctly cite sources of information 
d) Instruments and equipment 
• use a wide range of experimental and practical instruments, equipment and 
techniques appropriate to the knowledge and understanding included in the 
specification 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
80 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
81 
Appendix 5c: Use of apparatus and 
techniques 
 
Use of apparatus and techniques – physics 
Specifications for physics must give students opportunities to use relevant 
apparatus to develop and demonstrate these techniques. 
All of the techniques listed below will be assessed through a minimum of 12 
identified practical activities within each specification. These ‘core’ practicals must 
allow students to demonstrate all of the practical skills given in Appendix 5b. 
Practical techniques to be gained by candidates 
1. Use appropriate analogue apparatus to record a range of measurements (to 
include length/distance, temperature, pressure, force, angles, volume) and to 
interpolate between scale markings. 
2. Use appropriate digital instruments, including electrical multimeters, to obtain 
a range of measurements (to include time, current, voltage, resistance, mass). 
3. Use methods to increase accuracy of measurements, such as timing over 
multiple oscillations, or use of fiducial marker, set square or plumb line. 
4. Use stopwatch or light gates for timing. 
5. Use calipers and micrometers for small distances, using digital or vernier 
scales. 
6. Correctly construct circuits from circuit diagrams using DC power supplies, 
cells, and a range of circuit components, including those where polarity is 
important. 
7. Design, construct and check circuits using DC power supplies, cells, and a 
range of circuit components. 
8. Use signal generator and oscilloscope, including volts/div and time-base 
9. Generate and measure waves, using microphone and loudspeaker, or ripple 
tank, or vibration transducer, or microwave/radio wave source. 
10. Use laser or light source to investigate characteristics of light, including 
interference and diffraction. 
11. Use ICT such as computer modelling, or data logger with a variety of sensors 
to collect data, or use of software to process data. 
12. Use ionising radiation, including detectors. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
82 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
83 
 
Appendix 5d: Mapping between  
Appendix 5c and core practicals 
 
This qualification gives students opportunities to use relevant apparatus to develop 
practical skills and demonstrate competency in a range of practical techniques. 
All of the techniques listed in Appendix 5c will be assessed through a series of core 
practical activities within this specification. 
To achieve the Science Practical Endorsement, students need to show competence 
in the 12 practical techniques listed in Appendix 5c: Use of apparatus and 
techniques. 
The following table shows how each core practical activity, listed in the content, 
maps to the required practical techniques in Appendix 5c: Use of apparatus and 
techniques. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
84 
 
Physics Core Practical Practical technique in Appendix 5c 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
1: Determine the 
acceleration of a freely-
falling object 
            
2: Determine the electrical 
resistivity of a material             
3: Determine the e.m.f. and 
internal resistance of an 
electrical cell 
            
4: Use a falling-ball method 
to determine the viscosity of 
a liquid 
            
5: Determine the Young 
modulus of a material             
6: Determine the speed of 
sound in air using a 2-beam 
oscilloscope, signal 
generator, speaker and 
microphone 
            
7: Investigate the effects of 
length, tension and mass per 
unit length on the frequency 
of a vibrating string or wire 
            
8: Determine the wavelength 
of light from a laser or other 
light source using a 
diffraction grating 
            
9: Investigate the 
relationship between the 
force exerted on an object 
and its change of momentum 
            
10: Use ICT to analyse 
collisions between small 
spheres, e.g. ball bearings 
on a table top 
            
11: Use an oscilloscope or 
data logger to display and 
analyse the potential 
difference (p.d.) across a 
capacitor as it charges and 
discharges through a resistor 
            
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
85 
 
Physics Core Practical Practical technique in Appendix 5c 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
12: Calibrate a thermistor in 
a potential divider circuit as a 
thermostat 
            
13: Determine the specific 
latent heat of a phase 
change 
            
14: Investigate the 
relationship between 
pressure and volume of a 
gas at fixed temperature 
            
15: Investigate the 
absorption of gamma 
radiation by lead 
            
16: Determine the value of 
an unknown mass using the 
resonant frequencies of the 
oscillation of known masses 
            
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
86 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
87 
 
Appendix 6: Mathematical skills and 
exemplifications 
 
The information in this appendix has been taken directly from the document GCE 
AS and A level regulatory requirements for biology, chemistry, physics and 
psychology published by the Department for Education (April 2014). 
In order to be able to develop their skills, knowledge and understanding in science, 
students need to have been taught, and to have acquired competence in, the 
appropriate areas of mathematics relevant to the subject as indicated in the table 
of coverage below. 
The assessment of quantitative skills will include at least 10% level 2 or above 
mathematical skills for biology and psychology, 20% for chemistry and 40% for 
physics. These skills will be applied in the context of the relevant science A Level. 
All mathematical content must be assessed within the lifetime of the specification. 
The following tables illustrate where these mathematical skills may be developed 
and could be assessed in each of the sciences. Those shown in bold type would only 
be tested in the full A Level course. 
This list of examples is not exhaustive. These skills could be developed in other 
areas of specification content. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
88 
 
 Mathematical skills Exemplification of mathematical skill in the 
context of A Level Physics (assessment is 
not limited to the examples given below) 
(i)  C.0 – arithmetic and numerical computation 
C.0.1 Recognise and make use of 
appropriate units in calculations 
Students may be tested on their ability to: 
● identify the correct units for physical 
properties such as m s
-1, the unit for velocity 
● convert between units with different prefixes, 
e.g. cm
3 to m3 
C.0.2 Recognise and use expressions in 
decimal and standard form 
Students may be tested on their ability to: 
● use physical constants expressed in standard 
form such as c = 3.00 x 108 m s–1 
C.0.3 Use ratios, fractions and 
percentages 
Students may be tested on their ability to: 
● calculate efficiency of devices 
● calculate percentage uncertainties in 
measurements 
C.0.4 Estimate results Students may be tested on their ability to: 
● estimate the effect of changing experimental 
parameters on measurable values 
C.0.5 Use calculators to find and use 
power, exponential and 
logarithmic functions 
Students may be tested on their ability to: 
● solve for unknowns in decay problems 
such as N = N0e-λt 
C.0.6 Use calculators to handle sin x, 
cos x, tan x when x is expressed 
in degrees or radians 
Students may be tested on their ability to: 
● calculate the direction of resultant vectors 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
89 
 
 Mathematical skills Exemplification of mathematical skill in the 
context of A Level Physics (assessment is 
not limited to the examples given below) 
(ii)  C.1 – handling data 
C.1.1 Use an appropriate number of 
significant figures 
Students may be tested on their ability to: 
● report calculations to an appropriate number 
of significant figures given raw data quoted to 
varying numbers of significant figures 
● understand that calculated results can only be 
reported to the limits of the least accurate 
measurement 
C.1.2 Find arithmetic means Students may be tested on their ability to: 
● calculate a mean value for repeated 
experimental readings 
C.1.3 Understand simple probability Students may be tested on their ability to: 
● understand probability in the context of 
radioactive decay 
C.1.4 Make order of magnitude 
calculations 
Students may be tested on their ability to: 
● evaluate equations with variables expressed 
in different orders of magnitude 
C.1.5 Identify uncertainties in 
measurements and use simple 
techniques to determine 
uncertainty when data are 
combined by addition, 
subtraction, multiplication, 
division and raising to powers 
Students may be tested on their ability to: 
● determine the uncertainty where two 
readings for length need to be added together 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
90 
 
 Mathematical skills Exemplification of mathematical skill in the 
context of A Level Physics (assessment is 
not limited to the examples given below) 
(iii) C.2 – algebra 
C.2.1 Understand and use the 
symbols: =, <, <<, >>, >, ∝,  
≈, ∆  
Students may be tested on their ability to: 
● recognise the significance of the symbols in 
the expression F ∝ ∆p/∆t 
C.2.2 Change the subject of an 
equation, including non-linear 
equations 
Students may be tested on their ability to: 
● rearrange E = mc2 to make m the subject 
C.2.3 Substitute numerical values into 
algebraic equations using 
appropriate units for physical 
quantities 
Students may be tested on their ability to: 
● calculate the momentum p of an object by 
substituting the values for mass m and 
velocity v into the equation p = mv 
C.2.4 Solve algebraic equations, 
including quadratic equations 
Students may be tested on their ability to: 
● solve kinematic equations for constant 
acceleration such as v = u + at and  
s = ut + ½ at2  
C.2.5 Use logarithms in relation to 
quantities that range over 
several orders of magnitude 
Students may be tested on their ability to: 
● recognise and interpret real-world 
examples of logarithmic scales 
(iv) C.3 – graphs 
C.3.1 Translate information between 
graphical, numerical and 
algebraic forms 
Students may be tested on their ability to: 
● calculate Young modulus for materials using 
stress-strain graphs 
C.3.2 Plot two variables from 
experimental or other data 
Students may be tested on their ability to: 
● plot graphs of extension of a wire against 
force applied 
C.3.3 Understand that y = mx + c 
represents a linear relationship 
Students may be tested on their ability to: 
● rearrange and compare v = u + at with  
y = mx + c for velocity-time graph in 
constant acceleration problems 
C.3.4 Determine the slope and 
intercept of a linear graph 
Students may be tested on their ability to: 
● read off and interpret intercept point from a 
graph, e.g. the initial velocity in a  
velocity-time graph 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
91 
 
 Mathematical skills Exemplification of mathematical skill in the 
context of A Level Physics (assessment is 
not limited to the examples given below) 
(iv)  C.3 – graphs 
C.3.5 Calculate rate of change from a 
graph showing a linear 
relationship 
Students may be tested on their ability to: 
● calculate acceleration from a linear velocity-
time graph 
C.3.6 Draw and use the slope of a 
tangent to a curve as a measure 
of rate of change 
Students may be tested on their ability to: 
● draw a tangent to the curve of a 
displacement–time graph and use the 
gradient to approximate the velocity at a 
specific time 
C.3.7 Distinguish between 
instantaneous rate of change and 
average rate of change 
Students may be tested on their ability to: 
● understand that the gradient of the tangent 
of a displacement–time graph gives the 
velocity at a point in time which is a different 
measure to the average velocity 
C.3.8 Understand the possible physical 
significance of the area between 
a curve and the x axis and be 
able to calculate it or estimate it 
by graphical methods as 
appropriate 
Students may be tested on their ability to: 
● recognise that for a capacitor the area under 
a voltage-charge graph is equivalent to the 
energy stored 
C.3.9 Apply the concepts underlying 
calculus (but without requiring 
the explicit use of derivatives or 
integrals) by solving equations 
involving rates of change,  
e.g. 
Δx /Δt = –λx  
using a graphical method or 
spreadsheet modelling 
Students may be tested on their ability to: 
● determine g from distance-time plot, 
projectile motion 
 
C.3.10 Interpret logarithmic plots Students may be tested on their ability to: 
● obtain time constant for capacitor 
discharge by interpreting plot of log V 
against time 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
92 
 
 Mathematical skills Exemplification of mathematical skill in the 
context of A Level Physics (assessment is 
not limited to the examples given below) 
(iv)  C.3 – graphs 
C.3.11 Use logarithmic plots to test 
exponential and power law 
variations 
Students may be tested on their ability to: 
● use logarithmic plots with decay law of 
radioactivity/charging and discharging 
of a capacitor 
C.3.12 Sketch relationships which are 
modelled by y = k/x, y = kx2,  
y = k/x2, y= kx, y = sin x,  
y = cos x, y = e±x, and  
y = sin2x, y = cos2x a as 
applied to physical 
relationships 
Students may be tested on their ability to: 
● sketch relationships between pressure 
and volume for an ideal gas 
(v)  C.4 – geometry and trigonometry 
C.4.1 Use angles in regular 2D and 3D 
structures 
Students may be tested on their ability to: 
● interpret force diagrams to solve problems 
C.4.2 Visualise and represent 2D and 
3D forms including two-
dimensional representations of 
3D objects 
Students may be tested on their ability to: 
● draw force diagrams to solve mechanics 
problems 
C.4.3 Calculate areas of triangles, 
circumferences and areas of 
circles, surface areas and 
volumes of rectangular blocks, 
cylinders and spheres 
Students may be tested on their ability to: 
● calculate the area of the cross section to work 
out the resistance of a conductor given its 
length and resistivity 
C.4.4 Use Pythagoras’ theorem, and 
the angle sum of a triangle 
Students may be tested on their ability to: 
● calculate the magnitude of a resultant vector, 
resolving forces into components to solve 
problems 
C.4.5 Use sin, cos and tan in physical 
problems 
Students may be tested on their ability to: 
● resolve forces into components 
C.4.6 Use of small angle 
approximations including  
sin θ ≈ θ, tan θ ≈ θ, cos θ ≈ 1 
for small θ where appropriate 
Students may be tested on their ability to: 
● calculate fringe separations in interference 
patterns 
C.4.7 Understand the relationship 
between degrees and radians 
and translate from one to the 
other 
Students may be tested on their ability to: 
● convert angle in degrees to angle in radians 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
93 
Appendix 7: Command words used in 
examination papers 
The following table lists the command words used in the external assessments. 
Command word Definition 
Add/Label Requires the addition or labelling to a stimulus material given 
in the question, for example labelling a diagram or adding 
units to a table. 
Assess Give careful consideration to all the factors or events that 
apply and identify which are the most important or relevant. 
Make a judgement on the importance of something, and 
come to a conclusion where needed. 
Calculate Obtain a numerical answer, showing relevant working. If the 
answer has a unit, this must be included. 
Comment on Requires the synthesis of a number of variables from 
data/information to form a judgement. 
Compare and 
contrast 
Looking for the similarities and differences of two (or more) 
things. Should not require the drawing of a conclusion. 
Answer must relate to both (or all) things mentioned in the 
question.  
The answer must include at least one similarity and one 
difference. 
Complete Requires the completion of a table/diagram. 
Criticise Inspect a set of data, an experimental plan or a scientific 
statement and consider the elements. Look at the merits 
and/or faults of the information presented and back 
judgements made. 
Deduce Draw/reach conclusion(s) from the information provided. 
Derive Combine two or more equations or principles to develop a 
new equation. 
Describe To give an account of something. Statements in the response 
need to be developed as they are often linked but do not 
need to include a justification or reason. 
Determine The answer must have an element which is quantitative from 
the stimulus provided, or must show how the answer can be 
reached quantitatively. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
94 
 
Command word Definition 
Devise Plan or invent a procedure from existing principles/ideas 
Discuss ● Identify the issue/situation/problem/argument that is 
being assessed within the question. 
● Explore all aspects of an 
issue/situation/problem/argument. 
● Investigate the issue/situation etc by reasoning or 
argument. 
Draw Produce a diagram either using a ruler or using freehand. 
Evaluate Review information then bring it together to form a 
conclusion, drawing on evidence including strengths, 
weaknesses, alternative actions, relevant data or information. 
Come to a supported judgement of a subject’s qualities and 
relation to its context. 
Explain An explanation requires a justification/exemplification of a 
point. The answer must contain some element 
of reasoning/justification, this can include mathematical 
explanations. 
Give/state/name All of these command words are really synonyms. They 
generally all require recall of one or more pieces of 
information. 
Give a reason/ 
reasons 
When a statement has been made and the requirement is 
only to give the reasons why. 
Identify Usually requires some key information to be selected from a 
given stimulus/resource. 
Justify Give evidence to support (either the statement given in the 
question or an earlier answer). 
Plot Produce a graph by marking points accurately on a grid from 
data that is provided and then drawing a line of best fit 
through these points. A suitable scale and appropriately 
labelled axes must be included if these are not provided in 
the question. 
Predict Give an expected result. 
Show that Prove that a numerical figure is as stated in the question. The 
answer must be to at least 1 more significant figure than the 
numerical figure in the question. 
Sketch Produce a freehand drawing. For a graph, this would require 
a line and labelled axis with important features indicated, the 
axes are not scaled. 
State what is 
meant by 
When the meaning of a term is expected but there are 
different ways of how these can be described. 
Write When the questions ask for an equation. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
95 
 
Appendix 8: Formulae sheet 
Students need not memorise formulae for this qualification. 
The formulae below will be supplied in each examination. Any other formulae that 
are required will be provided in the question. Symbols used comply with the 
Association for Science Education (ASE) guidelines (which are based on 
International Union of Pure and Applied Physics (IUPAP) recommendations). 
Mechanics 
 
  
Kinematic equations of motion 
asuv
atuts
atuv
tvus
2
2
)(
22
2
2
1
+=
+=
+=
+=
 
  
Forces ΣF = ma 
m
Fg =  
W = mg 
Moment of force = Fx 
  
Momentum p = mv 
  
Work, energy and power 
 
 
∆W = F∆s 
21
2kE mv=      
∆Egrav = mg∆h 
t
EP =  
t
WP =  
inputenergy  total
outputenergy  useful  efficiency =  
 
inputpower  total
outputpower  usefulefficiency =  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
96 
 
Electricity 
 
  
Potential difference 
Q
WV =  
  
Resistance 
I
VR =  
  
Electrical power, energy and 
efficiency 
P = VI 
P = I2R  
R
VP
2
=  
W = VIt 
  
Resistivity 
A
ρlR =  
  
Current 
t
QI ∆
∆=  
 I = nqvA 
  
Materials 
 
  
Density 
V
m=ρ  
  
Stokes’ law F = 6πηrv 
  
Hooke’s law F = k∆x 
  
Pressure 
A
Fp =  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
97 
 
Young modulus 
Stress A
F=σ  
 
Strain x
x∆=ε  
 
ε
σ=E  
  
Elastic strain energy 1
2elE Fx∆= ∆      
  
Waves and particle nature of light 
  
Wave speed v = fλ 
  
Speed of a transverse wave on 
a string µ
Tv =  
  
Intensity of radiation 
A
PI =  
  
Power of a lens 
fP 1=  
  
 P= P1+P2+P3+… 
  
Thin lens equation 
fvu
111 =+  
  
Magnification for a lens magnification = Image height/Object height 
 
u
vm =  
  
Diffraction grating nλ = dsinθ 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
98 
 
Refractive index n1 sin θ1= n2 sin θ2 
 
v
cn =  
  
Critical angle 
nC 1sin =  
  
Photon model E = hf 
  
Einstein’s photoelectric equation 2
max2
1 mvhf += φ  
  
de Broglie wavelength 
p
h=λ  
  
Further mechanics 
 
  
Impulse F∆t = ∆p 
  
Kinetic energy of a non-
relativistic particle m
pEk
2
2
=  
  
Motion in a circle rv ω=  
 
ω
π2=T  
 
r
mvmaF
2
==  
 
r
va
2
=  
 2ωra =  
  
Centripetal force 
r
mvF
2
=  
 F = mrω2 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
99 
 
Fields 
 
Coulomb’s law 
2
0
21
4 r
QQF πε=  
  
Electric field 
Q
FE =  
 
2
04 r
QE πε=  
 
d
VE =  
  
Electric potential 
r
QV
04πε=  
  
Capacitance 
V
QC =  
  
Energy stored in capacitor QVW 2
1=  
 2
2
1 CVW =  
 
C
QW
2
2
1
=  
  
Capacitor discharge Q = Q0 e-t/RC 
  
Resistor-capacitor discharge I = Io e-t/RC 
 V = Vo e-t/RC 
 
RC
tQQ −= 0lnln  
 
RC
tII −= 0lnln  
 
RC
tVV −= 0lnln  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
100 
 
In a magnetic field F = BIl sin θ 
 F = Bqv sin θ 
  
Faraday’s and Lenz’s Laws 
E  t
N
d
)(d φ−=  
  
Root-mean-square values 
2
0VVrms =   
 
2
0IIrms =  
Nuclear and particle physics 
  
In a magnetic field 
BQ
pr =  
  
Thermodynamics 
 
  
Heating ∆E = mc∆θ 
 ΔE = LΔm 
  
Molecular kinetic theory kTcm 2
32
2
1 =><  
 ><= 2
3
1 cNmpV  
  
Ideal gas equation pV = NkT 
  
Stefan-Boltzmann law L = σT4A 
 L = 4πr2σT4 
  
Wien’s law λmaxT = 2.898 x 10-3 m K 
  
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
101 
Space 
Radiant energy flux 
24 d
LI π=
Redshift of electromagnetic 
radiation c
v
f
fz ≈∆≈∆= λ
λ
Cosmological expansion v = Hod 
Nuclear radiation 
Mass-energy ∆E = c2∆m 
Radioactive decay   A = λN
Nt
N λ− =d
d
21
2ln
t=λ
N = N0 e-λt 
A = A0 e-λt 
Gravitational fields 
Grav
itational force 
2
2 1
r
mGmF =
Gr
avitational field 
2r
Gmg =
Grav
itational potential 
rVgrav
Gm−=
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
102 
Oscillations 
S
imple harmonic motion F = − kx 
a = − ω2x 
x = Acos ωt 
v = − Aω sin ω t 
a = − Aω2 cos ωt 
ω
π2 1= =fT  
ω = 2πf 
Simple harmonic oscillator 
k
mT π2=
g
lT π2=
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
103 
Appendix 9: Data sheet 
 
The value of the following constants will be provided in each examination paper. 
Acceleration of free fall g = 9.81 m s−2 (close to Earth’s surface) 
 
Boltzmann constant 
 
k = 1.38 × 10
−23 J K−1 
 
 
 
Coulomb law constant 
 
k = 
04
1
πε
= 8.99 x 109 N m2 C-2 
 
 
Electron charge 
 
e = −1.60 × 10−19 C 
 
 
Electron mass 
 
me = 9.11 × 10−31 kg 
 
 
Electronvolt 
 
1 eV = 1.60 × 10−19 J 
 
 
Gravitational constant 
 
G = 6.67 × 10−11 N m2 kg−2 
 
 
Gravitational field 
strength 
 
g = 9.81 N kg−1 
 
(close to Earth’s surface) 
 
Planck constant 
 
h = 6.63 × 10−34 J s 
 
 
Permittivity of free space 
 
ε0 = 8.85 × 10−12 F m−1 
 
 
Proton mass 
 
mp = 1.67 × 10−27 kg 
 
 
Speed of light in a 
vacuum 
 
c = 3.00 × 108 m s−1 
 
 
Stefan-Boltzmann 
constant 
 
σ = 5.67 x 10-8 W m-2 K-4 
 
 
Unified atomic mass unit 
 
u = 1.66 x 10-27 kg 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
104 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
105 
Appendix 10: Uncertainties and practical 
work 
 
The aim of physics in studying natural phenomena is to develop explanations based 
on empirical evidence. Hence there is a central concern about the quality of 
evidence and of the explanations that are based on it. This involves an appreciation 
of the causes of uncertainties that can arise in practical work and how they should 
be dealt with, both in planning an experiment to minimise these uncertainties and 
in forming a valid conclusion.  
There is no practical examination in this qualification and a set of practical skills has 
been identified as appropriate for indirect assessment. Practical skills should be 
developed by carrying out practical work throughout the course, for example by 
carrying out the Core Practicals listed in the Specification. The assessment of these 
skills will be through examination questions, in particular for Unit 3: Practical Skills 
in Physics I and Unit 6: Practical Skills in Physics II. 
It is clearly important that the words used within the practical context have a 
precise and scientific meaning as distinct from their everyday usage. The terms 
used for this assessment will be those described in the publication by the 
Association for Science Education (ASE) entitled The Language of Measurement 
(ISBN 9780863574245). In adopting this terminology, it should be noted that 
certain terms will have a meaning different to that in the previous 
specification. In accordance with common practice, this qualification will adopt the 
Uncertainty Approach to measurement. Using this approach assumes that the 
measurement activity produces an interval of reasonable values together with a 
statement of the confidence that the true value lies within this interval. 
The following Glossary is a selection of terms from the list in The Language of 
Measurement published by ASE (ISBN 9780863574245). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
106 
Glossary 
Term Meaning and notes 
Validity A measurement is valid if it measures what it is supposed to be 
measuring – this depends both on the method and the 
instruments. 
True value The value that would have been obtained in an ideal measurement 
– with the exception of a fundamental constant the true value is 
considered unknowable. 
Accuracy A measurement result is considered accurate if it is judged to be 
close to the true value. It is a quality denoting the closeness of 
agreement between measurement and true value – it cannot be 
quantified and is influenced by random and systematic errors. 
Precision  A quality denoting the closeness of agreement (consistency) 
between values obtained by repeated measurement – this is 
influenced only by random effects and can be expressed 
numerically by measures such as standard deviation. A 
measurement is precise if the values ‘cluster’ closely together. 
Repeatability The precision obtained when measurement results are obtained by 
a single operator using a single method over a short timescale. A 
measurement is repeatable when similar results are obtained by 
students from the same group using the same method. Students 
can use the precision of their measurement results to judge this. 
Reproducibility The precision obtained when measurement results are obtained by 
different operators using different pieces of apparatus. A 
measurement is reproducible when similar results are obtained by 
students from different groups using different methods or 
apparatus. This is a harder test of the quality of data. 
Uncertainty The interval within which the true value can be considered to lie 
with a given level of confidence or probability – any measurement 
will have some uncertainty about the result, this will come from 
variation in the data obtained and be subject to systematic or 
random effects. This can be estimated by considering the 
instruments and the method and will usually be expressed as a 
range such as 20
 °C ± 2 °C. The confidence will be qualitative and 
based on the goodness of fit of the line of best fit and the size of 
the percentage uncertainty. 
Error The difference between the measurement result and the true 
value if a true value is thought to exist. This is not a mistake in 
the measurement. The error can be due to both systematic and 
random effects and an error of unknown size is a source of 
uncertainty. 
Resolution The smallest measuring interval and the source of uncertainty in a 
single reading. 
Significant 
figures (SF) 
The number of SF used in recording the measurements depends 
on the resolution of the measuring instruments and should usually 
be the same as given in the instrument with the fewest SF in its 
reading. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
107 
Uncertainties in practice 
What are uncertainties and why are they important? 
When you repeat a measurement you often get different results. There is an 
uncertainty in the measurement that you have taken. It is important to be able to 
determine the uncertainty in measurements so that its effect can be taken into 
consideration when drawing conclusions about experimental results. The 
uncertainty might be the resolution of the instrument or, if the readings were 
repeated, the uncertainty might be half the range of the repeats. If the 
uncertainty is predictable, i.e. it is systematic, then the uncertainty should be 
subtracted from each reading, for example if there is a zero error on an instrument. 
Recording data 
Results should be recorded to the resolution of the measuring instrument which 
means there will be a consistent number of decimal places for the readings for any 
one variable.  
If raw data goes over a power of ten we would not penalise a mixture of significant 
figures. When data is processed, these values should be recorded to a consistent 
number of significant figures which is usually 3 as this is what we can usually 
confidently plot on a graph.  
Calculating uncertainties 
There are several techniques that will produce an estimate of the uncertainty in 
the value of the mean. Since we are expecting students to produce an estimate of 
the uncertainty any suitable value that indicates half the range is acceptable. 
Example: A student measures the diameter of a metal canister using a ruler 
graduated in mm and records these results: 
 
Diameter/mm 
Reading 1 Reading 2 Reading 3 Mean 
66 65 61 64 
 
The uncertainty in the mean value (64
 mm) can be calculated as follows: 
a) Using the half range 
The range of readings is 61 mm – 66 mm so half the range is used to determine the 
uncertainty. 
Uncertainty in the mean diameter= (66 mm – 61 mm)/2 = 2.5 mm 
Therefore, the diameter of the metal canister is 64 mm ± 2.5 mm. 
Since a ruler graduated in mm could easily be read to ± 0.5 mm, it is acceptable to 
quote the uncertainty as ± 2.5 mm for this experiment. 
b) Using the reading furthest from the mean 
In this case, the measurement of 61 mm is further from the average value than 66 
mm therefore we can use this value to calculate the uncertainty in the mean. 
Uncertainty in the mean diameter= 64 mm – 61 mm = 3 mm. 
Therefore, the diameter of the metal canister is 64 mm ± 3 mm. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
108 
c) Using the resolution of the instrument 
This is used if a single reading is taken or if repeated readings have the same 
value. This is because there is an uncertainty in the measurement because the 
instrument used to take the measurement has its own limitations. If the three 
readings obtained above were all 64 mm then the value of the diameter being 
measured lies somewhere between 63.5 mm and 64.5 mm since a metre rule could 
easily be read to half a millimetre. In this case, the uncertainty in the diameter is 
0.5 mm. 
Therefore, the diameter of the metal canister is 64 mm ± 0.5 mm. 
This also applies to digital instruments. An ammeter records currents to 0.1 A.  
A current of 0.36 A would be displayed as 0.4 A, and a current of 0.44 A would also 
be displayed as 0.4 A. The resolution of the instrument is 0.1 A but the uncertainty 
in a reading is 0.05 A. 
Calculating percentage uncertainties 
The percentage uncertainty in a measurement can be calculated using: 
 Percentage uncertainty = (Uncertainty of measurement/Measurement) × 100% 
In the above example the percentage uncertainty in the diameter of the metal 
canister is: 
Percentage uncertainty = (3/64) × 100% = 4.7% 
Often the radius would be used in a calculation, for example in a calculation of 
volume. In this case, the percentage uncertainty for the radius of the canister is the 
same as its diameter, i.e. 4.7%, and not half of the percentage uncertainty. This is 
one reason why the percentage uncertainty in a measurement is useful.  
Additionally, the value is less than 5%, which shows that the measurement is 
probably repeatable. Note that a percentage uncertainty would normally be quoted 
to 1 or 2 sf. 
Compounding uncertainties 
Calculations often use more than one measurement. Each measurement will have 
its own uncertainty, so it is necessary to combine the uncertainties for each 
measurement to calculate the overall uncertainty in the calculation provided all the 
measured quantities are independent of one another. 
There are three methods of compounding uncertainties depending on whether the 
measurements in a calculation are raised to a power, multiplied/divided, or 
added/subtracted. 
a) Raising a measurement to a power 
If a measurement is raised to a power, for example squared or cubed, then the 
percentage uncertainty is multiplied by that power to give the total percentage 
uncertainty. 
Example: A builder wants to calculate the area of a square tile. He uses a rule to 
measure the two adjacent sides of a square tile and obtains the following results: 
 Length of one side = 84
 mm ± 0.5 mm 
 Length of perpendicular side = 84 mm ± 0.5 mm 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
109 
The percentage uncertainty in the length of each side of this square tile is given by:  
 Percentage uncertainty = (0.5/84) × 100% = 0.59 % = 0.6 % 
The area of the tile A is given by A = 84 × 84 = 7100 mm2 
Note that this is to 2 sf since the measurements are to 2 sf. 
The percentage uncertainty in the area of the square tile is calculated by 
multiplying the percentage uncertainty in the length by 2. 
 Percentage uncertainty in A = 2 × 0.6% = 1.2% 
Therefore the uncertainty in A = 7100 × 1.2% = 85 mm2 
So A = 7100 mm2 ± 1.2% or A = 7100 mm2 ± 85 mm2 
b) Multiplying or dividing measurements 
The total percentage uncertainty is calculated by adding together the percentage 
uncertainties for each measurement. 
Example: A metallurgist is determining the purity of a sample of an alloy that is in 
the shape of a cube by determining the density of the material. 
The following readings are taken: 
 Length of each side of the cube= 24.0 mm ± 0.5 mm 
 Mass of cube = 48.23 g ± 0.05 g 
She calculates (i) the density of the material and (ii) the percentage uncertainty in 
the density of the material. 
(i) Density of alloy  = mass / volume = mass / length3 
= (48.23 x 10−3 kg) / (24.0 x 10-3 m)3 = 3490 kg m−3 
(ii) Percentage uncertainty in the length = 0.5 / 24.0 × 100% = 2.1% 
 Percentage uncertainty in the mass = 0.05/48.23 × 100% = 0.1% 
 Percentage uncertainty in density  = 3 × 2.1% +0.1% = 6.4% (or 6%) 
Therefore, the density of the material = 3490 kg m−3 ± 6% or 3490 kg m−3 ± 210 
kg m−3 
Example: A student calculates the volume of a drinks can and the percentage 
uncertainty for the final value. 
The student determines that the radius of the metal can is 33 mm with an 
uncertainty of 1% so the cross-sectional area A of the canister is: 
 A = πr2 = π (33)2 = 3.4 × 103 mm2 ± 2% 
Notice that the result has been expressed using scientific notation so that we can 
write down just two significant figures. The calculator answer (3421.1...) gives the 
impression of far more sf than is justified when the radius is only known to the 
nearest mm. 
The cross-sectional area was calculated by squaring the radius. Since two quantities 
have in effect been multiplied together, the percentage uncertainty in the value of 
the cross-sectional area is found by adding the percentage uncertainty of the radius 
to the percentage uncertainty of the radius – doubling it. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
110 
The student measures the length L of the can = 115 mm ± 2 mm 
The volume V of the can is  
V = 3.4 × 103 mm2 × 115 mm = 3.9 × 105 mm3 = 3.9 × 10−4 m3 
The percentage uncertainty in this value is obtained by adding together an 
appropriate combination of the uncertainties 
Percentage uncertainty in L = (2/115) × 100% = 1.7 
Therefore, percentage uncertainty in V= 2% + 1.7% = 3.7% 
Volume V = 3.91 × 10−4 m3 ± 3.7% = 3.91 × 10-4 m3 ± 1.4 × 10-5 m3 
Again, an overall percentage uncertainty of less than 5% suggests that this 
determination of the volume of a can is repeatable. 
c) Adding or subtracting measurements 
When measurements are added or subtracted in a calculation then the uncertainty 
for each measurement is added to calculate the total uncertainty. 
Example: A student wants to determine the thickness of the walls of a plastic pipe. 
He measures the internal and external diameters of the pipe using vernier calipers 
and obtains the following readings: 
 Internal diameter = 101.4 mm ± 0.1 mm 
 External diameter = 102.8 mm ± 0.3 mm 
The difference between these two measurements is 1.4 mm ± 0.4 mm 
Since the difference in the radius is required then both the diameter and the 
uncertainty must be divided by 2 (since the percentage uncertainty remains the 
same), therefore the thickness of the walls is 0.7 mm ± 0.2 mm. 
Using uncertainties in drawing conclusions 
Often an experiment will require a comparison to a known value. This is when the 
uncertainty can be used to assess whether the measured value is accurate or not. 
This can be achieved in the following ways: 
a) Calculating maximum and minimum values 
The final uncertainty can be used to determine the range in which the measured 
value may lie. If the known value lies within this range then we can say that the 
measured value is accurate. 
Example: A student used a simple pendulum to obtain a value of g = 10.1
 m s−2. 
The experimental percentage uncertainty was calculated as 4%.  
Minimum value of g = 10.1 − (10.1 × 4%) = 9.7 m s−2 
Since the accepted value of g = 9.81 m s−2 lies above the minimum value, then we 
can conclude that the measured value of g is accurate. 
This method should always be used when the percentage uncertainty in the value is 
known. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
111 
b) Calculating a percentage difference 
If the measured value has been determined from a graph and there is no 
information about the percentage uncertainty of the measured value, then 
percentage difference can be used to comment on accuracy. If the percentage 
difference is less than 5%, then this is an indication that the result is accurate.  
In the above example, the percentage difference is calculated as: 
 Percentage difference = (10.1−9.81)/9.81 × 100% = 3%  
As this is less than 5% we can conclude that the measured value of g is accurate. 
c) Observations from graphs 
There is no expectation that error bars should be added to graphs.  
If a straight-line graph through the origin is expected but the line of best fit of the 
plotted points does not pass through the origin, then this is an indication of a 
systematic error. If there is a large scatter of points around the line of best fit this 
is an indication of a large uncertainty possibly due to random errors. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics 
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
112 
 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physics -  
Specification – Issue 3 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
113 
Appendix 11: Support from the University 
of York 
 
The Salters Horners Advanced Physics (SHAP) project team in the University of 
York Science Education Group runs in-service courses for teachers and technicians 
from centres that are following, or preparing to follow, this qualification. 
The project team also runs an advice service to help with questions concerning the 
teaching of the course, and produces newsletters that are distributed to centres 
using this specification. 
Centres following this qualification may be eligible for additional financial support 
(for example book grants) from the Salters and Horners companies. 
There are email support groups for SHAP teachers and technicians. 
For further information about the SHAP approach to teaching for this qualification, 
and about the support available to centres, please visit the SHAP website: 
www.york.ac.uk/org/seg/salters/physics or contact the project administrator at: 
Salters Horners Advanced Physics Project 
Science Education Group 
Alcuin College D Block 
University of York 
Heslington 
York 
YO10 5DD 
Telephone:  01904 322601 
Fax:  01904 322605 
Email:  joanna.macdonald@york.ac.uk 
Enquiries concerning assessment and administration should be addressed to the 
Qualifications and Delivery and Awards Manager for Physics at Pearson. 
 
 
 
Sb211118Z:\LT\PD\GCE 2015 NEW ISSUES\9781446936023_GCE2015_A_PHYSICS_ISSUE3.DOC.1–126/6 
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office:  80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121
