A Level 
Geography
Specification
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography (9GE0)
First teaching from September 2016
First certification from 2018 Issue 6 
About Pearson 
We are the world’s leading learning company operating in countries all around the world. We provide 
content, assessment and digital services to learners, educational institutions, employers, governments 
and other partners globally. We are committed to helping equip learners with the skills they need to 
enhance their employability prospects and to succeed in the changing world of work. We believe that 
wherever learning flourishes so do people.  
References to third party materials made in this specification are made in good faith. Pearson does not 
endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may be subject to change, 
or any opinions expressed therein. (Materials may include textbooks, journals, magazines and other 
publications and websites.) 
 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
ISBN 978 1 446 95039 5 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2024 
 
 
 
Summary of Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE 
in Geography (9GEO) Specification Issue 6 changes 
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this 
current issue 
Page number 
Minor amendments have been made in the following places: 
1.2a, 1.4c, 1.6c 
2A.1a–c, 2A.5c, 2A.11c, 2A.12c 
2B.1c, 2B.2c, 2B.12c 
3.3c, 3.4a, 3.5b, 3.6a–c, 3.7a, 3.8a,c 
4A overview, 4A.3a–c, 4A.4a,c, 4A.5c, 4A.7b 
4B overview, 4B.3a–c, 4B.4b, 4B.8a, 4B9.b, 4B.10c, 4B.11c, 4B.12a 
5.1a, 5.2a 
6.1 key idea, 6.1c, 6.2 key idea, 6.8a, 6.9a–c 
7.1c, 7.2a, 7.3a&c, 7.4a, 7.5b, 7.6b, 7.9a 
8A.1a–c, 8A.2c, 8A.3c, 8A.6b, 8A.8c, 8A.9c, 8A.12b, Guidance for 
interpreting geographical skills for Topic 8 Option 8A 
8B.1c, 8B.3a, 8B.5b, 8B.7c, 8B.10b&c, 8B.12c 
Full details about the above changes can be found in a separate 
document on the website. 
Various 
In 4A.6, 4B.6 and 5.7b, globes have been removed as they are 
unnecessary. 
31, 37, 44 
Minor updates made to malpractice information to reflect current 
procedures 
87 
 
If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, contact us via our 
website at: qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/contact-us.html. 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents 
1 Introduction 2 
Why choose Edexcel A Level Geography? 2 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this qualification 3 
Qualification at a glance 4 
2 Subject content and assessment information 6 
Area of study 1: Dynamic Landscapes 10 
Area of study 2: Dynamic Places 24 
Area of study 3: Physical Systems and Sustainability 41 
Area of study 4: Human Systems and Geopolitics 51 
Fieldwork 67 
Non-examination assessment: Independent Investigation 68 
3 Assessment information 82 
Assessment Objectives 84 
4 Administration and general information 85 
Entries 85 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special consideration and 
malpractice 85 
Student recruitment and progression 88 
Appendix 1: Geographical skills 91 
Appendix 2: Fieldwork skills 93 
Appendix 3: Definitions 94 
Appendix 4: Exam command word definitions 95 
Appendix 5: Geography independent investigation form 96 
Appendix 6: Descriptions of the level of independence required at  
different stages of the Independent Investigation 98 
Appendix 7: Independent  investigation mark sheet 100 
Appendix 8: Fieldwork statement 107 
Appendix 9: The context for the development of this qualification 108 
Appendix 10: Transferable skills 110 
Appendix 11: Level 3 Extended Project qualification 111 
Appendix 12: Codes 113 
Appendix 13: Rationale for Teacher Guidance 114 
Appendix 14: Geography NEA teacher guidance 117 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
2 
1 Introduction 
Why choose Edexcel A Level Geography? 
We’ve listened to feedback from all parts of the geography subject community, including 
hundreds of fellow teachers. We’ve used this opportunity of curriculum change to redesign a 
qualification that is engaging and relevant to today’s geographers – a qualification that 
enables your students to engage critically with real world issues and places, apply their own 
geographical knowledge, understanding and skills to make sense of the world around them, 
and to help prepare them to succeed in their chosen pathway. 
Engaging and contemporary issues-based approach 
Our specifications offer an issues-based approach to studying geography, enabling students 
to explore and evaluate contemporary geographical questions and issues such as the 
consequences of globalisation, responses to hazards, water insecurity and climate change.  
Supports progression to undergraduate level geography 
The specification content gives students the opportunity to develop an in-depth 
understanding of physical and human geography, the complexity of people and environment 
questions and issues, and to become critical, reflective and independent learners. 
Straightforward and flexible content structure 
This specification has four equally-weighted content areas of study, offering both compulsory 
and optional content, assessed through three external assessments and one piece of non-
examination assessment. 
AS and A Level qualifications that are co-teachable 
Centres co-teaching AS and A Level can deliver Area of study 1 Dynamic Landscapes and 
Area of study 2 Dynamic Places in the first year, allowing students to be entered for the AS 
at the end of year 12.  
Clear assessments that offer all students the chance to succeed 
Externally-examined papers provide gradual progression in demand throughout the topics 
and consistent use of 8 different command words so it is clear what the question is asking. 
Our A Level Geography non-examination assessment is straightforward to deliver and 
manageable.  
Confidence in geographical skills and fieldwork 
Content is framed by enquiry questions that encourage an investigative and evaluative 
approach to learning. We have signposted where and how geographical skills and fieldwork 
should be embedded in teaching. Our A Level assessment will integrate the assessment of 
geographical skills with knowledge and understanding.  
Holistic understanding of geography 
This specification will encourage students to make links between different geographical 
themes, ideas and concepts through synoptic themes embedded in the compulsory content.  
Support progression from Key Stage 4 
The content builds on the understanding developed at KS4, avoiding unnecessary repetition 
while also ensuring that students new to the subject are appropriately supported. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
3 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this 
qualification 
Planning  
● Our Getting Started guide gives you an overview of the new AS and A Level 
qualifications to help you to get to grips with the changes to content and assessment and 
to help you understand what these changes mean for you and your students. 
● We will give you editable AS and A Level course planner and schemes of work that you 
can adapt to suit your department. 
● Our mapping documents highlight key differences between the new and 2008 
qualifications. 
Teaching and learning  
There will be lots of free teaching and learning support to help you deliver the new 
qualifications, including: 
● topic packs for every topic, including key concepts and processes, place exemplification, 
and geographical skills 
● support for embedding geographical skills and fieldwork into teaching 
● training on fieldwork and geographical skills. 
Preparing for exams  
We will also provide a range of resources to help you prepare your students for the 
assessments, including: 
● additional specimen papers to support formative assessments and mock exams 
● marked exemplars of student work in external assessments and the A Level non-
examination assessment, with examiner commentaries 
● training on how to use our mark schemes and mark our specimen papers  
● free standardisation events and trial marking materials for the new A Level 
coursework. 
ResultsPlus 
ResultsPlus provides the most detailed analysis available of your students’ exam 
performance. It can help you identify the topics and skills where further learning would 
benefit your students.  
Get help and support 
Our subject advisor service, led by Jon Wolton, and online communities, will ensure you 
receive help and guidance from us and that you can share ideas and information with other 
teachers. You can sign up to receive e-newsletters from Jon to keep up to date with 
qualifications and product and service news.  
Learn more at qualifications.pearson.com 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
4 
Qualification at a glance 
Content and assessment overview 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography consists of three externally-
examined papers and one non-examination assessment component. 
Students must complete all assessment in May/June in any single year. 
Paper 1 (Paper code: 9GE0/01)  
Written examination: 2 hours and 15 minutes 
30% of the qualification 
105 marks 
Content overview1 
● Area of study 1, Topic 1: Tectonic Processes and Hazards 
● Area of study 1, Topic 2: Landscape Systems, Processes and Change – including optional  
sub-topics from which students choose one from two: 2A: Glaciated Landscapes and Change  
or 2B: Coastal Landscapes and Change 
● Area of study 3, Topic 5: The Water Cycle and Water Insecurity 
● Area of study 3, Topic 6: The Carbon Cycle and Energy Security 
Assessment overview 
An externally-assessed written examination comprising three sections. 
Section A relates to Topic 1: Tectonic Processes and Hazards. 
Section B relates to Topic 2: Landscape Systems, Processes and Change. Students answer 
questions on either Topic 2A: Glaciated Landscapes and Change or Topic 2B: Coastal Landscapes 
and Change. 
Section C relates to Topic 5: The Water Cycle and Water Insecurity and Topic 6: The Carbon 
Cycle and Energy Security.  
The examination may include short open, open response and resource-linked questions. The 
examination includes 12-mark and 20-mark extended writing questions. Calculators may be used. 
Paper 2 (Paper code: 9GE0/02) 
Written examination: 2 hours and 15 minutes 
30% of the qualification 
105 marks 
Content overview1 
● Area of study 2, Topic 3: Globalisation 
● Area of study 2, Topic 4: Shaping Places – including optional sub-topics from which students 
choose one from two: 4A Regenerating Places or 4B Diverse Places 
● Area of study 4, Topic 7: Superpowers 
● Area of study 4, Topic 8: Global Development and Connections – including optional sub-topics 
from which students choose one from two: 8A Health, Human Rights and Intervention or  
8B Migration, Identity and Sovereignty 
Assessment overview 
An externally-assessed written examination comprising three sections. 
Section A relates to Topics 3 and 7: Globalisation/Superpowers. 
Section B relates to Topic 4: Shaping Places. Students answer questions on either Topic 4A: 
Regenerating Places or Topic 4B: Diverse Places. 
Section C relates to Topic 8: Global Development and Connections. Students answer questions 
on either Topic 8A: Health, Human Rights and Intervention or Topic 8B: Migration, Identity and 
Sovereignty. 
The examination may include short open, open response and resource-linked questions. The 
examination includes 12-mark and 20-mark extended writing questions. Calculators may be used. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
5 
 
Paper 3 (*Paper code: 9GE0/03) 
Written examination: 2 hours and 15 minutes 
20% of the qualification 
70 marks 
Content overview 
The specification contains three synoptic themes within the compulsory1 content areas: 
● Players 
● Attitudes and actions 
● Futures and uncertainties. 
The synoptic investigation will be based on a geographical issue within a place-based context that 
links to the three synoptic themes and is rooted in two or more of the compulsory content areas. 
Assessment overview 
An externally-assessed written examination. A resource booklet will contain information about the 
geographical issue. 
All questions in the examination draw synoptically on knowledge and understanding from 
compulsory content drawn from different parts of the course. 
The examination may include short open, open response and resource-linked questions. The 
examination includes 8-mark, 18-mark and 24-mark extended writing questions. Calculators may 
be used. 
Non-examination assessment: Independent Investigation (9GE0/04) 
Non-examined assessment 
20% of the qualification  
70 marks 
Content overview 
● The student defines a question or issue for investigation, relating to the compulsory or optional 
content. The topic may relate to any aspect of geography contained within the specification 
● The student’s investigation will incorporate fieldwork data (collected individually or as part of a 
group) and own research and/or secondary data 
● The fieldwork, which forms the focus and context of the individual investigation, may be either 
human, physical or integrated physical-human 
● The investigation report will evidence independent analysis and evaluation of data, presentation 
of data findings and extended writing 
● Students will be expected to show evidence that they have used both quantitative and 
qualitative data to support their independent investigation as appropriate to the particular 
environment and/or location. 
Assessment overview 
● The investigation report is internally assessed and externally moderated. 
● The student will produce a written report of 3000–4000 words. 
*See Appendix 12: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to this 
qualification.  
 
1 The compulsory content is contained in Topics 1, 3, 5, 6 and 7. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
6 
2 Subject content and assessment 
information 
The subject content sets out the knowledge, understanding and skills relevant to this 
qualification. Together with the assessment information, it provides the framework within 
which centres create their programmes of study, so ensuring progression from AS 
requirements and the possibilities for progression to higher education. 
Qualification aims and objectives 
This specification for the discipline of geography encourages students to gain enjoyment, 
satisfaction and a sense of achievement as they develop their knowledge and understanding 
of the subject. This A Level course will enable students to be inspired by their geographical 
understanding, to engage critically with real world issues and places, and to apply their 
geographical knowledge, theory and skills to the world around them. Students will grow as 
independent thinkers and as informed and engaged citizens, who understand the role and 
importance of geography as one of the key disciplines relevant to understanding the world’s 
changing peoples, places and environments. 
The aims and objectives of this qualification are to enable students to build on their AS 
knowledge and skills to: 
● develop their knowledge of locations, places, processes and environments, at all 
geographical scales from local to global across the specification as a whole 
● develop an in-depth understanding of the selected core and non-core processes in physical 
and human geography at a range of temporal and spatial scales, and of the concepts that 
illuminate their significance in a range of locational contexts 
● recognise and be able to analyse the complexity of people–environment interactions at all 
geographical scales, and appreciate how they underpin understanding of some of the key 
issues facing the world today 
● develop their understanding of, and ability to apply, the concepts of place, space, scale 
and environment, that underpin both the national curriculum and GCSE, including 
developing a more nuanced understanding of these concepts 
● gain understanding of specialised concepts relevant to the core and non-core content. 
These must include the concepts of causality, systems, equilibrium, feedback, inequality, 
representation, identity, globalisation, interdependence, mitigation and adaptation, 
sustainability, risk, resilience and thresholds 
● improve their understanding of the ways in which values, attitudes and circumstances 
have an impact on the relationships between people, place and environment, and develop 
the knowledge and ability to engage, as citizens, with the questions and issues arising 
(‘circumstances’ in this case refers to the context of people's lives, and the socio-economic 
and political milieu in which they find themselves) 
● become confident and competent in selecting, using and evaluating a range of quantitative 
and qualitative skills and approaches, (including observing, collecting and analysing geo-
located data) and applying them as an integral part of their studies 
● understand the fundamental role of fieldwork as a tool to understand and generate new 
knowledge about the real world, and become skilled at planning, undertaking and 
evaluating fieldwork in appropriate situations 
● apply geographical knowledge, understanding, skills and approaches in a rigorous way to 
a range of geographical questions and issues, including those identified in fieldwork, 
recognising both the contributions and limitations of geography 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
7 
● develop as critical and reflective learners, able to articulate opinions, suggest relevant new 
ideas and provide evidenced argument in a range of situations 
● build on knowledge of contexts, locations, places and environments, by extending the 
scope and scale of study, the variety of physical, social, economic, cultural and political 
contexts encountered, the depth of conceptual understanding required, and the range of 
spatial and temporal scales included 
● develop a deep understanding of both physical and human processes, applying this 
understanding to interrogate people–environment interactions and people–place 
connections at all scales from local to global 
● build on and reinforce conceptual understanding underpinning GCSE, experiencing an 
extended demand that includes a wider range of more complex and specialised concepts 
that relate to the core and non-core content 
● engage with models, theories and generalisations, and develop a mature understanding of 
the nature and limitations of objectivity and the significance of human values and 
attitudes 
● develop understanding of the rationale for, and applications of, skills and approaches 
used, showing a considerable degree of independence in selecting and using a wide range 
of geographical methods, techniques and skills, involving both qualitative and quantitative 
methods 
● undertake fieldwork that encourages them to apply and evaluate theory in the real world, 
and that A Level fieldwork in particular demands a high degree of responsibility from 
students for selecting research questions, applying relevant techniques and skills, and 
identifying appropriate ways of analysing and communicating findings. 
Geographical skills 
This qualification requires students to evidence a variety of geographical skills, showing a 
critical awareness of the appropriateness and limitations of different methods, skills and 
techniques. 
Full details of the required geographical skills are given in Appendix 1: Geographical skills. 
Fieldwork 
A Level students must complete a minimum of four days of fieldwork. Fieldwork must be 
carried out in relation to processes in physical and human geography. This is a Department 
for Education (DfE) requirement. Centres will be required to provide evidence of this 
fieldwork in the form of a written fieldwork statement. The fieldwork statement represents a 
true and accurate written declaration made by a centre to Pearson, confirming that a student 
to which that centre has delivered the A Level Geography assessment has undertaken 
geographical fieldwork over four days and in both physical and human environments. 
Pearson will publish the final deadline date for submission of this form on our website. Failure 
to return the Fieldwork Statement on time will constitute malpractice on the part of the 
Centre, see page 86.  
In the non-examination assessment component, students are required to undertake an 
independent investigation that involves (but need not be restricted to) fieldwork, producing a 
written report. Students’ investigations will incorporate fieldwork data (collected individually 
or as part of a group). 
Full details of the required fieldwork skills are provided in Appendix 2: Fieldwork skills. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
8 
How to use the content section of the specification 
Overview 
Each topic begins with an overview. This provides an explanation of the relevance of the 
topic to modern geography. It also outlines links between the topic and other areas of the 
specification. The overview does not form part of the assessed content, but could be used by 
teachers when introducing a new topic to students.  
Enquiry questions 
Each topic contains three or four enquiry questions. The enquiry questions should form the 
basis for the study of that topic. Enquiry questions encourage active learning and an 
investigative, critically evaluative approach. An enquiry question, combined with the key 
ideas in the left-hand column of the specification content, can be used as the starting point 
to develop learning objectives for one or more lessons. 
Guidance for integrating geographical skills 
This qualification requires students to evidence a variety of geographical skills, showing a 
critical awareness of the appropriateness and limitations of different methods, skills and 
techniques. 
Guidance on integrating these skills has been provided at the end of each content topic 
under the heading Guidance for integrating geographical skills. This guidance provides 
suggested opportunities for integrating the full range of skills outlined in the geographical 
skills appendix. Opportunities to integrate geographical skills are indicated by bracketed 
numbers in the detailed content, (1) for example. These skills are not exclusive to the topic 
areas under which they appear; students will need to be able to apply these skills across any 
suitable topic area throughout their course of study. 
Full details of the required geographical skills are provided in Appendix 1: Geographical skills. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
9 
Synoptic themes within the compulsory content areas 
This specification contains three synoptic themes. These are over-arching themes designed 
to help students make links between different geographical themes, ideas and concepts. The 
synoptic themes incorporate specialist geographical concepts, namely: causality, systems, 
feedback, inequality, identity, globalisation, interdependence, mitigation and adaption, 
sustainability, risk, resilience and thresholds. The synoptic themes are highlighted in the 
specification in bold italics. 
In this qualification, Paper 3 is a synoptic investigation that will link explicitly and/or 
implicitly to these synoptic themes and will incorporate key concepts. 
The three synoptic themes are: 
 
1. Players (P) Who are the different players (individuals, groups and organisations, 
stakeholders) involved in geographical issues and decisions 
(interdependence, globalisation, systems)? Why do some players have 
greater influence than others (inequality)? This includes: international 
players (intergovernmental organisations (IGOs)), national and local 
government, large and small private businesses, transnational 
corporations (TNCs), pressure groups and non-governmental 
organisations (NGOs) as well as others in particular contexts. 
2. Attitudes and 
actions (A) 
Why do attitudes to geographical issues (identity) vary so greatly and 
how does this influence actions (policies and choice of strategy and 
management methods)? Influences on values and attitudes include 
identity, political and religious views, priority given to profit, 
importance of social justice and equality and attitudes towards the 
natural environment (conservation and sustainability versus 
exploitation). 
3. Futures and 
uncertainties (F) 
There are contrasting approaches when making decisions about 
geographical issues that will affect people in the future. These include 
business as usual, priority towards more sustainable strategies and 
radical alternatives (mitigation and adaptation). Choice of objective 
will affect both people and the environment in very different ways 
(risk, resilience and thresholds). The outcomes of choices made today 
are uncertain for a range of reasons, including scientific, 
demographic, economic and political uncertainty. 
 
Place contexts 
Where the detailed content in the specification must be studied in context, this is indicated 
by brackets containing the symbol , followed in some cases by suggested place contexts. 
These suggestions are not compulsory, and a similar suitable context could be chosen. The 
choice of place contexts is designed to include developed, emerging and developing 
economies, and this will be reflected in the choice of location and over the examination cycle. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
10 
Area of study 1: Dynamic Landscapes 
Topic 1: Tectonic Processes and Hazards 
Overview 
Tectonic hazards – earthquakes, volcanic eruptions and secondary hazards such as tsunamis 
– represent a significant risk in some parts of the world. This is especially the case where 
active tectonic plate boundaries interact with areas of high population density and low levels 
of development. Resilience in these places can be low, and the interaction of physical 
systems with vulnerable populations can result in major disasters. An in-depth understanding 
of the causes of tectonic hazards is key to both increasing the degree to which they can be 
managed, and putting in place successful responses that can mitigate social and economic 
impacts and allow humans to adapt to hazard occurrence. 
Content 
Enquiry question 1: Why are some locations more at risk from  
tectonic hazards? 
Key idea Detailed content 
1.1 The global 
distribution of 
tectonic hazards 
can be explained 
by plate 
boundary and 
other tectonic 
processes. 
a. The global distribution and causes of earthquakes, volcanic 
eruptions and tsunamis. (1) 
b.  The distribution of plate boundaries resulting from divergent, 
convergent and conservative plate movements (oceanic, 
continental and combined situations). 
c.  The causes of intra-plate earthquakes, and volcanoes 
associated with hot spots from mantle plumes. 
1.2  There are 
theoretical 
frameworks that 
attempt to 
explain plate 
movements. 
a.  The theory of plate tectonics and its key elements (the 
earth’s internal structure, convection, subduction, ridge push, 
slab pull, sea floor spreading and palaeomagnetism). 
b.  The operation of these processes at different plate margins 
(destructive, constructive, collision and transform). (2) 
c.  Physical processes impact on the magnitude and type of 
volcanic eruption, and earthquake magnitude and focal depth 
(Benioff zone). 
1.3  Physical 
processes explain 
the causes of 
tectonic hazards. 
a.  Earthquake waves (P, S and L waves) cause crustal 
fracturing, ground shaking and secondary hazards 
(liquefaction and landslides). 
b.  Volcanoes cause lava flows, pyroclastic flows, ash falls, gas 
eruptions, and secondary hazards (lahars, jökulhlaups). 
c.  Tsunamis can be caused by sub-marine earthquakes at 
subduction zones as a result of sea-bed and water column 
displacement. (3) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
11 
 
Enquiry question 2: Why do some tectonic hazards develop into disasters? 
Key idea Detailed content 
1.4  Disaster 
occurrence can 
be explained by 
the relationship 
between hazards, 
vulnerability, 
resilience and 
disaster. 
a. Definition of a natural hazard and a disaster, the importance 
of vulnerability and a community’s threshold for resilience, 
the hazard risk equation. 
b. The Pressure and Release model (PAR) and the complex 
inter-relationships between the hazard and its wider context. 
c. The social and economic impacts of tectonic hazards (volcanic 
eruptions, earthquakes and tsunamis) on the people, 
economy and environment of contrasting locations in 
developed, emerging and developing countries. 
1.5 Tectonic hazard 
profiles are 
important to an 
understanding of 
contrasting 
hazard impacts, 
vulnerability and 
resilience. 
a. The magnitude and intensity of tectonic hazards is measured 
using different scales (Mercalli, Moment Magnitude Scale 
(MMS) and Volcanic Explosivity Index (VEI)). 
b. Comparing the characteristics of earthquakes, volcanoes and 
tsunamis (magnitude, speed of onset and areal extent, 
duration, frequency, spatial predictability) through hazard 
profiles. 
c. Profiles of earthquake, volcano and tsunami events showing 
the severity of social and economic impact in developed, 
emerging and developing countries. (4) 
1.6  Development and 
governance are 
important in 
understanding 
disaster impact 
and vulnerability 
and resilience. 
a. Inequality of access to education, housing, healthcare and 
income opportunities can influence vulnerability and 
resilience. 
b. Governance (P: local and national government) and 
geographical factors (population density, 
isolation/accessibility, degree of urbanisation) influence 
vulnerability and a community’s resilience. 
c. Contrasting hazard events in developed, emerging and 
developing countries to show the interaction of physical and 
human factors, and the importance of locational context in 
influencing the scale of disaster. (5) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
12 
 
Enquiry question 3: How successful is the management of tectonic 
hazards and disasters? 
Key idea Detailed content 
1.7  Understanding 
the complex 
trends and 
patterns for 
tectonic disasters 
helps explain 
differential 
impacts. 
a. Tectonic disaster trends since 1960 (number of deaths, 
numbers affected, level of economic damage) in the context 
of overall disaster trends. (6); research into the accuracy and 
reliability of the data to interpret complex trends. 
b. Tectonic mega-disasters can have regional or even global 
significance in terms of economic and human impacts.  
( 2004 Asian tsunami, 2010 Eyafjallajokull eruption in 
Iceland (global interdependence) and 2011 Japanese tsunami 
(energy policy)) 
c. The concept of a multiple-hazard zone and how linked 
hydrometeorological hazards sometimes contribute to a 
tectonic disaster ( the Philippines). 
1.8  Theoretical 
frameworks can 
be used to 
understand the 
predication, 
impact and 
management of 
tectonic hazards. 
a. Prediction and forecasting (P: role of scientists) accuracy 
depend on the type and location of the tectonic hazard. 
b. The importance of different stages in the hazard management 
cycle (response, recovery, mitigation, preparedness).  
(P: role of emergency planners) 
c. Use of Park’s Model to compare the response curve of hazard 
events, comparing areas at different stages of development. 
1.9  Tectonic hazard 
impacts can be 
managed by a 
variety of 
mitigation and 
adaptation 
strategies, which 
vary in their 
effectiveness. 
a. Strategies to modify the event include land-use zoning, 
hazard – resistant design and engineering defences
 as well as 
diversion of lava flows. (P: role of planners, engineers) (7) 
b. Strategies to modify vulnerability and resilience include hi-
tech monitoring, prediction, education, community 
preparedness and adaptation. (F: models forecasting 
disaster impacts with and without modification) 
c. Strategies to modify loss include emergency, short and longer 
term aid and insurance (P: role of NGOs and insurers) and 
the actions of affected communities themselves. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
13 
 
Guidance for integrating geographical skills for Topic 1 
The following skills provide suggested opportunities for integrating the full range of skills 
outlined in the geographical skills appendix (Appendix 1). These skills are not exclusive to 
the topic areas under which they appear; students will need to be able to apply these skills 
across any suitable topic area throughout their course of study. 
(1) Analysis of hazard distribution patterns on world and regional scale maps. 
(2) Use of block diagrams to identify key features of different plate boundary settings. 
(3) Analysis of tsunami time-travel maps to aid prediction. 
(4) Use of correlation techniques to analyse links between magnitude of events, deaths and 
damage. 
(5) Statistical analysis of contrasting events of similar magnitude to compare deaths and 
damage. 
(6) Interrogation of large data sets to assess data reliability and to identify and interpret 
complex trends. 
(7) Use of Geographic Information Systems (GIS) to identify hazard risk zones and degree 
of risk related to physical and human geographical features. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
14 
Topic 2: Landscape Systems, Processes and Change 
Option 2A: Glaciated Landscapes and Change 
Overview 
Ice sheets and glaciers operate within a landscape system as glacial processes of erosion, 
transport and deposition combine with meteorological and climatological processes and 
interact with geological and lithological processes to produce distinctive landscapes. The 
landscapes can be both present day and relict and can occur in both upland and lowland 
areas. These landscapes are being changed by both physical processes and human activities 
which pose unique threats due to the low level of resilience found in these areas. Study must 
include examples of landscapes from areas inside and outside the UK. 
Content 
Enquiry question 1: How has climate change influenced the formation of 
glaciated landscapes over time? 
Key idea Detailed content 
2A.1 The causes of 
longer and 
shorter climate 
change from 
the start of the 
Pleistocene, 
through the 
Holocene and 
into the 
Anthropocene. 
a. A chronology of multiple glacial and interglacial periods 
caused by climate change since the start of the Pleistocene. 
b. The factors leading to climate change in the Pleistocene, 
Holocene and Anthropocene: Milankovitch cycles, variations in 
solar output (1), variations in composition of atmospheric 
gases, and volcanic eruptions. 
2A.2 Present and 
past 
Pleistocene 
distribution of 
ice cover. 
a. The definition and importance of the cryosphere and its role 
in global systems and classification of ice masses by scale and 
location (ice sheets, ice caps, cirque and valley glaciers, and 
ice fields) and polar and temperate environments. 
b. The present-day distribution of high latitude ice sheets and 
evidence for Pleistocene ice sheet extent. 
c. The present-day distribution of high altitude glaciated upland 
landscapes and evidence of relict landscapes from the 
Pleistocene. (2) 
2A.3 Periglacial 
processes 
produce 
distinctive 
landscapes. 
a. Distribution of past and present periglacial landscapes which 
are underlain by continuous, discontinuous and sporadic 
areas of permafrost with a seasonally active layer. 
b. Periglacial processes include nivation, frost heave, freeze-
thaw weathering and solifluction as well as high winds and 
meltwater erosion. 
c. The formation of often unique periglacial landforms (ice 
wedges, patterned ground, pingos, loess) contributes towards 
the occurrence of distinctive periglacial landscapes ( Tundra 
environments of northern Russia or northern Canada). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
15 
 
Enquiry question 2: What processes operate within glacier systems? 
Key idea Detailed content 
2A.4 Mass balance 
is important in 
understanding 
glacial 
dynamics and 
the operation 
of glaciers as 
systems. 
a. Glacial mass balance system and the relationship between 
accumulation and ablation in the maintenance of equilibrium. 
(3) The importance of positive and negative feedback  
( Greenland Ice Sheet). 
b. The process of accumulation (direct snowfall, avalanches and 
wind deposition) and the process of ablation (melting, 
sublimation, calving, evaporation and avalanches). 
c. The reasons for the variations in the rates of accumulation 
and ablation, and the impact these variations have on the 
mass balance over different timescales. 
2A.5  Different 
processes 
explain glacial 
movement and 
variations in 
rates. 
a. Polar and temperate glaciers have different rates of 
movement. 
b. There are different processes that are important in the 
movement of glaciers (basal slip, regelation creep, internal 
deformation). 
c. A number of factors control the rate of movement (altitude, 
basal temperature, slope, lithology, size and variations in 
mass balance) with both positive and negative feedback in 
the system. (4) 
2A.6  The glacier 
landform 
system. 
a. Glaciers alter landscapes by a number of processes: details of 
erosion, entrainment, transport and deposition. 
b. Glacial landforms develop at macro-, meso- and micro-scales 
with distinctive morphologies in process environments, such 
as sub-glacial, marginal, proglacial and periglacial. 
c. These landforms create a number of distinctive landscapes in 
upland and lowland areas that can be used to study the 
extent of ice cover. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
16 
 
Enquiry question 3: How do glacial processes contribute to the formation 
of glacial landforms and landscapes? 
Key idea Detailed content 
2A.7 Glacial erosion 
creates 
distinctive 
landforms and 
contributes to 
glaciated 
landscapes. 
a. Glacial erosional processes (abrasion, quarrying, plucking, 
crushing and basal melting, combined with subaerial freeze 
thaw and mass movement). 
b. The processes leading to the formation of landforms 
associated with cirque and valley glaciers (cirques/corries (5), 
arêtes, pyramidal peaks, glacial troughs, truncated 
spurs/hanging valleys and ribbon lakes). 
c. The formation of landforms due to ice sheet scouring (roches 
moutonnées, knock and lochan, crag and tail) and the 
influence of differential geology. 
2A.8 Glacial 
deposition 
creates 
distinctive 
landforms and 
contributes to 
glaciated 
landscapes. 
a. The formation of glacial (ice contact) depositional features 
(medial, lateral, recessional and terminal moraines and 
drumlins). 
b. The formation of lowland depositional features (till plains, 
lodgement and ablation till). (6) 
c. The assemblage of landforms can be used to reconstruct 
former ice extent, movement and provenance (erratics, 
moraines, crag and tail, drumlin orientation). (7) 
2A.9 Glacial 
meltwater 
plays a 
significant role 
in creating 
distinctive 
landforms and 
contributes to 
glaciated 
landscapes. 
a. The processes of water movement within the glacial system 
(supraglacial, englacial and sub-glacial flows). 
b. Glacial and fluvioglacial deposits have different characteristics 
(stratification, sorting, imbrication and grading). (8) 
c. The formation of fluvio-glacial landforms; ice contact features 
(kames, eskers and kame terraces) and proglacial features 
(sandurs, pro-glacial lakes, meltwater channels, and 
kettleholes). 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
17 
 
Enquiry question 4: How are glaciated landscapes used and managed 
today? 
Key idea Detailed content 
2A.10 Glacial and 
periglacial 
landscapes 
have intrinsic 
cultural, 
economic and 
environmental 
value. 
a. Relict and active glaciated landscapes have environmental 
and cultural value (polar scientific research, wilderness 
recreation, and spiritual/religious associations).  
(A: attitudes range from exploitation to preservation) 
b. Glaciated landscapes are important economically (farming, 
mining, hydroelectric power, tourism, forestry) to include a 
study of contrasting environments around the world. 
c. Glaciated and periglacial landscapes have a unique 
biodiversity (tundra) and play an important role in the 
maintenance of natural systems (water and carbon cycles). 
2A.11 There are 
threats facing 
fragile active 
and relict 
glaciated 
upland 
landscapes. 
a. Glaciated landscapes face varying degrees of threat from both 
natural hazards (avalanches and glacial outburst floods) and 
human activities (leisure and tourism, reservoir construction, 
urbanisation) ( Alpine valleys).  
b. Human activity can degrade the landscape and fragile ecology 
of glaciated landscapes (soil erosion, trampling, landslides, 
deforestation). (A: direct actions by players reduce 
resilience) 
c. Climate change is having a major impact on glacial mass 
balances, which in turn risks disruption of the hydrological 
cycle (meltwater, river discharge, sediment yield, water 
quality) ( Himalayan Glaciers). (9) (A: indirect actions by 
players alter natural systems) 
2A.12 Threats to 
glaciated 
landscapes can 
be managed 
using a 
spectrum of 
approaches. 
a. Different stakeholders (conservationists, local and regional 
government, global organisations, NGOs) are involved in 
managing the challenges posed by glaciated landscapes, 
using a spectrum of approaches from protection through to 
sustainable management and multiple economic use ( 
Yosemite Valley). (A: actions range from exploitation to 
preservation) 
b. Legislative frameworks are used to protect and conserve 
landscapes by conservation and management at a variety of 
scales. 
c. Climate change makes successful management of these 
unique and fragile landscapes increasingly challenging, with a 
need for coordinated approaches at global, national and local 
scale. (F: this risk is creating an uncertain future and 
needs mitigation and adaptation) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
18 
 
Guidance for integrating geographical skills for Topic 2 Option 2A 
Study must emphasise the use of quantitative geographical skills, including developing 
observation skills, measurement and geo-spatial mapping skills, together with data 
manipulation and statistical skills applied for field measurement. Qualitative approaches may 
be used if appropriate. The following guidance on integrating skills gives suggestions for 
opportunities to meet these requirements. These skills are not exclusive to the topic areas 
under which they appear; students will need to be able to apply these skills across any 
suitable topic area throughout their course of study. The full range of skills is outlined in the 
geographical skills appendix (Appendix 1). 
(1) Graphical analysis of reconstructed climate versus landform evidence for past 
glacial/interglacial periods. 
(2) Comparison of past and present distribution of glaciated landscapes using global and 
regional maps. 
(3) Use of numerical data to calculate simple mass balance and equilibrium line position; 
use of GIS to identify main features of glacier types and assess glacier health. 
(4) Use of measures of central tendency to compare rates of glacier movement. 
(5) Cirque orientation analysis using large-scale maps (OS maps); calculating Spearman’s 
rank correlations of height of basin, size of basin and orientation and commenting on 
the significance of the correlation. 
(6) Till fabric analysis using rose diagrams. 
(7) Use of British Geological Society (BGS) glacial drift maps, Ordnance Survey (OS) maps, 
GIS and fieldwork results to reconstruct past ice extent and ice flow direction. 
(8) Use of student t-test to analyse changes in sediment size and shape in outwash plains; 
central tendency analysis of both glacial and fluvioglacial deposits (comparison of size, 
shape and degree of sorting of clasts). 
(9) Numerical analysis of mean rates of glacial recession in different global regions. 
(10) Drumlin morphometry and orientation survey to measure correlation of height, length 
and elongation ratio. Statistical comparison of two data sets from contrasting locations.  
 
NB Geographical skills should use data and images from areas inside and outside the UK. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
19 
Topic 2: Landscape Systems, Processes and Change 
Option 2B: Coastal Landscapes and Change 
Overview 
Coastal landscapes develop due to the interaction of winds, waves and currents, as well as 
through the contribution of both terrestrial and offshore sources of sediment. These flows of 
energy and variations in sediment budgets interact with the prevailing geological and 
lithological characteristics of the coast to operate as coastal systems and produce distinctive 
coastal landscapes, including those in rocky, sandy and estuarine coastlines. These 
landscapes are increasingly threatened from physical processes and human activities, and 
there is a need for holistic and sustainable management of these areas in all the world’s 
coasts. Study must include examples of landscapes from inside and outside the UK. 
Content 
Enquiry question 1: Why are coastal landscapes different and what 
processes cause these differences? 
Key idea Detailed content 
2B.1  The coast, 
and wider 
littoral zone, 
has 
distinctive 
features and 
landscapes. 
a. The littoral zone consists of backshore, nearshore and offshore 
zones, includes a wide variety of coastal types and is a 
dynamic zone of rapid change. 
b. Coasts can be classified by using longer term criteria such as 
geology and changes of sea level or shorter term processes 
such as inputs from rivers, waves and tides. 
c. Rocky coasts (high and low relief) result from geology which is 
resistant to erosive forces of sea, rain and wind, often in a 
high-energy environment, whereas coastal plain landscapes 
(sandy and estuarine coasts) are found near areas of low relief 
and result from supply of sediment from different terrestrial 
and offshore sources, often in a low-energy environment. 
2B.2  Geological 
structure 
influences 
the 
development 
of coastal 
landscapes 
at a variety 
of scales. 
a. Geological structure is responsible for the formation of 
concordant and discordant coasts. 
b. Geological structure influences coastal morphology: Dalmatian 
and Haff type concordant coasts and headlands and bays on 
discordant coasts. 
c. Geological structure (bedding planes, jointing, dip, faulting, 
folding) is an important influence on coastal morphology and 
erosion rates, and also on the formation of cliff profiles and the 
occurrence of micro-features, e.g. caves ( Glamorgan 
Heritage Coast). (2) 
2B.3  Rates of 
coastal 
recession 
and stability 
depend on 
lithology and 
other factors. 
a. Bedrock lithology (igneous, sedimentary, metamorphic) and 
unconsolidated material (boulder clay) geology are important in 
understanding rates of coastal recession. 
b. Differential erosion of alternating strata in cliffs 
(permeable/impermeable, resistant/less resistant) produces 
complex cliff profiles and influences recession rates. (3) 
c. Vegetation is important in stabilising sandy coastlines through 
dune successional development and salt marsh successional 
development in estuarine areas. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
20 
 
Enquiry question 2: How do characteristic coastal landforms contribute to 
coastal landscapes? 
Key idea Detailed content 
2B.4  Marine erosion 
creates 
distinctive 
coastal 
landforms and 
contributes to 
coastal 
landscapes. 
a. Different wave types (constructive/destructive) influence 
beach morphology and beach sediment profiles, which vary 
at a variety of temporal scales from short term (daily) 
through to longer periods (4) 
b. The importance of erosion processes (hydraulic action, 
corrosion, abrasion, attrition) and how they are influenced by 
wave type, size and lithology. 
c. Erosion creates distinctive coastal landforms (wave cut 
notches, wave cut platforms, cliffs, the cave-arch-stack-
stump sequence). 
2B.5  Sediment 
transport and 
deposition 
create 
distinctive 
landforms and 
contribute to 
coastal 
landscapes. 
a. Sediment transportation is influenced by the angle of wave 
attack, the process of longshore drift, tides and currents. (5) 
b. Transportation and deposition processes produce distinctive 
coastal landforms (beaches, recurved and double spits, 
offshore bars, barrier beaches and bars, tombolos and 
cuspate forelands), which can be stabilised by plant 
succession. 
c. The Sediment Cell concept (sources, transfers and sinks) is 
important in understanding the coast as a system of dynamic 
equilibrium, with both negative and positive feedback  
( Portland Bill to Selsey Bill). 
2B.6  Subaerial 
processes of 
mass 
movement and 
weathering 
influence 
coastal 
landforms and 
contribute to 
coastal 
landscapes. 
a. Weathering (mechanical, chemical, biological) is important in 
sediment production and influences rates of recession. 
b. Mass movement (blockfall, rotational slumping, landslides) is 
important on some coasts with weak and/or complex 
geology. 
c. Mass movement creates distinctive landforms (rotational 
scars, talus scree slopes, terraced cliff profiles). 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
21 
 
Enquiry question 3: How do coastal erosion and sea level change alter the 
physical characteristics of coastlines and increase risks? 
Key idea Detailed content 
2B.7  Sea level 
change 
influences 
coasts on 
different 
timescales. 
a. Longer-term sea level changes result from a complex 
interplay of factors both eustatic (ice formation/melting, 
thermal changes) and isostatic (post glacial adjustment, 
subsidence, accretion and tectonics). 
b. Sea level change has produced emergent coastlines (raised 
beaches with fossil cliffs) and submergent coastlines (rias, 
fjords and Dalmatian). (6) 
c. Contemporary sea level change from global warming or 
tectonic activity is a risk to some coastlines. 
2B.8  Rapid coastal 
retreat causes 
threats to 
people at the 
coast. 
a. Rapid coastal recession is caused by physical factors 
(geological and marine) but can be influenced by human 
actions (dredging or coastal management) ( the Nile Delta 
or Guinea coastline or Californian coastline). (A: actions of 
different players may alter natural systems) 
b. Subaerial processes (weather and mass movement) work 
together to influence rates of coastal recession.  
c. Rates of recession are not constant and are influenced by 
different factors both short- and longer term (wind 
direction/fetch, tides, seasons, weather systems and 
occurrence of storms). (7) 
2B.9  Coastal 
flooding is a 
significant and 
increasing risk 
for some 
coastlines. 
a. Local factors increase flood risk on some low-lying and 
estuarine coasts (height, degree of subsidence, vegetation 
removal); global sea level rise further increases risk  
( Bangladesh or the Maldives). 
b. Storm surge events can lead to severe coastal flooding with 
dramatic short-term impacts (depressions, tropical cyclones). 
c. Climate change may increase coastal flood risk (frequency 
and magnitude of storms, sea level rise) but the pace and 
magnitude of this threat is uncertain. (F: this risk is 
creating an uncertain future and needs mitigation and 
adaptation) 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
22 
 
Enquiry question 4: How can coastlines be managed to meet the needs of 
all players? 
Key idea Detailed content 
2B.10 Increasing 
risks of coastal 
recession and 
coastal 
flooding have 
serious 
consequences 
for affected 
communities. 
a. Economic losses (housing, businesses, agricultural land, 
infrastructure) and social losses (relocation, loss of livelihood, 
amenity value) from coastal recession can be significant, 
especially in areas of dense coastal developments. 
b. Coastal flooding and storm surge events can have serious 
economic and social consequences for coastal communities in 
both developing and developed countries. 
c. Climate change may create environmental refugees in coastal 
areas. 
2B.11 There are 
different 
approaches to 
managing the 
risks 
associated with 
coastal 
recession and 
flooding. 
a. Hard engineering approaches (groynes, sea walls, rip rap, 
revetments, offshore breakwaters) are economically costly 
and directly alter physical processes and systems. (8)  
(A: actions by different players may have unforeseen 
consequences) 
b. Soft engineering approaches (beach nourishment, cliff re-
grading and drainage, dune stabilisation) attempt to work 
with physical systems and processes to protect coasts and 
manage risks caused by changes in sea-level. (9) 
c. Sustainable management is designed to cope with future 
threats (increased storm events, rising sea levels) but its 
implementation can lead to local conflicts in many countries. 
(F: mitigation and adaptation will both be needed for 
future stability) 
2B.12 Coastlines are 
now 
increasingly 
managed by 
holistic 
integrated 
coastal zone 
management 
(ICZM). 
a. Coastal management increasingly uses the concept of littoral 
cells to manage extended areas of coastline. Throughout the 
world, countries are developing schemes that are sustainable 
and use holistic ICZM strategies. 
b. Shoreline Management Policy decisions (No Active 
Intervention, Strategic Realignment, Hold The Line, Advance 
The Line) are based on complex judgements (engineering 
feasibility, environmental sensitivity, land value, political and 
social reasons); Cost Benefit Analysis (CBA) and 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) are used as part of 
the decision-making process. 
c. Policy decisions can lead to conflicts between different players 
(homeowners, local authorities, environmental pressure 
groups) with perceived winners and losers in countries at 
different levels of development (developed and developing or 
emerging countries) ( Happisburgh and Chattogram).  
(A: attitudes of differing players may vary) 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
23 
Guidance for integrating geographical skills for Topic 2 Option 2B 
Study must emphasise the use of quantitative geographical skills, including developing 
observation skills, measurement and geo-spatial mapping skills, together with data 
manipulation and statistical skills applied for field measurement. Qualitative approaches may 
be used if appropriate. The following guidance on integrating skills gives suggestions of 
opportunities to meet these requirements. These skills are not exclusive to the topic areas 
under which they appear; students will need to be able to apply these skills across any 
suitable topic area throughout their course of study. The full range of skills is outlined in the 
geographical skills appendix (Appendix 1).  
(1) GIS mapping of the variety of coastal landscapes, both for and beyond the UK. 
(2) Satellite interpretation of a variety of coastlines to attempt to classify them. 
(3) Field sketches of contrasting coastal landscapes. 
(4) Using measures of central tendency to classify waves into destructive and constructive 
wave types. 
(5) Using student t-test to investigate changes in pebble size and shape along a drift 
aligned beach and also across the littoral zone to above the storm beach. 
(6) Map and aerial interpretation of distinctive landforms indicating past of sea level 
change. 
(7) Use of GIS, aerial photos and maps to calculate recession rates for a variety of 
temporal rates (annual changes and longer-term changes). 
(8) Interrogation of GIS of management cells to ascertain land use values and develop 
cost/benefit analysis to inform the choice of coastal management strategy. 
(9) Photo interpretation of a range of approaches to management to assess environmental 
impact. 
(10) Sand dune or salt marsh surveys to assess the impact of succession using an index of 
diversity, X² (Chi-square to compare features of the various zones). 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
24 
Area of study 2: Dynamic Places 
Topic 3: Globalisation 
Overview 
Globalisation and global interdependence continue to accelerate, resulting in changing 
opportunities for businesses and people. Inequalities are caused within and between 
countries as shifts in patterns of wealth occur. Cultural impacts on the identity of 
communities increase as flows of ideas, people and goods take place. Recognising that both 
tensions in communities and pressures on environments are likely, will help players 
implement sustainable solutions. 
Content 
Enquiry question 1: What are the causes of globalisation and why has it 
accelerated in recent decades?  
Key idea Detailed content 
3.1 Globalisation is a 
long-standing 
process which 
has accelerated 
because of rapid 
developments in 
transport, 
communications 
and businesses. 
a. Globalisation involves widening and deepening global 
connections, interdependence and flows (commodities, 
capital, information, migrants and tourists). (1) 
b. Developments in transport and trade in the 19th century 
(railways, telegraph, steam-ships) accelerated in the 20th 
century (jet aircraft, containerisation), contributing to a 
‘shrinking world’. 
c. The 21st century has been dominated by rapid development 
in ICT and global communication (mobile phones, internet, 
social networking, electronic banking, fibre optics), lowering 
communication costs and contributing to time-space 
compression. 
3.2  Political and 
economic 
decision making 
are important 
factors in the 
acceleration of 
globalisation. 
a. International political and economic organisations (P: role of 
World Trade Organization (WTO), International 
Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank) have contributed to 
globalisation through the promotion of free trade policies and 
foreign direct investment (FDI).  
b. National governments are key players in terms of promoting 
free trade blocs (P: role of European Union (EU), The 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)) and 
through polices (free-market liberalisation, privatisation, 
encouraging business start-ups). (P: role of governments 
in economic liberalisation) 
c. Special economic zones, government subsidies and attitudes 
to FDI ( China’s 1978 Open Door Policy) have contributed to 
the spread of globalisation into new global regions (P: role of 
governments in attracting foreign direct investment 
(FDI)) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
25 
 
Enquiry question 1: What are the causes of globalisation and why has it 
accelerated in recent decades? 
Key idea Detailed content 
3.3  Globalisation has 
affected some 
places and 
organisations 
more than 
others. 
a. Degree of globalisation varies by country and can be 
measured using indicators and indices (AT Kearney index, 
KOF index). (2) 
b. TNCs are important in globalisation (P: role of TNCs) both 
contributing to its spread (global production networks, 
glocalisation and the development of new markets) and 
taking advantage of economic liberalisation (outsourcing and 
offshoring). 
c. T here are historical, physical, political, economic and 
environmental reasons why some locations remain largely 
detached from globalisation ( North Korea or some rural 
communities in Niger). (3) 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
26 
 
Enquiry question 2: What are the impacts of globalisation for countries, 
different groups of people and cultures and the physical environment? 
Key idea Detailed content 
3.4  The global shift 
has created 
winners and 
losers for people 
and the physical 
environment. 
a. The movement of the global economic centre of gravity to 
Asia via the global shift of manufacturing ( China) and 
outsourcing of services ( India) can lead to benefits 
(infrastructure investment, waged work, poverty reduction, 
education and training) but also costs (growing inequalities, 
loss of productive land, unplanned settlements, 
environmental and resource pressure). 
b. Some communities in developing countries have experienced 
major environmental problems (including air and water 
pollution, land degradation, over-exploitation of resources, 
and loss of biodiversity), which impact on people’s health and 
wellbeing. 
c. Some deindustrialised regions in developed countries face 
social and environmental problems as a result of economic 
restructuring (dereliction, contamination, depopulation, crime 
and high unemployment). (4)  
3.5  The scale and 
pace of economic 
migration has 
increased as the 
world has 
become more 
interconnected, 
creating 
consequences for 
people and the 
physical 
environment. 
a. Rural-urban migration (push and pull factors), and/or natural 
increase, is responsible for the growth of megacities  
( Mumbai or Karachi); rapid urban growth creates social 
and environmental challenges. (5) 
b. International migration has increased in global hub cities and 
regions, deepening interdependence between regions (high-
wage economic migration to  Singapore and London and 
low-wage economic migration to  UAE and Saudi Arabia). 
c. Migration has economic, social, political and environmental 
costs and benefits for both host and source locations. 
3.6  The emergence 
of a global 
culture, based on 
western ideas, 
consumption, 
and attitudes 
towards the 
physical 
environment, is 
one outcome of 
globalisation. 
a. Cultural diffusion occurs as a result of globalisation; TNCs, 
global media corporations (P: role of TNCs), tourism and 
migration create and spread a ‘westernised’ global culture 
which impacts on both the environment and people  
( Changing diets in Asia). The spread of a global culture has 
also led to new awareness of opportunities for disadvantaged 
groups ( Paralympic movement). (P: opportunities for 
these groups) (6) 
b. C ultural erosion (loss of language, traditional food, music, 
clothes, social relations) occurs in many locations. In some 
places this is the result of deliberate action ( loss of 
Indigenous lifestyles in Papua New Guinea) and has resulted 
in changes to environments (de-valuing local and larger-scale 
ecosystems). 
c. Concern about cultural impacts, economic and environmental 
exploitation has led to opposition to globalisation from some 
groups, including governments. (A: attitudes of pro- and 
anti-globalisation groups, environmental movement) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
27 
 
Enquiry question 3: What are the consequences of globalisation for global 
development and the physical environment and how should different 
players respond to its challenges? 
Key idea Detailed content 
3.7  Globalisation has 
led to dramatic 
increases in 
development for 
some countries, 
but also widening 
development gap 
extremities and 
disparities in 
environmental 
quality. 
a. Economic measures (both single and composite indices) of 
development (income per capita, economic sector balance) 
contrast with those focused on social development (Human 
Development Index (HDI), Gender Inequality Index (GII)) 
and environmental quality (pollution indices). (7) 
b. Trends in widening income inequality, globally and nationally 
(measured using the Gini Coefficient), suggest globalisation 
has created winners and losers for people and physical 
environments between and within developed, emerging and 
developing economies. (8) 
c. Contrasting trends in economic development and 
environmental management between global regions since 
1970 indicate differential progress that can be related to the 
outcomes from globalisation.  
3.8  Social, political 
and 
environmental 
tensions have 
resulted from the 
rapidity of global 
change caused 
by globalisation. 
a. Open borders, deregulation and encouragement of foreign 
direct investment have created culturally mixed societies and 
thriving migrant diasporas. Changes caused by globalisation 
have resulted in tensions in some locations. ( Rise of 
extreme nationalism in Europe). 
b. Attempts have been made in some locations to control the 
spread of globalisation by censorship ( China or North 
Korea), limiting immigration ( UK or Japan) and trade 
protectionism. (P: role of government) (A: attitudes of 
pro- and anti-immigration groups) 
c. Some groups seek to retain their cultural identity within 
countries and seek to retain control of culture and physical 
resources, whereas others embrace the changes brought by 
globalisation ( First Nations in Canada). 
3.9  Ethical and 
environmental 
concerns about 
unsustainability 
have led to 
increased 
localism and 
awareness of the 
impacts of a 
consumer 
society. 
a. Local groups and NGOs promote local sourcing ( Transition 
towns) as one response to globalisation by increasing 
sustainability (A: actions of local pressure groups); this 
has economic, social and environmental costs and benefits.  
b. Fair trade and ethical consumption schemes may reduce the 
environmental degradation, the inequalities of global trade 
and improve working conditions for some people. (A: actions 
of NGOs and pressure groups) 
c. Recycling has a role in managing resource consumption and 
ecological footprints, but its use varies by product and place 
( local authorities in the UK or local NGOs such as Keep 
Britain Tidy). (F: environmental consequences of 
different patterns of resource consumption) 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
28 
Guidance for integrating geographical skills for Topic 3 
The following skills provide suggested opportunities for integrating the full range of skills 
outlined in the geographical skills appendix (Appendix 1). These skills are not exclusive to 
the topic areas under which they appear; students will need to be able to apply these skills 
across any suitable topic area throughout their course of study. 
(1) Use of proportional flow lines showing networks of flows. 
(2) Ranking and scaling data to create indices. 
(3) Analysis of human and physical features on maps to understand lack of connectedness. 
(4) Use of population, deprivation and land-use datasets to quantify the impacts of 
deindustrialisation. 
(5) Use of proportional flow arrows to show global movement of migrants from source to 
host areas. 
(6) Analysis of global TNC and brand value datasets to quantify the influence of western 
brands. 
(7) Critical use of World Bank and United Nations (UN) data sets to analyse trends in 
human and economic development, including the use of line graphs, bar charts and 
trend lines. 
(8) Plotting Lorenz curves and calculating the Gini Coefficient. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
29 
Topic 4: Shaping Places 
Option 4A: Regenerating Places 
Overview 
Local places vary economically and socially with change driven by local, national and global 
processes. These processes include movements of people, capital, information and 
resources, making some places economically dynamic while other places appear to be 
marginalised. This creates and exacerbates considerable economic and social inequalities 
both between and within local areas. Urban and rural regeneration programmes involving a 
range of players involve both place making (regeneration) and place marketing (rebranding). 
Regeneration programmes impact variably on people both in terms of their lived experience 
of change and their perception and attachment to places. The relative success of 
regeneration and rebranding for individuals and groups depends on the extent to which lived 
experience, perceptions, and attachments to places are changed.  
Students should begin by studying the place in which they live or study in order to look at 
economic change and social inequalities. They will then put this local place in context in 
order to understand how regional, national, international and global influences have led to 
changes there. They should then study one further contrasting place through which they will 
develop their wider knowledge and understanding about how places change and are shaped. 
Both the local place and the contrasting place should be a locality, a neighbourhood or a 
small community, either urban or rural. 
Content 
Enquiry question 1: How and why do places vary? 
An in-depth study of the local place in which you live or study and one 
contrasting place 
Key idea Detailed content 
4A.1 Economies can 
be classified in 
different ways 
and vary from 
place to place. 
a. Economic activity can be classified by sector (primary, 
secondary, tertiary and quaternary) and also by type of 
employment (part-time/full-time, temporary/permanent, 
employed/self-employed.  
b. There are differences in economic activity (employment data 
and output data) and this is reflected through variation in 
social factors (health, life expectancy and levels of 
education). (1) 
c. The inequalities in pay levels across economic sectors and in 
different types of employment are reflected in quality of life 
indices. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
30 
 
Enquiry question 1: How and why do places vary? 
An in-depth study of the local place in which you live or study and one 
contrasting place 
Key idea Detailed content 
4A.2  Places have 
changed their 
function and 
characteristics 
over time. 
a. Over time, places have changed their functions 
(administrative, commercial, retail and industrial) and 
demographic characteristics (gentrification, age structure and 
ethnic composition). 
b. Reason for changes in a place might be explained by physical 
factors, accessibility and connectedness, historical 
development and the role of local and national planning. (2) 
c. Change can be measured using employment trends, 
demographic changes, land use changes and levels of 
deprivation (income deprivation, employment deprivation, 
health deprivation, crime, quality of the living environment, 
abandoned and derelict land). (3) 
4A.3  Past and 
present 
connections 
have shaped 
the economic 
and social 
characteristics 
of your chosen 
places. 
a. Global, international, national and regional influences have 
shaped the characteristics of your chosen places.  
(P: increasing roles of TNCs and IGOs) 
b. Y our chosen places can be represented in a variety of 
different forms, giving contrasting images to those presented 
more formally and statistically (7). 
c. How the lives of students and others have been influenced by 
continuity and change in the economic and social 
characteristics of your chosen places. (4) (A: Attitudes on 
changes range from cultural erosion to enrichment) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
31 
 
Enquiry question 2: Why might regeneration be needed? 
Key idea Detailed content 
4A.4 Economic and 
social 
inequalities 
change 
people’s 
perceptions of 
an area. 
a. Successful regions ( Palo Alto and ‘Silicon Valley’) have high 
rates of employment, inward migration (internal and 
international) and low levels of multiple deprivation but also 
high property prices and skill shortages in both urban and 
rural areas. 
b. In some regions ( The Rust Belt, USA) economic 
restructuring has triggered a spiral of decline, which includes 
increasing levels of social deprivation (education, health, 
crime, access to services and living environment) in both 
deindustrialised urban areas and rural settlements once 
dominated by primary economic activities. 
c. There are variations in the perceived need for regeneration 
due to significant differences in economic and social 
inequalities in both urban and rural locations. 
4A.5 There are 
significant 
variations in 
the lived 
experience of 
place and 
engagement 
with them. 
a. There are wide variations in levels of engagement in local 
communities (local and national election turnout, 
development and support for local community groups).  
(A: local communities vary in attitudes) 
b. Lived experience of, and attachment to, places varies 
according to age, ethnicity, gender, length of residence (new 
migrants, students) and levels of deprivation; these in turn 
impact on levels of engagement. (A: attachment to places 
influence attitudes) 
c. Conflicts can occur among contrasting groups in communities 
that have different views about the priorities and strategies 
for regeneration. These differences have complex causes 
including economic and social inequalities, lack of political 
engagement and representation. (P: players vary in 
attitudes (A) and may have contrasting priorities (F) 
4A.6 There is a 
range of ways 
to evaluate the 
need for 
regeneration.  
a. The use of statistical evidence to determine the need for 
regeneration in your chosen local place. (5) 
b. Different media can provide contrasting evidence, questioning 
the need for regeneration in your chosen local place. (6) 
c. How different representations of your chosen local place could 
influence the perceived need for regeneration. (7) 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
32 
 
Enquiry question 3: How is regeneration managed?  
Key idea Detailed content 
4A.7  UK 
government 
policy 
decisions play 
a key role in 
regeneration. 
a. Infrastructure investment (high speed rail, airport 
development) in order to maintain growth and improve 
accessibility to regenerate regions. (P: national 
government facilitates regeneration, often in 
partnerships with charities and developers) 
b. Rate and type of development (planning laws, house building 
targets, housing affordability) affecting economic  
regeneration of both rural and urban regions.  
(A: government actions may prioritise national over 
local needs and opinions.) 
c. UK government decisions about international migration and 
the deregulation of capital markets ( enabling foreign 
investment in prime London real estate) have significant 
impacts on the potential for growth and both direct and 
indirect investment. (P: government may create open or 
closed doors policies)  
4A.8  Local 
government 
policies aim to 
represent 
areas as being 
attractive for 
inward 
investment. 
a. Local governments compete to create sympathetic business 
environments with local plans designating areas for 
development for a range of domestic and foreign investors  
( Science and technology parks). (A: the actions of local 
authorities will affect their success) 
b. Local interest groups (Chambers of Commerce, local 
preservation societies, trade unions) play a key role in 
decision-making about regeneration; there are often tensions 
between groups that wish to preserve environments and 
those that seek change. ( London Olympics 2012)  
(A: differing attitudes may cause conflicts) 
c. Urban and rural regeneration strategies include retail-led 
plans, tourism, leisure and sport ( London Olympics 2012), 
public/private rural diversification ( Powys Regeneration 
Partnership). 
4A.9  Rebranding 
attempts to 
represent 
areas as being 
more attractive 
by changing 
public 
perception of 
them. 
a. Rebranding involves re-imaging places using a variety of 
media to improve the image of both urban and rural locations 
and make them more attractive for potential investors. 
b. For UK deindustrialised cities, rebranding can stress the 
attraction of places, creating specific place identity building 
on their industrial heritage; this can attract national and 
international tourists and visitors ( Glasgow ‘Scotland with 
Style’). (8) 
c. There are a range of rural rebranding strategies in the post- 
production countryside based on heritage and literary 
associations, farm diversification and specialised products, 
outdoor pursuits and adventure in both accessible and remote 
areas; these strategies are intended to make these places 
more attractive to national and international tourists and 
visitors ( ‘Brontë country’, Kielder Forest). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
33 
 
Enquiry question 4: How successful is regeneration? 
Key idea Detailed content 
4A.10  Assessing the 
success of 
regeneration 
uses a range of 
measures: 
economic, 
demographic, 
social and 
environmental. 
a. The success of economic regeneration can be assessed using 
measures of income, poverty and employment (both relative 
and absolute changes) both within areas and by comparison 
to other more successful areas.  
b. Social progress can be measured by reductions in inequalities 
both between areas and within them; social progress can also 
be measured by improvements in social measures of 
deprivation and in demographic changes (improvements in 
life expectancy and reductions in health deprivation).  
c. Regeneration is successful if it leads to an improvement in the 
living environment (levels of pollution reduced, reduction in 
abandoned and derelict land). (9) 
4A.11  Different urban 
stakeholders 
have different 
criteria for 
judging the 
success of 
urban 
regeneration. 
a. A study of the strategies used in the regeneration of an urban 
place ( Salford Quays) and the contested nature of these 
decisions within local communities. (10) (A: attitudes will 
include NIMBYism) 
b. The changes that have taken place as a consequence of 
national and local strategies can be judged using a range of 
economic, social, demographic and environmental variables in 
an urban area. (F: future success depends on past 
decisions) 
c. Different stakeholders (local and national governments, local 
businesses and residents) will assess success using 
contrasting criteria; their views will depend on the meaning 
and lived experiences of an urban place and the impact of 
change on both the reality and the image of that place. 
4A.12  Different rural 
stakeholders 
have different 
criteria for 
judging the 
success of 
rural 
regeneration. 
a. A study of the strategies used in the restructuring of a rural 
place ( North Antrim coast) and the contested nature of 
these decisions within local communities. 
b. The changes that have taken place as a consequence of 
national and local strategies can be judged using a range of 
economic, social, demographic and environmental variables in 
a rural area. (F: future success depends on past 
decisions) 
c. Different stakeholders (local and national governments, local 
businesses and residents) will assess success using 
contrasting criteria; their views will depend on the meaning 
and lived experiences of a rural place and the impact of 
change on both the reality and the image of that place. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
34 
Guidance for integrating geographical skills for Topic 4 Option 4A 
Quantitative and qualitative geographical skills must be developed in this topic. Particular 
weight must be given to qualitative approaches involved in representing place, and to 
analysing critically the impacts of different media on place meanings and perceptions. The 
use of geospatial data must also be used to present place characteristics. The following 
guidance on integrating geographical skills gives suggestions for opportunities to meet these 
requirements. 
These skills are not exclusive to the topic areas under which they appear; students will need 
to be able to apply these skills across any suitable topic area throughout their course of 
study. Appendix 1 outlines the full range of geographical skills.  
(1) Use of GIS to represent data about place characteristics. 
(2) Interpretation of oral accounts of the values and lived experiences of places from 
different interest groups and ethnic communities. 
(3) Use of Index of Multiple Deprivation (IMD) database to understand variations in levels 
and types of deprivation. 
(4) Investigation of social media to understand how people relate to the places where they 
live. 
(5) Testing of the strength of relationships through the use of scatter graphs and 
Spearman’s rank correlation. 
(6) Use of different newspaper sources to understand conflicting views about plans for 
regeneration. 
(7) Evaluation of different sources (music, photography, film, art, literature) and 
appreciation of why they create different representations and image of a local place. 
(8) Exploration of discursive/creative media sources to find out how place identity has been 
used as part of rebranding. 
(9) The interpretation of photographic and map evidence showing ‘before and after’  
cross-sections of regenerated urban and rural places. 
(10) Interrogation of blog entries and other social media to understand different views of the 
success of regeneration projects. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
35 
Topic 4: Shaping Places 
Option 4B: Diverse Places 
Overview 
Local places vary both demographically and culturally with change driven by local, national 
and global processes. These processes include movements of people, capital, information 
and resources, making some places more demographically and culturally heterogeneous 
while other places appear to be less dynamic. This creates and exacerbates considerable 
social inequalities both between and within local areas. 
Variations in past and present connections with places lead to very different lived 
experiences of places at a local level. This is because demographic and cultural changes 
impact variably on people in terms of the lived experience of change and their perception of 
and attachment to places. The relative success of the management of demographic and 
cultural changes for individuals and groups depends on that lived experience of change and 
how perceptions of, and attachments to, the place are changed. 
Students should begin by studying the place in which they live or study in order to look at 
demographic and social changes. They will then put this local place in context in order to 
understand how regional, national, international and global influences have led to changes in 
this place. They should then study one further contrasting place, which will develop wider 
knowledge and understanding about how places change and are shaped. Both the local place 
and the contrasting place should be a locality, a neighbourhood or a small community, either 
urban or rural.  
Content 
Enquiry question 1: How do population structures vary? 
An in-depth study of the local place in which you live or study and one 
contrasting place 
Key idea Key idea 
4B.1 Population 
structure 
varies from 
place to place 
and over time. 
a.
 The population of the UK has grown unevenly in the last 50 
years, with some regions growing rapidly ( London and the 
south-east) whilst others have grown more slowly ( the 
north-east of England). 
b. Population structure and density varies according to 
placement in the rural-urban continuum and, therefore 
accessibility, physical factors, historical development and the 
role of planning. 
c. Population structure and dynamics are a result of differences 
in fertility and mortality rates as well as international and 
internal migration. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
36 
 
Enquiry question 1: How do population structures vary? 
An in-depth study of the local place in which you live or study and one 
contrasting place 
Key idea Detailed content 
4B.2  Population 
characteristics 
vary from 
place to place 
and over time. 
a. There can be considerable variation in population 
characteristics (gender and ethnicity), both in and between 
settlements. 
b. Different levels of cultural diversity in places can be explained 
by social clustering, accessibility to key cities, physical factors 
and government planning policy. (A: actions by 
governments may foster or suppress diversity) 
c. Fertility and mortality rates, as well as international and 
internal migration, are changing the cultural characteristics of 
places. 
4B.3  How past and 
present 
connections 
have shaped 
the 
demographic 
and cultural 
characteristics 
of your chosen 
places. 
a. Global, international, national and regional influences have 
shaped the characteristics of your chosen places.  
(P: increasing roles of TNCs and IGOs) 
b. Your chosen places can be represented in a variety of 
different forms, giving contrasting images to those presented 
more formally and statistically. (7)  
c. How the lives of students and others have been influenced by 
continuity and change in the demographic and cultural 
characteristics of your chosen places. (1) 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
37 
 
Enquiry question 2: How do different people view diverse living spaces? 
Key idea Detailed content 
4B.4  Urban places 
are seen 
differently by 
different 
groups 
because of 
their lived 
experience of 
places and 
their 
perception of 
those places. 
a. During industrialisation, urban places were perceived by some 
as dangerous and threatening ( Victorian London); currently 
they could be seen as attractive because of their range of 
economic opportunities and the variety of social and leisure 
activities that attract young people and migrants. 
b. Some urban locations are perceived as undesirable by 
residents and/or outsiders due to crime rates, environmental 
quality, population characteristics and reputation, based on 
quantitative data but also due to lived experience and media 
representation. (2) 
c. Suburban and inner-city areas are perceived differently in 
terms of their desirability as places to live and work by 
contrasting demographic groups (by age, ethnicity,  
life-cycle stage). (3) (A: attitudes may vary) 
4B.5  Rural places 
are seen 
differently by 
different 
groups 
because of 
their lived 
experience of 
places and 
their 
perception of 
those places. 
a. Rural places are often perceived as idyllic because of their 
tranquillity, natural landscapes and historical and cultural 
associations ( Hardy’s ‘Wessex’). (4) (A: urban and rural 
residents may differ in their attitude to places) 
b. Some rural locations are perceived as undesirable by 
residents and/or outsiders because of remoteness, limited 
social opportunities, limited range of services, high transport 
costs, population characteristics and reputation based on 
quantitative data but also because of lived experience and 
media representation. 
c. Rural areas are viewed in different ways: from very remote 
areas to retirement villages and commuter villages.  
(A: attitudes may vary) 
4B.6  There is a 
range of ways 
to evaluate 
how people 
view their 
living spaces. 
a. The use of statistical evidence to determine whether people 
have a positive or negative image of your chosen local place.  
(5) 
b. Different media can provide contrasting evidence about the 
image different people have of your chosen local place. 
c. How different representations of your chosen local place could 
be used to influence the perception of cultural and 
demographic issues and conflict. (6) 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
38 
 
Enquiry question 3: Why are there demographic and cultural tensions in 
diverse places? 
Key idea Detailed content 
4B.7  Culture and 
society is now 
more diverse 
in the UK. 
a. Significant internal movement of people within the UK has 
created uneven demographic and cultural patterns.  
( London and the south-east) 
b. Culture and society in the UK has changed because of 
significant international migration flows from former colonies 
( Indian sub-continent and the West Indies) and from the 
European Union. (P: the main gatekeeper player 
affecting flows is the Government) 
c. Some international migrants choose to live in rural areas for 
specific reasons, creating social challenges and opportunities. 
( East Europeans in Lincolnshire) 
4B.8  Levels of 
segregation 
reflect cultural, 
economic and 
social variation 
and change 
over time. 
a. International migrants tend to live in distinctive places 
withsegregation closely related to economic indicators 
(income and employment) and social indicators (health, 
crime, ethnicity and education). (7) 
b. Diverse living spaces in urban areas have social 
characteristics that reflect ethnicity and culture in terms of 
distinctive retail outlets, places of worship and leisure.  
( Southall) (8) 
c. Experiences and perceptions of living spaces change over 
generations as communities have evolved economically and 
culturally. (A: intergenerational attitudes and norms 
may change from global cultural trends) 
4B.9  Changes to 
diverse places 
can lead to 
tension and 
conflict. 
a. Different community groups, local and national governments 
and TNCs may make changes to land uses that create 
challenges and opportunities for local people and their lived 
experience of place. (A: different actions may have 
different impacts) 
b. There are sometimes tensions over the diversity of living 
spaces, especially between long-term residents who seek 
continuity and recent in-migrants who may seek change. (9) 
( Luton) 
c. Changes to the built environment will bring benefits to some 
groups but can provoke hostility from other groups that 
perceive migrants as a threat to their culture. Migrants may 
experience a sense of social exclusion. ( Glasgow)  
(P: planners and developers may make controversial 
decisions) 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
39 
 
Enquiry question 4: How successfully are cultural and demographic issues 
managed? 
Key idea Detailed content 
4B.10  The 
management 
of cultural and 
demographic 
issues can be 
measured 
using a range 
of techniques. 
a. Management can be assessed using measures of income and 
employment (both relative and absolute changes) both in 
areas and by comparison to other areas. 
b. Social progress can be measured by reductions in inequalities 
both between areas and within them as well as improvements 
in social measures of deprivation and demographic changes 
(improvements in life expectancy). (8) 
c. Integration of different cultures can be measured by levels of 
political engagement through voter turnout, the development 
of local community groups and reductions in ‘hate’ crime and 
racism. 
4B.11  Different urban 
stakeholders 
have different 
criteria for 
assessing the 
success of 
managing 
change in 
diverse urban 
communities. 
a. A study of the contrasting ways in which different 
demographic and ethnic groups view an urban living space 
and the impact of national and local strategies in resolving 
issues ( Aik Saath in Slough). 
b. The changes that have taken place can be judged using a 
range of economic, social, demographic and environmental 
variables in the changing urban area. (F: changes may 
create differing legacies) 
c. Different stakeholders (local and national governments, local 
businesses and residents) will assess success using 
contrasting criteria depending on their role, the meaning of 
the place and the impact of change on both the reality and 
their image of that place. (10) (A: ‘success’ depends on 
the attitudes of different players)  
4B.12  Different rural 
stakeholders 
have different 
criteria for 
assessing the 
success of 
managing 
change in 
diverse rural 
communities. 
a. A study of the contrasting ways in which different 
demographic and ethnic groups view a rural living space and 
the impact of national and local strategies on a rural area  
( Lake District National Park Partnership). 
b. The changes that have taken place can be judged using a 
range of economic, social, demographic and environmental 
variables in the changing rural area. (F: changes may 
create differing legacies) 
c. Different stakeholders (local and national governments, local 
businesses and residents) will assess success using 
contrasting criteria, depending on the meaning of the place 
and the impact of change on both the reality and their image 
of that place. (A: ‘success’ depends on the attitudes of 
different players)  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
40 
Guidance for integrating geographical skills for Topic 4 Option 4B 
Quantitative and qualitative geographical skills must be developed in this topic. Particular 
weight must be given to qualitative approaches involved in representing place and to 
critically analysing the impacts of different media on place meanings and perceptions. The 
use of geospatial data must also be used to present place characteristics. The following 
guidance on integrating geographical skills gives suggestions for opportunities to meet 
these requirements. 
These skills are not exclusive to the topic areas under which they appear; students will need 
to be able to apply these skills across any suitable topic area throughout their course of 
study. Appendix 1 outlines the full range of geographical skills. 
(1) Investigation of social media to understand how people relate to the places where  
they live. 
(2) Use of GIS to represent and analyse crime data and to show variations in levels of 
crime across communities. 
(3) Interviews with local residents to interpret information representing cultural and 
demographic issues in a local place. 
(4) Interpretation of qualitative information (advertising copy, tourist agency material, local 
art exhibitions) to show both its significance and what it means about a chosen local 
place. 
(5) Testing of the strength of relationships through the use of scattergraphs and 
Spearman’s rank correlation.  
(6) Evaluation of different sources (music, photography, film, art, literature) and 
appreciation of why they create different representations and image of a local place.  
(7) Use of indexes to measure ethnic and cultural diversity. 
(8) Interpretation of photographic and map evidence showing ‘before and after’  
cross-sections. 
(9) Interpretation of oral accounts of the values and lived experiences of places from 
different interest groups and ethnic communities. 
(10) Analysis of contrasting newspaper reports about a change, including opinions about that 
change. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
41 
Area of study 3: Physical Systems and Sustainability 
Topic 5: The Water Cycle and Water Insecurity 
Overview 
Water plays a key role in supporting life on earth. The water cycle operates at a variety of 
spatial scales and also at short- and long-term timescales, from global to local. Physical 
processes control the circulation of water between the stores on land, in the oceans, in the 
cryosphere, and the atmosphere. Changes to the most important stores of water are a result 
of both physical and human processes. 
Water insecurity is becoming a global issue with serious consequences and there is a range 
of different approaches to managing water supply. 
Content 
Enquiry question 1: What are the processes operating within the 
hydrological cycle from global to local scale? 
Key idea Detailed content 
5.1  The global 
hydrological 
cycle is of 
enormous 
importance to 
life on earth 
a. The global hydrological cycle’s operation as a closed system 
(processes, stores and flows) driven by solar energy and 
gravitational potential energy. (1) 
b. The relative importance and size (percentage contribution) of 
the water stores (oceans, atmosphere, biosphere, cryosphere, 
groundwater and surface water) and annual fluxes between 
atmosphere, ocean and land. 
c. The global water budget limits water available for human use 
and water stores have different residence times; some stores 
are non-renewable (fossil water or cryosphere losses). 
5.2  A drainage basin 
is an open 
system within 
the global 
hydrological 
cycle. 
a. A drainage basin is a system of linked processes: inputs 
(precipitation patterns), flows (interception, infiltration, direct 
runoff, saturated overland flow, throughflow, percolation, 
groundwater flow) and outputs (evaporation, transpiration 
and channel flow). 
b. Physical factors within drainage basins determine the relative 
importance of inputs, flows and outputs (climate, soils, 
vegetation, geology, relief). 
c. Humans disrupt the drainage basin cycle by accelerating 
processes (deforestation, changing land use) and creating 
new water storage reservoirs or by abstracting water.  
( Amazonia) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
42 
 
Enquiry question 1: What are the processes operating within the 
hydrological cycle from global to local scale? 
Key idea Detailed content 
5.3  The hydrological 
cycle influences 
water budgets 
and river 
systems at a 
local scale. 
a. Water budgets which show the annual balance between inputs 
(precipitation) and outputs (evapotranspiration) and their 
impact on soil, water availability and are influenced by climate 
type ( tropical temperate or polar examples). (2) 
b. River regimes indicate the annual variation of discharge of a 
river and result from the impact of climate, geology and soils 
as shown in regimes from contrasting river basins ( Yukon, 
Amazon, Indus). (3) 
c. The shape of storm hydrographs depends on physical features 
of drainage basins (size, shape, drainage density, rock type, 
soil, relief and vegetation) as well as human factors (land use 
and urbanisation). (P: the role of planners in managing 
land use). (4) 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
43 
 
Enquiry question 2: What factors influence the hydrological system over 
short- and long-term timescales? 
Key idea Detailed content 
5.4  Deficits within 
the hydrological 
cycle result from 
physical 
processes but 
can have 
significant 
impacts. 
a. The courses of drought, both meteorological and hydrological: 
short-term precipitation deficit, longer term trends, and ENSO 
cycles. (5) (6) 
b. The contribution human activity makes to the risk of drought: 
over-abstraction of surface water resources and ground water 
aquifers ( Sahelian or Australia drought). 
c. The impacts of drought on ecosystem functioning (wetlands, 
forest stress) and the resilience of these ecosystems. 
5.5  Surpluses within 
the hydrological 
cycle can lead to 
flooding, with 
significant 
impacts for 
people. 
a. Meteorological causes of flooding, including intense storms 
leading to flash flooding, unusually heavy or prolonged 
rainfall, extreme monsoonal rainfall and snowmelt. (5) (6) 
b. Human actions that can exacerbate flood risk (changing land 
use within the river catchment, mismanagement of rivers 
using hard engineering systems.) 
c. Damage from flooding has both environmental impacts (soils 
and ecosystems) and socio-economic impacts (economic 
activity, infrastructure and settlement) ( UK flood events 
2007 or 2012). 
5.6  Climate change 
may have 
significant 
impacts on the 
hydrological 
cycle globally 
and locally. 
a. Climate change affects inputs and outputs within the 
hydrological cycle: trends in precipitation and evaporation.  
b. Climate change affects stores and flows, size of snow and 
glacier mass, reservoirs, lakes, amount of permafrost, soil 
moisture levels as well as rates of runoff and stream flow. 
c. Climate change resulting from short-term oscillations (ENSO 
cycles) and global warming increase the uncertainty in the 
system; this causes concerns over the security of water 
supplies. (F: projections of future drought and flood 
risk) 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
44 
 
Enquiry question 3: How does water insecurity occur and why is it 
becoming such a global issue for the 21st century? 
Key idea Detailed content 
5.7 There are 
physical causes 
and human 
causes of water 
insecurity. 
a. The growing mismatch between water supply and demand 
has led to a global pattern of water stress (below 1,700 m³ 
per person) and water scarcity (below 1000 m³ per  
person). (7) 
b. The causes of water insecurity are physical (climate 
variability, salt water encroachment at coast) as well as 
human (over abstraction from rivers, lakes and groundwater 
aquifers, water contamination from agriculture, industrial 
water pollution). 
c. The finite water resource faces pressure from rising demand 
(increasing population, improving living standards, 
industrialisation and agriculture), which is increasingly serious 
in some locations and is leading to increasing risk of water 
insecurity. (F: projections of future water scarcity) 
5.8  There are 
consequences 
and risks 
associated with 
water insecurity. 
a. The causes of and global pattern of physical water scarcity 
and economic scarcity and why the price of water  
varies globally. (8) 
b. The importance of water supply for economic development 
(industry, energy supply, agriculture) and human wellbeing 
(sanitation, health and food preparation); the environmental 
and economic problems resulting from inadequate water. 
c. The potential for conflicts to occur between users within a 
country, and internationally over local and trans-boundary 
water sources ( Nile or Mekong). (P: role of different 
players). (9) 
5.9  There are 
different 
approaches to 
managing water 
supply, some 
more sustainable 
than others. 
a. The pros and cons of the techno-fix of hard engineering 
schemes to include water transfers, mega dams and 
desalination plants ( water transfers in China). 
b. The value of more sustainable schemes of restoration of 
water supplies and water conservation (smart irrigation, 
recycling of water) ( Singapore). (A: contrasting 
attitudes to water supply) 
c. Integrated drainage basin management for large rivers  
( Nile or Colorado) and water sharing treaties and 
frameworks (United Nations Economic Commission for Europe 
(UNECE), Water Convention, Helsinki, and the Water 
Framework Directive and Hydropower, Berlin). (P: role of 
players in reducing water conflict risk) 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
45 
 
Guidance for integrating geographical skills for Topic 5 
Quantitative geographical skills must be developed in this topic, including understanding of 
simple mass balance, unit conversions, and the analysis and presentation of data. Qualitative 
approaches may be used if appropriate. The following guidance on integrating geographical 
skills gives suggestions for opportunities to meet these requirements. 
These skills are not exclusive to the topic areas under which they appear; students will need 
to be able to apply these skills across any suitable topic area throughout their course of 
study. Appendix 1 outlines the full range of geographical skills. 
(1) Use of diagrams showing proportional flows within systems. 
(2) Comparative analysis of river regime annual discharges. 
(3) Analysis and construction of Water Budget graphs. 
(4) Using comparative data, labelling of features of storm hydrographs. 
(5) Use of large database to study the pattern and trends in floods and  
droughts worldwide. 
(6) Interpretation of synoptic charts and weather patterns, leading to droughts and floods. 
(7) Use of a global map to analyse world water stress and scarcity. 
(8) Interpretation of water poverty indexes using diamond diagrams for countries at 
different levels of development. 
(9) Identify seasonal variations in the regime of international rivers, such as the Nile and 
the Mekong and assess impact of existing and potential dams. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
46 
Topic 6: The Carbon Cycle and Energy Security 
Overview 
A balanced carbon cycle is important in maintaining planetary health. The carbon cycle 
operates at a range of spatial scales and timescales, from seconds to millions of years. 
Physical processes control the movement of carbon between stores on land, the oceans and 
the atmosphere. Changes to the most important stores of carbon and carbon fluxes are a 
result of physical and human processes. Reliance on fossil fuels has caused significant 
changes to carbon stores and contributed to climate change resulting from anthropogenic 
carbon emissions. 
The water and carbon cycles and the role of feedbacks in and between the two cycles, 
provide a context for developing an understanding of climate change. 
Anthropogenic climate change poses a serious threat to the health of the planet. There is a 
range of adaptation and mitigation strategies that could be used, but for them to be 
successful they require global agreements as well as national actions. 
Content 
Enquiry question 1: How does the carbon cycle operate to maintain 
planetary health? 
Key idea Detailed content 
6.1  Most global 
carbon is locked 
in terrestrial 
stores as part of 
the long-term 
geological cycle 
(slow carbon 
cycle). 
a. The biogeochemical carbon cycle consists of carbon stores of 
different sizes (terrestrial, oceans and atmosphere), with 
annual fluxes between stores of varying size (measured in 
Pg/Gt), rates and on different timescales. (1) 
b. Most of the earth’s carbon is geological, resulting from the 
formation of sedimentary carbonate rocks (limestone) in the 
oceans and biologically derived carbon in shale, coal and 
other rocks. 
c. Rainwater becomes a weak carbonic acid when it absorbs 
carbon dioxide from the atmosphere that then reacts with 
silicate minerals. This chemical weathering process releases 
ions such as calcium, which are transported by rivers to the 
oceans, where organisms combine calcium with dissolved 
carbon to create calcium carbonate. Carbonate rock forms via 
sedimentation of dead organisms, and carbon dioxide is 
released back into the atmosphere by volcanism. 
6.2  Biological 
processes 
sequester carbon 
on land and in 
the oceans on 
shorter 
timescales (fast 
carbon cycle). 
a. Phytoplankton sequester atmospheric carbon during 
photosynthesis in surface ocean waters; carbonate 
shells/tests move into the deep ocean water through the 
carbonate pump and action of the thermohaline circulation. 
b. Terrestrial primary producers sequester carbon during 
photosynthesis; some of this carbon is returned to the 
atmosphere during respiration by consumer organisms. 
c. Biological carbon can be stored as dead organic matter in 
soils, or returned to the atmosphere via biological 
decomposition over several years. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
47 
 
Enquiry question 1: How does the carbon cycle operate to maintain 
planetary health? 
Key idea Detailed content 
6.3  A balanced 
carbon cycle is 
important in 
sustaining other 
earth systems 
but is 
increasingly 
altered by human 
activities. 
 
a. The concentration of atmospheric carbon (carbon dioxide and 
methane) strongly influences the natural greenhouse effect, 
which in turn determines the distribution of temperature and 
precipitation. (2) 
b. Ocean and terrestrial photosynthesis play an important role in 
regulating the composition of the atmosphere. Soil health is 
influenced by stored carbon, which is important for ecosystem 
productivity. 
c. The process of fossil fuel combustion has altered the balance 
of carbon pathways and stores with implications for climate, 
ecosystems and the hydrological cycle. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
48 
 
Enquiry question 2: What are the consequences for people and the 
environment of our increasing demand for energy? 
Key idea Detailed content 
6.4  Energy security 
is a key goal for 
countries, with 
most relying on 
fossil fuels. 
a. C onsumption (per capita and in terms of units of GDP) and 
energy mix (domestic and foreign, primary and secondary 
energy, renewable versus non-renewable). (3) 
b. Access to and consumption of energy resources depends on 
physical availability, cost, technology, public perception, level 
of economic development and environmental priorities  
( national comparisons: USA versus France). 
c. Energy players (P: role of TNCs, The Organisation of the 
Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), consumers, 
governments) have different roles in securing pathways and 
energy supplies. 
6.5  Reliance on fossil 
fuels to drive 
economic 
development is 
still the global 
norm. 
a. There is a mismatch between locations of conventional fossil 
fuel supply (oil, gas, coal) and regions where demand is 
highest, resulting from physical geography. 
b. Energy pathways (pipelines, transmission lines, shipping 
routes, road and rail) are a key aspect of security but can be 
prone to disruption especially as conventional fossil fuel 
sources deplete ( Russian gas to Europe). (4) 
c. The development of unconventional fossil fuel energy 
resources (tar sands, oil shale, shale gas, deep water oil) has 
social costs and benefits, implications for the carbon cycle, 
and consequences for the resilience of fragile environments. 
( Canadian tar sands, USA fracking, Brazilian deep water 
oil) (P: role of business in developing reserves, versus 
environmental groups and affected communities) 
6.6  There are 
alternatives to 
fossil fuels but 
each has costs 
and benefits. 
a. Renewable and recyclable energy (nuclear power, wind power 
and solar power) could help decouple fossil fuel from 
economic growth; these energy sources have costs and 
benefits economically, socially, and environmentally and in 
terms of their contribution they can make to energy security. 
( changing UK energy mix) 
b. Biofuels are an alternative energy source that are increasing 
globally; growth in biofuels however has implications for food 
supply as well as uncertainty over how ‘carbon neutral’ they 
are. ( Biofuels in Brazil) (5) 
c. Radical technologies, including carbon capture and storage 
and alternative energy sources (hydrogen fuel cells, electric 
vehicles) could reduce carbon emissions but uncertainty 
exists as to how far this is possible. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
49 
 
Enquiry question 3: How are the carbon and water cycles linked to the 
global climate system?  
Key idea Detailed content 
6.7  Biological carbon 
cycles and the 
water cycle are 
threatened by 
human activity. 
a. Growing demand for food, fuel and other resources globally 
has led to contrasting regional trends in land-use cover 
(deforestation, afforestation, conversion of grasslands to 
farming) affecting terrestrial carbon stores with wider 
implications for the water cycle and soil health. (6) 
b. Ocean acidification, as a result of its role as a carbon sink, is 
increasing due to fossil fuel combustion and risks crossing the 
critical threshold for the health of coral reefs and other 
marine ecosystems that provide vital ecosystem services. 
c. Climate change, resulting from the enhanced greenhouse 
effect, may increase the frequency of drought due to shifting 
climate belts, which may impact on the health of forests as 
carbon stores. ( Amazonian drought events) 
6.8  There are 
implications for 
human wellbeing 
from the 
degradation of 
the water and 
carbon cycles. 
a. Forest loss has implications for human wellbeing but there is 
some evidence that forest stores are being protected and 
even expanded in some locations (environmental Kuznets’ 
curve model). (A: attitudes of global consumers to 
environmental issues) 
b. Increased temperatures affect evaporation rates and the 
quantity of water vapour in the atmosphere with implications 
for precipitation patterns, river regimes and water stores 
(cryosphere and drainage basin stores) ( Arctic) 
(F: uncertainty of global projections). (7) 
c. Threats to ocean health pose threats to human wellbeing, 
especially in developing regions that depend on marine 
resources as a food source and for tourism and coastal 
protection. 
6.9  Further planetary 
warming risks 
large-scale 
release of stored 
carbon, requiring 
responses from 
different players 
at different 
scales. 
a. Future emissions, atmospheric concentration levels and 
climate warming are uncertain owing to natural factors (the 
role of carbon sinks), human factors (economic growth, 
population, energy sources) and positive feedback 
mechanisms (carbon release from peatlands and permafrost, 
and tipping points, including forest die back and alterations to 
the thermohaline circulation). (8) (F: uncertainty of global 
projections) 
b. Adaptation strategies for a changed climate (water 
conservation and management, resilient agricultural systems, 
land-use planning, flood-risk management) have different 
costs and risks. 
c. Re-balancing the carbon cycle could be achieved through 
mitigation (carbon taxation, renewable switching, energy 
efficiency, afforestation, carbon capture and storage, and 
solar radiation management) but this requires global scale 
agreement and national actions both of which have proved to 
be problematic. (A: attitudes of different countries, TNCs 
and people) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
50 
 
Guidance for integrating geographical skills for Topic 6 
Quantitative geographical skills must be developed in this topic, including understanding of 
simple mass balance, unit conversions and the analysis and presentation of data. Qualitative 
approaches may be used if appropriate. The following guidance on integrating geographical 
skills gives suggestions for opportunities to meet these requirements. 
These skills are not exclusive to the topic areas under which they appear; students will need 
to be able to apply these skills across any suitable topic area throughout their course of 
study. Appendix 1 outlines the full range of geographical skills.  
(1) Use of proportional flow diagrams showing carbon fluxes. 
(2) Use of maps showing global temperature and precipitation distribution. 
(3) Graphical analysis of the energy mix of different countries, including change over time. 
(4) Analysis of maps showing global energy trade and flows. 
(5) Comparisons of emissions from different energy source. 
(6) Using GIS to map land-use changes such as deforestation over time. 
(7) Analysis of climate model maps to identify areas at most risk from water shortages, 
floods in the future. 
(8) Plotting graphs of carbon dioxide levels, calculating means and rates of change. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
51 
Area of study 4: Human Systems and Geopolitics 
 
Topic 7: Superpowers 
Overview 
Superpowers can be developed by a number of characteristics. The pattern of dominance has 
changed over time. Superpowers and emerging superpowers have a very significant impact 
on the global economy, global politics and the environment. The spheres of influence 
between these powers are frequently contested, resulting in geopolitical implications. 
Content 
Enquiry question 1: What are superpowers and how have they changed 
over time? 
Key idea Detailed content 
7.1  Geopolitical 
power stems 
from a range of 
human and 
physical of 
characteristics of 
superpowers. 
a. Superpowers, emerging and regional powers can be defined 
using contrasting characteristics (economic, political, military, 
cultural, demographic and access to natural resources). (1) 
b. Mechanisms for maintaining power sit on a spectrum from 
‘hard’ to ‘soft’ power, which vary in their effectiveness. 
c. The relative importance of these characteristics and 
mechanisms for maintaining power has changed over time  
( China's ‘belt and road’ policy).  
7.2  Patterns of power 
change over time 
and can be 
 uni-, bi- or 
multi-polar. 
a. The maintenance of power during the imperial era by direct 
militarised colonial control (British Empire, multipolar world 
1919–1939). 
b. Multi-faceted, indirect control (political, economic, military, 
cultural) including neo-colonial mechanisms has become more 
important (Cold War era; emergence of China as a potential 
rival to the USA’s hegemony). (2) 
c. Different patterns of power bring varying degrees of 
geopolitical stability and risk. 
7.3  Emerging powers 
vary in their 
influence on 
people and the 
physical 
environment, 
which can 
change rapidly 
over time. 
a. A number of emerging countries, including Brazil, Russia, 
India and China (BRIC) and other G20 members, are 
increasingly important to global economic and political 
systems, as well as global environment governance (UN 
Climate Change Conference). 
b. Each has evolving strengths and weaknesses (economic, 
political, military, cultural, demographic and environmental) 
that might inhibit or advance their economic and geopolitical 
role in the future. 
c. Contrasting development theories (World Systems Theory, 
Dependency Theory, Modernisation Theory) can be used to 
help explain changing patterns of power. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
52 
 
Enquiry question 2: What are the impacts of superpowers on the global 
economy, political systems and the physical environment? 
Key idea Detailed content 
7.4 Superpowers have 
a significant 
influence over the 
global economic 
system. 
a. Superpowers attempt to control the global economy 
(promoting free trade and capitalism) through a variety of 
IGOs (World Bank, IMF, WTO, World Economic Forum 
(WEF)). (3) 
b. TNCs are dominant economic forces in the global economy 
and economic and cultural globalisation in terms of 
technology (patents) and trade patterns. (P: role of TNCs 
in maintaining power and wealth)  
c. Global cultural influence (the arts, food the media) and 
‘westernisation’ is an important aspect of power, linked to 
economic influence and technology. 
7.5  Superpowers and 
emerging nations 
play a key role in 
international 
decision making 
concerning people 
and the physical 
environment. 
a. Superpowers and emerging nations play a key role in global 
action (crisis response, conflict, climate change). (P: role of 
powerful countries as ‘global police’) 
b. Alliances, both military (North Atlantic Treaty Organisation 
(NATO), The Australia, New Zealand and United States 
Security Treaty (ANZUS) and economic (EU, United States-
Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA), ASEAN) and 
environmental (IPCC) increase interdependence and are 
important in geostrategy and global influence. 
c. The UN (Security Council, International Court of Justice, and 
peacekeeping missions and climate change conferences) are 
important to global geopolitical stability. (A: actions and 
attitudes of global IGOs) 
7.6  Global concerns 
about the physical 
environment are 
disproportionately 
influenced by 
superpower 
actions. 
a. Superpower resource demands (food, fossil fuels, and 
minerals) can cause environmental degradation and their 
carbon emissions contribute disproportionately to global 
warming. (4) 
b. There are differences in the willingness of superpowers to act 
( USA and China) to reduce carbon emissions and reach 
global agreements on environmental issues. (A: attitudes 
and actions of different countries) 
c. Future growth in middle-class consumption in emerging 
superpowers has implications for the availability and cost of 
key resources (rare earths, oil, staple grains and water), as 
well as for the physical environment. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
53 
 
Enquiry question 3: What spheres of influence are contested by 
superpowers and what are the implications of this? 
Key idea Detailed content 
7.7  Global influence 
is contested in a 
number of 
different 
economic, 
environmental 
and political 
spheres. 
a. Tensions can arise over the acquisition of physical resources 
(Arctic oil and gas) where ownership is disputed and 
disagreement exists over exploitation. (A: attitudes and 
actions in relation to resources) 
b. The global system of intellectual property rights can be 
undermined by counterfeiting, which strains trade relations 
and TNC investment. 
c. Political spheres of influence can be contested leading to 
tensions over territory and physical resources ( South and 
East China Seas) and in some cases resulting in open conflict 
( Western Russia/Eastern Europe) with implications for 
people and physical environments. 
7.8  Developing 
nations have 
changing 
relationships with 
superpowers with 
consequences for 
people and the 
physical 
environment. 
a. Developing economic ties between emerging powers and the 
developing world (China and African nations) increase 
interdependence, generate environmental impacts and bring 
opportunities and challenges. (P: role of emerging 
powers) 
b. The rising economic importance of certain Asian countries  
( China or India) on the global stage increases the 
geopolitical influence of the region but also creates economic 
and political tensions within the region. (5) 
c. Cultural, political, economic and environmental tensions in 
the Middle East represent an ongoing challenge to 
superpowers and emerging powers due to complex 
geopolitical relations combined with the supply of vital energy 
resources. (A: contrasting cultural ideologies) 
7.9  Existing 
superpowers face 
ongoing 
economic 
restructuring, 
which challenges 
their power. 
a. Economic problems (debt, unemployment, economic 
restructuring, social costs) represent an ongoing challenge to 
superpowers ( USA and EU). 
b. The economic costs of maintaining global military power 
(naval, nuclear, air power, intelligence services) and space 
exploration are questioned in some existing superpowers. 
c. The future balance of global power in 2030 and 2050 is 
uncertain and there are a range of possible outcomes 
(continued USA dominance, bi-polar and multi-polar 
structures). (F: uncertainty over future power 
structures) (6) 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
54 
Guidance for integrating geographical skills for Topic 7 
The following skills provide suggested opportunities for integrating the full range of skills 
outlined in the geographical skills appendix (Appendix 1). These skills are not exclusive to 
the topic areas under which they appear; students will need to be able to apply these skills 
across any suitable topic area throughout their course of study. 
(1) Constructing power indexes using complex data sets, including ranking and scaling. 
(2) Mapping past, present and future sphere of influence and alliances using world maps. 
(3) Using graphs of world trade growth using linear and logarithmic scales. 
(4) Mapping emissions and resource consumption using proportional symbols. 
(5) Plotting the changing location of the world’s economic centre of gravity on world maps. 
(6) Analysing future Gross Domestic Product (GDP) using data from different sources. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
55 
Topic 8: Global Development and Connections 
Option 8A: Health, Human Rights and Intervention 
Overview 
Traditional definitions of development are based largely on economic measures but have 
been increasingly challenged by broader definitions based on environmental, social and 
political quality of life with many new measures used to record progress at all scales in 
human rights and human welfare. There are variations in the norms and laws of both 
national and global institutions that impact on decisions made at all scales, from local to 
global. These decisions lead to a wide range of geopolitical interventions via international and 
national policies, from development aid through to military campaigns. 
The impact of geopolitical interventions on both human health and wellbeing and human 
rights is variable and contested, with some groups appearing to benefit disproportionately, 
which can lead to increasing inequalities and injustice.  
Content 
Enquiry question 1: What is human development and why do levels vary 
from place to place? 
Key idea Detailed content 
8A.1  Concepts of 
human 
development 
are complex 
and contested. 
a. Human development has traditionally been measured using 
the growth of GDP as an end in itself but the relationship 
between human contentment and levels of wealth and income 
is complex (Happy Planet Index) and many dominant western 
models are contested ( Sharia law or Bolivia under Evo 
Morales). (1) 
b. Improvements in environmental quality, health, life 
expectancy and human rights are seen by some (Rosling) as 
more significant goals for development while economic 
growth is often seen as the best means of delivering them. 
c. Education is central to economic development (human 
capital) and to the understanding and assertion of human 
rights. However, this view is not universally shared (attitudes 
to gender equality in education), so both access to education 
and standards of achievement vary greatly among countries 
(UNESCO). 
8A.2  There are 
notable 
variations in 
human health 
and life 
expectancy. 
a. There are considerable variations in health and life 
expectancy in the developing world that are explained by 
differential access to basic needs such as food, water supply 
and sanitation, and which impact particularly on levels of 
infant and maternal mortality. (2) 
b. Variations in health and life expectancy in the developed 
world are largely a function of differences in lifestyles, levels 
of deprivation and the availability, cost and effectiveness of 
medical care. (2) 
c. There are significant variations in health and life expectancy 
within countries ( UK or Brazil) that can be related to ethnic 
variations, income levels and inequalities, which in turn 
impact on lifestyles ( Indigenous peoples in Australia). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
56 
 
Enquiry question 1: What is human development and why do levels vary 
from place to place? 
Key idea Detailed content 
8A.3 Governments 
and 
International 
Government 
Organisations 
play a 
significant role 
in defining 
development 
targets and 
policies. 
a. The relationship between economic and social development is 
complex and dependent on decisions made by governments 
on the importance of social progress; this ranges from 
welfare states with high levels of social spending to 
totalitarian regimes run by elites with low levels of spending 
on health and education. (3) 
b. The dominant IGOs (World Bank, IMF, WTO) have 
traditionally promoted neo-liberal views of development 
based on the adoption of free trade, privatisation and 
deregulation of financial markets but also, recent 
programmes have been aimed at improving environmental 
quality, health, education and human rights. 
c. Progress against the United Nation’s Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs) has been mixed in terms of 
individual countries, global regions and targets; the UN post-
2015 development agenda expands on the MDGs, setting new 
goals to include sustainable development. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
57 
 
Enquiry question 2: Why do human rights vary from place to place? 
Key idea Detailed content 
8A.4  Human rights 
have become 
important 
aspects of both 
international 
law and 
international 
agreements. 
a. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) is a 
statement of intent and a framework for foreign policy 
statements to explain economic or military intervention but 
not all states have signed the Declaration. 
b. The European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) was 
drafted by the nations of the Council of Europe to help 
prevent conflict and integrated into the UK by the Human 
Rights Act of 1998; the ECHR remains controversial as some 
see it as an erosion of national sovereignty. 
c. The Geneva Convention forms a basis in international law for 
prosecuting individuals and organisations who commit war 
crimes and is endorsed by 196 countries; however few cases 
come to trial and over 150 countries continue to engage in 
torture. 
8A.5  There are 
significant 
differences 
between 
countries in 
both their 
definitions and 
protection of 
human rights. 
a. Some states () frequently invoke human rights in 
international forums and debates whilst others prioritise 
economic development over human rights and defend this 
approach (). 
b. Some superpowers and emerging powers have transitioned to 
more democratic governments but the degree of democratic 
freedom varies ( comparison of an authoritarian and a 
democratic system); the protection of human rights and 
degree of freedom of speech varies. 
c. Levels of political corruption vary and can be measured 
(Index of Corruption); high levels of corruption are a threat to 
human rights as the rule of law can be subverted. (4) 
8A.6  There are 
significant 
variations in 
human rights 
within 
countries, 
which are 
reflected in 
different levels 
of social 
development. 
a. In some states (post-colonial states) there are significant 
groups, defined by gender and/or ethnicity that have had 
fewer rights than the dominant group. 
b. Differences in rights are frequently reflected in differences in 
levels of health and education ( First Nations in Canada). 
c. A demand for equality from both women and ethnic groups 
has been an important part of the history of many states in 
recent years ( Afghanistan, Australia, Bolivia) with progress 
taking place at different rates. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
58 
 
Enquiry question 3: How are human rights used as arguments for political 
and military intervention? 
Key idea Detailed content 
8A.7  There are 
different forms 
of geopolitical 
intervention in 
defence of 
human rights. 
a. There is a wide range of geopolitical interventions to address 
development and human rights issues: development aid, 
trade embargoes, military aid, indirect and direct military 
action. 
b. Interventions are promoted by IGOs, national governments 
and NGOs (Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch) but 
there is seldom consensus about the validity of these 
interventions. 
c. Some Western governments frequently condemn human 
rights violations and use them as conditions for offering aid, 
negotiating trade agreements, and as a reason for military 
intervention, which challenge ideas of national sovereignty 
(). 
8A.8  Some 
development is 
focused on 
improving both 
human rights 
and human 
welfare but 
other 
development 
has very 
negative 
environmental 
and cultural 
impacts. 
a. Development aid takes many forms from charitable gifts to 
address the impacts of hazards ( Haiti) administered both 
by NGOs ( Oxfam or Christian Aid) and national 
governments, to IGOs offering loans. (5) 
b. The impact of development aid is contested, successes 
include progress in dealing with life-threatening conditions 
(malaria) and improvements in some aspects of human rights 
(gender equality) but critics suggest that it encourages 
dependency, and promotes corruption and the role of the elite 
at the expense of human rights and minority groups. (6) 
c. Some economic development, both by superpowers and 
TNCs, has very serious impacts on the environment in which 
minority groups live and disregards their human rights to 
their land and culture ( oil in the Niger Delta or Dakota and 
Keystone XL pipeline, and land acquisitions by TNCs in 
Ethiopia). (7) 
8A.9  Military aid and 
both direct and 
indirect 
military 
intervention 
are frequently 
justified in 
terms of 
human rights. 
a. Global strategic interests might drive military interventions 
but are often justified by the protagonists in terms of human 
rights (). 
b. Military aid, both in terms of training personnel and weapons 
sales, is sometimes used to support countries that 
themselves have questionable human rights records (). 
c. Direct military intervention is part of a ’war on terror’, which 
is partially justified as promoting human rights () but is 
compromised by the use of torture by combatant states that 
have signed the Declaration of Human Rights (). 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
59 
 
Enquiry question 4: What are the outcomes of geopolitical interventions in 
terms of human development and human rights? 
Key idea Detailed content 
8A.10  There are 
several ways 
of measuring 
the success of 
geopolitical 
interventions. 
a. Measurements of success comprise a wide range of variables, 
including improvements in health, life expectancy, 
educational levels, gender equality, freedom of speech and 
successful management of refugees as well as increases in 
GDP per capita. (8) 
b. For some governments and IGOs, the introduction of 
democratic institutions is deemed important and freedom of 
expression is seen as central to the development of 
democratic and capitalist societies. 
c. For other countries, () success is measured in terms of 
economic growth with less attention to holistic development 
(human wellbeing) or human rights and the development of 
democratic institutions.  
8A.11  Development 
aid has a 
mixed record 
of success. 
a. The relationship of aid, development, health and human 
rights is unclear, with relative success stories in some states 
( Botswana or Ebola in West Africa) contrasted with relative 
failure in other states ( Haiti, Iraq). 
b. In some states that receive substantial development aid, 
economic inequalities have increased while in other states 
economic inequalities have decreased; this in turn impacts on 
human development including health and life expectancy. (9) 
c. The extent to which superpowers use development aid as an 
extension of their foreign policies and judge success in terms 
of access to resources, political support in IGOs and formation 
of military alliances. (10) 
8A.12  Military 
interventions, 
both direct and 
indirect, have 
a mixed record 
of success. 
a. The recent history of military interventions, both direct and 
indirect, suggest that there are significant costs, including 
loss of sovereignty and human rights () and contrasts 
between short-term gains with long-term costs (). 
b. Other non-military interventions may have a stronger record 
of improving both human rights and development  
( UN Women or UNICEF). 
c. Lack of action also has global consequences () which may 
impact negatively on progress in environmental, political and 
social development (human wellbeing and human rights). 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
60 
 
Guidance for integrating geographical skills for Topic 8 Option 8A 
Students must use both quantitative and qualitative skills in this topic. The following 
guidance on integrating geographical skills gives suggestions for opportunities to meet these 
requirements. 
These skills are not exclusive to the topic areas under which they appear; students will need 
to be able to apply these skills across any suitable topic area throughout their course of 
study. Appendix 1 outlines the full range of geographical skills.  
(1) Comparison of different measurements of development using ranked data. 
(2) Use of scatter graphs and correlation techniques to describe the relationship between 
health and life expectancy and other indicators of development. 
(3) Use of proportional circles to show the relative size of government spending and the 
share of that spending devoted to welfare, health and education across developing, 
emerging and developed nations. 
(4) Use qualitative and quantitative indicators to derive an index of corruption and show 
this on global maps to compare variations in levels of corruption with types of 
government. 
(5) Use of flow-lines on global maps to show both the direction and level of aid from donor 
to recipient global regions. 
(6)  Evaluating source material, including newspaper articles and marketing material to 
determine the impact of development aid. 
(7)  Interpreting images to evaluate the impact of economic development on the 
environment minority groups live in. 
(8) Critical analysis of source material to identify possible reasons for error in the 
assessment of success for interventions in the management of refugees. 
(9) Using Gini Coefficient and income or wealth proportion for quintiles or deciles of the 
population to describe inequalities in and between nations. 
(10) Critical analysis of source materials to identify possible misuse of data in the qualitative 
assessment of success for military interventions such as Iraq, Afghanistan and Libya. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
61 
Topic 8: Global Development and Connections 
Option 8B: Migration, Identity and Sovereignty 
Overview 
Globalisation involves movements of capital, goods and people. Tensions can result between 
the logic of globalisation, with its growing levels of environmental, social and economic 
interdependence among people, economies and nation states and the traditional definitions 
of national sovereignty and territorial integrity. International migration not only changes the 
ethnic composition of populations but also changes attitudes to national identity. At the same 
time, nationalist movements have grown in some places challenging dominant models of 
economic change and redefining ideas of national identity. 
Global governance has developed to manage a number of common global issues 
(environmental, social, political and economic) and has a mixed record in its success in 
dealing with them. It has promoted growth and political stability for some people in some 
places whilst not benefiting others. Unequal power relations have tended to lead to unequal 
environmental, social and economic outcomes. 
Content 
Enquiry question 1: What are the impacts of globalisation on international 
migration? 
Key idea Detailed content 
8B.1  Globalisation 
has led to an 
increase in 
migration both 
within 
countries and 
among them. 
a. Globalisation has caused extremely significant changes in the 
global economic system, changing the pattern of demand for 
labour; this has encouraged both rural-urban migration within 
countries ( China) and international migration between 
countries ( EU-Schengen). 
b. Between 3–4% of the global population live outside their 
country of birth but this proportion varies greatly between 
countries because of different policies relating to international 
migration and levels of engagement with the global economy 
( Singapore or Japan or Australia).  
c. The pattern of international migration is changing and will 
continue to change because environmental, economic and 
political events affect both the source areas of many migrants 
and their destinations; this results in flows of economic 
migrants, refugees and asylum seekers. (1) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
62 
 
Enquiry question 1: What are the impacts of globalisation on international 
migration? 
Key idea Detailed content 
8B.2  The causes of 
migration are 
varied, 
complex and 
subject to 
change. 
a. Most migrants move for work or to re-join family members; 
there are other significant causes, including displacement of 
refugees due to conflict and poverty in their regions of origin 
( migrants crossing the Mediterranean). (2) 
b. Economic theory suggests that economic efficiency is 
maximised when goods (free trade), capital (deregulated 
financial markets) and labour (open-borders) can move freely 
across international borders but this poses serious challenges 
for national identity and sovereignty. 
c. The movement of labour is unrestricted within many nation 
states to ensure efficient allocation of resources ( regional 
movements in the UK) and the same logic applies for some 
global regions (EU) but does not yet apply at a global level. 
8B.3  The 
consequences 
of international 
migration are 
varied and 
disputed. 
a. Migration changes the cultural and ethnic composition of 
nation states but the integration of migrants varies both 
between nations and within them. 
b. Migration causes political tensions because of differences in 
perceptions of the social, economic, cultural and demographic 
impacts ( Labour flows across the Mexico-US border and 
between EU states). (3) 
c. There are variations in the ability of people to migrate across 
national borders according to levels of skill and income; and 
opportunities, including the presence or absence of controls 
and international borders. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
63 
 
Enquiry question 2: How are nation states defined and how have they 
evolved in a globalising world? 
Key idea Detailed content 
8B.4  Nation states 
are highly 
varied and 
have very 
different 
histories. 
a. National sovereign states vary greatly in their ethnic, cultural 
and linguistic unity ( Iceland compared to Singapore); this 
results from their history of population growth, their degree 
of isolation and the role of migration. (4) 
b. Many national borders are a consequence of physical 
geography and historical development; other borders are a 
result of colonial history and might not take account of 
different ethnic or religious groups ( Iraq or Rwanda), which 
can lead to problems of sovereignty and legitimacy. 
c. There are many contested borders ( Ukraine/Russia) and 
not all nation states are universally recognised as such  
( Taiwan) which can lead to both potential conflict and 
population movements. 
8B.5 Nationalism 
has played a 
role in the 
development 
of the modern 
world. 
a. 19th-century nationalism was important in the development 
of empires and a source of conflict in Europe and beyond as 
other nations became part of larger empires ( British Raj in 
India). 
b. Since 1945, many new nation states have emerged as 
European empires disintegrated ( 1960s ‘wind of change’ in 
Africa); the transition to independence frequently involved 
conflicts that were costly environmentally, economically and 
in human terms ( Viet-Nam or Sudan). 
c. Patterns of migration between former colonies and the 
imperial core country are still evident and important in 
changing the ethnic composition and cultural heterogeneity of 
those countries. (5) 
8B.6  Globalisation 
has led to the 
deregulation of 
capital markets 
and the 
emergence of 
new state 
forms. 
a. Globalisation has encouraged the growth of states that have 
low-tax regimes which provide havens for the profits for TNCs 
and homes for wealthy expatriates. 
b. Most governments and IGOs have accepted the emergence of 
tax-havens although many NGOs have raised objections. 
c. Growing global inequalities have been recognised as a major 
threat to the sustainability of the global economic system and 
some governments have promoted alternative models  
( Bolivia or Ecuador). (6) 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
64 
 
Enquiry question 3: What are the impacts of global organisations on 
managing global issues and conflicts? 
Key idea Detailed content 
8B.7 Global 
organisations 
are not new 
but have been 
important in 
the post-1945 
world. 
a. The United Nations was the first post-war IGO to be 
established and has grown in importance; its role in global 
governance is affected by the different geopolitical visons of 
members of the Security Council and its multiple functions in 
managing global environmental, socio-economic and political 
problems. 
b. Interventions by the UN through the use of economic 
sanctions and direct military intervention have been made in 
defence of human rights but have a mixed record of success.  
( Trade Embargo Iran or UN forces in Congo). 
c. Some member states (US, UK) have operated independently 
of the UN in intervening in countries labelled as ‘fragile states’ 
or to conduct a ‘war on terror’ with profound impacts on 
geopolitical relations and global stability. 
8B.8 IGOs 
established 
after the 
Second World 
War have 
controlled the 
rules of world 
trade and 
financial flows. 
a. The IMF, WB and WTO were established by the WWII allied 
nations and have been important in maintaining the 
dominance of ‘western’ capitalism, global economic 
management and trade policy (free trade). 
b. Global borrowing rules and trade policies have been especially 
effective in delivering growth to the developed world, but the 
impact of Structural Adjustment and HIPC policies on the 
developing world’s economies and economic sovereignty is 
disputed ( Jamaica’s structural adjustment programme).  
c. Membership of global trade and financial IGOs is almost 
universal, as a result of the dominance of these 
organisations, but regional groupings have emerged in the 
form of trading blocs ( NAFTA/SEATO) and in some cases 
(EU) there has been a movement to closer political unity.  
8B.9 IGOs have 
been formed to 
manage the 
environmental 
problems 
facing the 
world, with 
varying 
success. 
a. G lobal environmental issues including issues concerning the 
quality of the atmosphere and biosphere ( Montreal Protocol 
on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer) and biosphere 
( Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species 
of Wild Fauna and Flora CITES). (7) 
b. IGOs have been involved in developing laws for managing 
oceans ( UN Convention on the Law of the Sea) and 
international rivers ( Helsinki Water Convention rules) as 
well as monitoring the state of the environment  
( Millennium Ecosystem Assessment). 
c. IGO management also includes responsibility for Antarctica as 
a continent of peace and science ( Antarctic Treaty 
System). 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
65 
 
Enquiry question 4: What are the threats to national sovereignty in a more 
globalised world? 
Key idea Detailed content 
8B.10 National 
identity is an 
elusive and 
contested 
concept. 
a. Nationalism remains a powerful force; it is reinforced through 
education, sport and by political parties stressing loyalty to 
both the institutions and the ideals of nation states. 
b. Identity and loyalty has historically been tied to distinctive 
legal systems, methods of governance, national ‘character’ or 
even a landscape ( The English Countryside). 
c. Most countries are multi-national with many contrasting 
ethnic groups; questions of national identity and loyalties are 
therefore complex, especially in an era of globalisation. 
8B.11  There are 
challenges to 
national 
identity. 
a. Many UK-based companies are foreign owned ( EDF or 
Jaguar Land Rover (JLR)), making ‘Made in Britain’ an 
increasingly complex idea. (8) 
b. ‘ Westernisation’ is often dominated by US cultural values 
through the operation of large corporations in both retailing 
and entertainment; this, in turn, promotes a distinctive view 
of the benefits the dominant capitalist model. 
c. Ownership of property, land and businesses in countries is 
increasingly non-national ( Qatari and Russian property in 
London and US or Indian or Chinese ownership of TNCs), 
which impacts on national identity. (9) 
8B.12  There are 
consequences 
of disunity 
within nations. 
a. There are strong nationalist movements seeking to create 
independent, smaller states whilst remaining within larger 
trading groups ( Catalonia or Scotland in the EU). 
b. There are significant political tensions in the BRIC and other 
emerging nations resulting from the uneven pattern of the 
costs and benefits of globalisation. 
c. The role of the state is variable and national identity is not 
always strong, especially in ‘fragile states’ where there are 
stark differences between the politically and economically 
powerful elite, foreign investment groups and the wider 
population ( Somalia). (10) 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
66 
Guidance for integrating geographical skills for Topic 8 Option 8B 
Students must use both quantitative and qualitative skills in this topic. The following 
guidance on integrating geographical skills gives suggestions for opportunities to meet these 
requirements. 
These skills are not exclusive to the topic areas under which they appear; students will need 
to be able to apply these skills across any suitable topic area throughout their course of 
study. Appendix 1 outlines the full range of geographical skills.  
(1) Use of flow-lines on global maps showing flows, both the direction and number of 
migrants among global regions. 
(2) Interpreting oral accounts from migrants to investigate the cause of migration. 
(3) Interpreting a range of opinions on the contribution of migrants to the culture and 
social life of two contrasting nations. 
(4) Use of divided bar graphs to compare the ethnic diversity of countries. 
(5) Comparison of global maps of languages and colonial histories to analyse relationship 
between them (Anglophone, Francophone and Lusophone). 
(6) Using the Gini coefficient and income/wealth proportions for deciles of the population to 
describe inequalities within and between nation states. 
(7) Evaluating source material, including newspaper articles, to determine the impact of 
IGOs managing global environmental issues. 
(8) Use of proportional circles to show size of output and level of foreign ownership of 
different economic sectors. 
(9) Critical analysis of a variety of source material to identify possible reasons for errors in 
the assessment of the costs and benefits of foreign ownership (property land and 
businesses). 
(10) Critical analysis of source material to identify possible misuse of data in the assessment 
of role of the state and the success in promoting national identity. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
67 
Fieldwork 
Overview 
Students are required to complete a minimum of four days of fieldwork. 
This fieldwork must relate to processes in both physical and human geography. It must also 
provide an introduction to the nature and process of a high-quality geographical enquiry. 
Full details of the required fieldwork skills are provided in Appendix 2: Fieldwork skills. 
Fieldwork statement 
Centres will be required to provide evidence of this fieldwork (which can include days 
undertaken as part of a separate AS Level in Geography) in the form of a written fieldwork 
statement. See Appendix 8: Fieldwork statement.  
Pearson will publish the final deadline date for submission of this form on our website each 
year. Failure to return the fieldwork statement on time will constitute malpractice on the part 
of the centre. 
Relationship between the fieldwork and the independent 
investigation 
The fieldwork will enable students to develop skills that they can use in their independent 
investigation. 
Students may, but are not required, to use data collected in their four days’ fieldwork as part 
of their independent investigation. However, it is also possible to carry out the independent 
investigation on a separate topic with new data collected. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
68 
Non-examination assessment: Independent 
Investigation 
Overview 
The purpose of this non-examination assessment is to test students’ skills in independent 
investigation. Students are required to undertake an independent investigation that involves 
(but which need not be restricted to) fieldwork. The focus of the investigation must be 
derived from the specification the student is studying. The guidance for word length is  
3000-4000 words.  
The student defines a question or issue relating to the compulsory or optional content. The 
student’s investigation will incorporate fieldwork data (collected individually or as part of a 
group) and own research and/or secondary data. The student’s report will evidence 
independent analysis and evaluation of data, presentation of data findings and extended 
writing. 
Content 
The independent investigation may relate to human or physical geography or it may 
integrate them.  
The independent investigation must: 
● be based on a question or issue defined and developed by the student individually to 
address aims, questions and/or hypotheses relating to any of the compulsory or optional 
content 
● incorporate field data and/or evidence from field investigations, collected individually or in 
groups 
● draw on the student's own research, including their own field data and, if relevant, 
secondary data sourced by the student 
● require the student independently to contextualise, analyse and summarise findings and 
data 
● involve the individual drawing of conclusions and their communication by means of 
extended writing and the presentation of relevant data. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
69 
The table below shows a suitable A Level Geography route to enquiry that forms the 
student’s independent investigation. 
 
Stage Description 
Purpose, identification of a 
suitable 
question/aim/hypothesis 
and developing a focus 
Identify appropriate field research questions/aims/hypotheses, 
based on their knowledge and understanding of relevant 
aspects of physical and/or human geography. Research the 
relevant literature sources linked to possible fieldwork 
opportunities presented by the environment, considering their 
practicality and relationship to compulsory and optional 
content. Understand the nature of the current literature 
research relevant to the focus. This should be clearly and 
appropriately referenced within the written report. 
Designing the fieldwork 
methodologies, research 
and selection of 
appropriate equipment 
Consideration of how to observe and record phenomena in the 
field and to design appropriate data-collection strategies taking 
account of sampling and the frequency and timing of 
observation. Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of 
how to select practical field methodologies (primary) 
appropriate to their investigation (may include a combination 
of qualitative and quantitative techniques). 
Information collation and 
data representation and 
analysis 
Know how to use an appropriate diagrams, graphs and maps, 
and using geospatial technologies to select and present 
relevant aspects of the investigation outcomes. 
Analysis and explanation 
of information 
Use techniques appropriate for analysing field data and 
research information. Demonstrate the ability to write a 
coherent analysis of fieldwork findings and results linked to a 
specific geographical focus. 
Conclusions and critical 
reflection on methods and 
results 
Use knowledge and understanding to interrogate and interpret 
meaning from their investigation (theory, concepts, 
comparisons), through the significance of conclusions. 
Demonstrate the ability to interrogate and critically examine 
field data (including any measurement errors) in order to 
comment on its accuracy and/or the extent to which it is 
representative and reliable. 
Recognising the wider 
geographical context 
Explain how the results relate to the wider geographical 
context and use the experience to extend geographical 
understanding. Show an understanding of the ethical 
dimensions of field research. 
 
Learning hours for the independent investigation are not specified because the process of 
producing the report is iterative and undertaken independently. 
The independent investigation report may be completed at school/college, or at home (or 
other location outside school/college), or at a combination of both. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
70 
Independent Investigation controls relating to student 
independence and teacher guidance to students  
The rationale for the following rules is given in Appendix 13. 
Guidance permitted at different stages: 
● Investigation title stage (guidance and approval) 
● Planning and investigation stage (guidance and approval) 
Teachers: 
Can: 
● provide broad parameters for candidates’ investigation proposals (including themes from 
the specification, locations, availability of equipment, time constraints); 
● explain what independence means (see table in Appendix 6). 
● advise on health and safety considerations, the use of equipment and potential ethical 
concerns. 
● discuss with candidates their initial exploratory planning and tentative investigation titles. 
Must:  
● confirm that the provisional title has the potential to meet the assessment criteria and 
offer general guidance on any necessary amendments.  
● review each candidate’s Geography Independent Investigation Form. Within this review 
teachers should ensure that the proposed investigation can suitably access the 
specification requirements and give general guidance on the methodology and analytical 
tools that the candidate plans to use. 
● promote good practice such as referencing and using a bibliography system. 
● store work securely once it is handed in for formal assessment.  
Must not2:  
● provide candidates with a choice of titles or tasks from which candidates then choose.  
● give detailed feedback to individual candidates about how to improve work to meet the 
assessment criteria. The guidance provided prior to final submission should only enable 
candidates to take the initiative in making amendments, rather than detailing what 
amendments should be made. This means that teachers must not provide templates and 
model answers for the work of specific candidates.  
● mark work provisionally and share that mark so that the candidate may then improve it.  
● return work to candidates after it has been submitted and marked.  
● give guidance on how to make improvements to the draft in order to meet the assessment 
criteria so that candidates are no longer engaged in independent learning. 
 
2 This section applies also to third party fieldwork providers. Teachers must ensure that at all times they 
remain confident in the authenticity and independence of the candidate’s work. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
71 
 
If teachers give any assistance which goes beyond general advice, for example3: 
● provide detailed specific guidance on how to improve drafts to meet the assessment 
criteria; 
● give detailed specific guidance on errors and omissions which limits candidates’ 
opportunities to show initiative themselves; 
● intervene personally to improve the presentation or content of work; 
● provide primary or secondary data not collected by the candidate either individually or as 
part of a group 
then they must record this assistance and take it into account when marking the work. 
Annotation should be used to explain how marks were applied in the context of the additional 
assistance given. 
If teachers and/or third party fieldwork providers give specific guidance which goes beyond 
general guidance and do not take it into account when marking the work, or record it, this 
will be considered as malpractice. If malpractice is suspected, the Awarding Organisation will 
investigate. If malpractice is found to have taken place a penalty will be applied dependent 
on the circumstances and severity of the malpractice. 
For full information regarding malpractice please see the JCQ document ‘Suspected 
Malpractice in Examinations and Assessments’. 
Examples of specific guidance and general guidance are given in Appendix 14, page 117. 
These examples are not exhaustive.  
Description of the level of independence at each stage of the investigation  
Appendix 6 gives descriptions which, although they do not infer anything in the way of marks 
allocated for each stage of the investigation, are to specify the level of independence 
required at different stages. 
Note that the level of independence at each stage is the minimum required (i.e. where 
collaboration is allowed it is not mandatory and candidates may work alone). 
Levels of independence: 
● Collaboration allowed - candidates may work as a class/group/pair, 
● Independent work – candidates must work alone 
If candidates collaborate (where independence is expected) and/or are given assistance 
beyond the parameters indicated in the table below, then the teacher must record this on the 
Geography Independent Investigation Form and take it into account when marking the work. 
Failure to do so will be considered as malpractice. If malpractice is suspected the Awarding 
Organisation will investigate. If malpractice is found to have taken place a penalty will be 
given dependent on the circumstances and severity of the malpractice. 
For full information regarding malpractice please see the JCQ document ‘Suspected 
Malpractice in Examinations and Assessments’. 
Health and safety 
All centres must comply with the new requirements (2011) of relevant legislation and codes 
of practice, including the Department for Education health and safety guidance for schools 
(www.education.gov.uk/schools/adminandfinance/healthandssafety) and the Health and 
Safety Executive – School trips and outdoor learning activities 
(www.hse.gov.uk/services/education/school-trips.pdf). 
 
3 First three bullet points as per the JCQ Instructions for conducting non-examination assessment, 
section 4.2. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
72 
Centres should also develop their own mechanisms so that students know the importance of 
ensuring their own safety and that of others. This could include developing risk assessments 
as part of the preparation for fieldwork, for example by using Google Maps and Google 
StreetView to assess likely hazards and risk. Students who might be lone working should be 
provided with additional information and guidance and the centre must have suitable policies 
and procedures for lone working. 
Resources 
Students must have equal access to IT resources. Students should have access to a range of 
resources, literature and texts to enable them to make choices as required for their research 
task. 
Storing students’ work 
Where students are completing the assignment over a number of sessions, at the end of 
each session their work must be saved and kept securely. 
Word count 
It is recommended that students write between 3000 and 4000 words for their independent 
investigation. Students will not be specifically penalised on the basis of the length of their 
written report. However, excessively high or low word counts may restrict students’ ability to 
evidence the skills outlined in the marking criteria. Students must sign the candidate 
declaration in both the Geography independent investigation form (Appendix 5) and Mark 
sheet (Appendix 7). 
Submission of the independent investigation report 
The student’s completed individual investigation report should be submitted to Pearson. The 
original Non-examination assessment Authentication Sheet must be included. 
Independent Investigation plan guidance service  
Pearson provides a free student planning guidance service. Please see our website for further 
details. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
73 
Assessment, internal standardisation and moderation 
Candidates’ investigations must be internally-assessed by centres, annotated to indicate how 
and why marks have been awarded, and internally-standardised, following the procedures 
specified in section 6.1 and 6.2 of the JCQ Instructions for conducting non-exam 
assessments. The independent investigation is then externally moderated. There is a 
maximum of 70 marks available for the independent investigation. Teachers should mark the 
independent investigation using the assessment criteria on the following pages. Teachers 
may annotate students’ work but should also include any comments on the Geography 
independent investigation form (see Appendix 5) to justify the marks awarded. 
Where marking has been carried out by more than one teacher in a centre, there must be a 
process of internal standardisation carried out to ensure that there is a consistent application 
of the assessment criteria. 
Marks awarded by the centre will be subject to external moderation by Pearson. Moderation 
will ensure consistency with national standards and will include a review of assignments to 
ensure that the assignment-setting rules have been correctly applied by centres. Pearson will 
notify centres of the students whose work has been selected for moderation. This sample will 
take cohort size into account. 
If the moderation indicates that centre assessment does not reflect national standards, an 
adjustment will be made to students’ final marks to compensate. 
For further information please refer to the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ) Instructions 
for Conducting Non-examined Assessments on the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk. The 
assessment of this qualification must comply with these instructions. 
Non-examination assessment: assessment criteria 
Teachers must mark students’ work using the following assessment criteria. 
Marking guidance 
● All students must receive the same treatment. Teachers must mark the last student in 
exactly the same way as they mark the first. 
● The assessment criteria descriptors should be used to assess which mark range students 
work best fits. When this has been determined, a decision must be taken on whether the 
work is placed at the ‘bottom’, ‘middle’ or ‘top’ of this mark range. A mark can then be 
confidently awarded. 
● Mark schemes should be applied positively. Students must be rewarded for what they 
have shown they can do rather than be penalised for omissions. 
● All the marks on the mark scheme are designed to be awarded. Teachers should always 
award full marks if deserved, i.e. if the answer matches the mark scheme. Teachers 
should be prepared to award zero marks if the student’s response is not worthy of credit 
according to the mark scheme. 
● Centres must internally moderate and cross-standardise work to ensure fairness, accuracy 
and reliability. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
74 
 
  Purpose of the Independent Investigation  
(12 marks) 
(AO1: 4 marks, AO2: 4 marks and AO 3: 4 marks) 
Level Mark Descriptor  
 0 No rewardable material. 
Level 1 1–4 ● Demonstrates isolated elements of geographical knowledge and 
understanding of location, geographical theory and comparative 
context, which are frequently irrelevant or inaccurate. (AO1) 
● May attempt to apply understanding to find links between the 
investigation’s context and a broader geographical context but links 
are irrelevant with frequent inaccuracies. (AO2) 
● May attempt to investigate frequently irrelevant and narrow range of 
geographical sources in order to identify/obtain geographical 
information and data that is frequently inaccurate and only 
occasionally supports the investigation; the aim, question or 
hypothesis is generic or unlinked to research information, and provides 
an unfocused framework for investigation, with flawed consideration of 
manageability and/or scale; planned enquiry process is limited in 
clarity and structure. (AO3) 
Level 2 5–8 ● Demonstrates geographical knowledge and understanding of location, 
geographical theory and comparative context which is relevant but 
narrow or incomplete, and may include some inaccuracies. (AO1) 
● Applies understanding to find links between the investigation’s context 
and a broader geographical context; links are mainly relevant and 
coherent but may include some inaccuracies. (AO2) 
● Investigates a range of mainly relevant geographical sources in order 
to identify/obtain mainly accurate geographical information and data 
that supports most parts of the investigation; research information is 
used to construct a generally valid aim, question or hypothesis that 
provides a mostly appropriate framework for investigation with some 
consideration of manageability and/or scale; planned enquiry process 
is adequately structured and clear. (AO3) 
Level 3 9–12 ● Demonstrates accurate and relevant geographical knowledge and 
understanding of location, geographical theory and comparative 
context throughout. (AO1) 
● Applies understanding to find coherent and relevant links between the 
investigation’s context and a broader geographical context. (AO2) 
● Investigates a wide range of relevant geographical sources in order to 
identify/obtain accurate geographical information and data that 
support the investigation; research information is used to construct a 
justified aim, question or hypothesis that provides an appropriate 
framework for investigation at a manageable scale; planned enquiry 
process is logically structured and comprehensive. (AO3) 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
75 
 
  Field Methodologies and Data Collection  
(10 marks) 
(AO3: 10 marks) 
Level Mark Descriptor  
 0 No rewardable material. 
Level 1 1–3 ● An inappropriate balance between range and depth of methods chosen 
to collect data and information relevant to the geographical focus. 
(AO3) 
● A sampling framework is absent or is not relevant to the topic being 
investigated. (AO3) 
● No consideration of either frequency or timing of observations. (AO3) 
● Research planning shows limited understanding of the ethical 
dimensions of field research methods. (AO3) 
● Poor quality data and information as a result of inaccurate use of 
methods with low levels of accuracy/precision. (AO3) 
Level 2 4–7 ● Chooses methods to collect data and information relevant to the 
geographical topic. (AO3) 
● A sampling framework is considered but may not be technically valid or 
successfully implemented. (AO3) 
● Consideration of either frequency or timing of observations. (AO3) 
● Research planning shows understanding of the ethical dimensions of 
field research methods, which may be generic or incomplete. (AO3) 
● Data and information collected using methods with inconsistent 
accuracy/precision. (AO3) 
Level 3 8–10 ● Chooses appropriate methods to collect a range of data and 
information relevant to the geographical topic. (A03) 
● Designs a valid sampling framework explicitly linked and appropriate to 
the geographical focus being investigated. (AO3) 
● Considers both frequency and timing of observations. (AO3) 
● Research planning shows appropriate and relevant understanding of 
the ethical dimensions of field research methods. (AO3) 
● Obtains reliable data and information as a result of consistent use of 
methods with high levels of accuracy/precision. (AO3) 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
76 
 
  Data Representation, Analysis, Interpretation and 
Evaluation of Techniques and Methodologies used  
(24 marks) 
(AO3: 24 marks) 
Level Mark Descriptor  
 0 No rewardable material. 
Level 1 1–6 ● Indiscriminate use of geographical skills to deconstruct data; 
connections used to show the statistical/ geographical significance of 
data are unsupported or linked to flawed evidence. (AO3) 
● Provides a flawed or incomplete appraisal of techniques and 
methodologies used including: 
o ethical dimensions of field research 
o utility and validity of chosen methodologies. (AO3) 
● Any attempt to synthesise research findings is incoherent; conclusions 
may be attempted but are frequently flawed and unsupported or linked 
to irrelevant evidence. (AO3) 
● Conclusions, if attempted, are simplistic and generic; may attempt to 
support conclusions with frequently irrelevant references to fieldwork 
data or information; responses are presented in a manner that is 
unclear and/or technically inaccurate. (AO3) 
Level 2 7–12 ● Uses geographical skills, which may not be the most appropriate, to 
deconstruct data in order to show connections that lack support from 
evidence and the statistical/ geographical significance of data, which 
may be incomplete and lack accuracy. (AO3) 
● Provides a narrow or imbalanced appraisal of techniques and 
methodologies used including: 
o ethical dimensions of field research 
o utility and validity of chosen methodologies. (AO3) 
● Synthesises research findings in a superficial manner to form some 
rational conclusions that are occasionally supported by evidence which 
might be limited or incomplete. (AO3) 
● Communicates conclusions that are supported by fieldwork data or 
information which are occasionally relevant; responses are presented 
in a manner which may be occasionally incoherent and is sometimes 
technically accurate. (AO3) 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
77 
 
  Data Representation, Analysis, Interpretation and 
Evaluation of Techniques and Methodologies used  
continued 
Level Mark Descriptor  
Level 3 13–18 ● Uses appropriate geographical skills to deconstruct data in order to 
show partially evidenced connections and mostly accurate 
statistical/geographical significance of data. (AO3) 
● Provides a generally balanced appraisal, that may lack detail in some 
aspects of techniques and methodologies used including: 
o ethical dimensions of field research 
o utility and validity of chosen methodologies. (AO3)  
● Synthesises research findings coherently to form rational conclusions 
that are mostly supported by evidence. (AO3) 
● Communicates conclusions that are supported by mostly relevant 
fieldwork data or information presented in a manner which is 
appropriate and mostly technically accurate. (AO3) 
Level 4 19–24 ● Uses appropriate geographical skills to deconstruct data in order to 
show evidenced connections and accurate statistical/geographical 
significance of data. (AO3) 
● Provides detailed and balanced appraisal of techniques and 
methodologies used including: 
o ethical dimensions of field research 
o utility and validity of chosen methodologies. (AO3)  
● Synthesises research findings coherently to form rational evidence-
based conclusions. (AO3) 
● Communicates convincing conclusions that are supported by the clear 
and technically accurate presentation of relevant fieldwork data or 
information. (AO3) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
78 
 
  Conclusions and Critical Evaluation of the Overall 
Investigation  
(24 marks) 
(AO1: 4 marks, AO2: 4 marks and AO3: 16 marks) 
Level Mark Descriptor  
 0 No rewardable material. 
Level 1 1–6 ● Demonstrates isolated elements of geographical knowledge and 
understanding of location, geographical theory and comparative 
context, which are frequently irrelevant or inaccurate. (AO1) 
● May attempt to apply understanding to find links between the 
investigation’s conclusions and a broader geographical context, but 
these may be inaccurate or irrelevant. (AO2). 
● Synthesis of research findings is indiscriminate and only occasionally 
coherent. (AO3)  
● Appraisal of the reliability of evidence and validity of conclusions is 
imbalanced and frequently narrow or flawed. (AO3) 
● A simplistic, undeveloped argument is expressed through flawed or 
largely incoherent lines of reasoning that demonstrate use of an 
unfocused enquiry process. Uses limited accurate geographical 
terminology. (AO3) 
● Conclusions, if attempted, are simplistic; may attempt to support 
conclusions with limited links to evidence and concepts which are 
frequently irrelevant. (AO3) 
Level 2  7–12 ● Demonstrates geographical knowledge and understanding of location, 
geographical theory and comparative context, which are occasionally 
relevant and accurate. (AO1) 
● Applies understanding to find links between the investigation’s 
conclusions and a broader geographical context with limited 
coherence. (AO2). 
● Synthesis of research findings is limited, but makes some coherent 
points. (AO3)  
● Appraisal of the reliability of evidence and validity of conclusions is 
imbalanced and includes some minor flaws. (AO3) 
● A simplistic argument is expressed through lines of reasoning, with 
some coherence that demonstrate use of an inconsistently structured 
enquiry process. Uses some accurate geographical terminology. (AO3)  
● Conclusions are simplistic, but occasionally supported with some 
relevant links to evidence and concepts. (AO3) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
79 
 
  Conclusions and Critical Evaluation of the Overall 
Investigation  
(24 marks) 
(AO1: 4 marks, AO2: 4 marks and AO3: 16 marks) 
Level Mark Descriptor  
Level 3 13–18 ● Demonstrates mostly accurate and relevant geographical knowledge 
and understanding of location, geographical theory and comparative 
context. (AO1) 
● Applies understanding to find largely coherent and relevant links 
between the investigation’s conclusions and a broader geographical 
context. (AO2) 
● Synthesises most aspects of the research findings in a largely coherent 
manner. (AO3) 
● Provides a mainly appropriate appraisal of the reliability of evidence 
and validity of conclusions. (AO3) 
● A developed argument which considers a relevant selection of factors 
in an uneven manner and which is expressed through logical lines of 
reasoning that are clear, but not fully developed and demonstrates a 
use of an appropriately structured enquiry process. Uses mostly 
accurate geographical terminology.(AO3)  
● Conclusions are mostly supported by drawing together a selection of 
mostly relevant evidence and concepts linked to the investigation. 
(AO3) 
Level 4 19–24 ● Demonstrates accurate and relevant geographical knowledge and 
understanding of location, geographical theory and comparative 
context throughout. (AO1) 
● Applies understanding to find coherent and relevant links between the 
investigation’s conclusions and a broader geographical context. (AO2) 
● Synthesises research findings coherently and comprehensively. (AO3) 
● Provides a balanced appraisal of the reliability of evidence and validity 
of conclusions. (AO3) 
● A balanced and concise, well-developed argument is expressed 
through sustained logical lines of reasoning that demonstrates use of a 
structured and comprehensive enquiry process. Uses accurate 
geographical terminology throughout. (AO3)  
● Convincing conclusions that are fully supported by drawing together a 
selection of relevant evidence and concepts linked to the entire 
purpose of the investigation. (AO3) 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
80 
Geography Independent Investigation form 
All sections of the form in Appendix 5 must be completed by candidate and teacher and the 
form must be attached to the work submitted for moderation. The forms may also be subject 
to inspection by a JCQ Centre Inspector. (Some JCQ inspections are targeted at centres with 
statistically atypical results in internal assessments.) Any suspected instances of malpractice 
will be reported to the Awarding Organisation for further investigation. If malpractice is found 
to have taken place a penalty will be given dependent on the circumstances and severity of 
the malpractice. 
For full information regarding malpractice please see the JCQ document ‘Suspected 
Malpractice in Examinations and Assessments’. 
1. Candidate/teacher authentication section 
 Centres must ensure that the candidate authentication section is completed for each 
candidate by both the candidate and teacher. The form requires the following details (as 
per section 4.6 of the JCQ Instructions). 
 Candidates must sign a declaration to confirm that, apart from collaboration with other 
candidates and general guidance from the teacher, where these are acceptable within the 
parameters of the specification, the work which they submit for final assessment is their 
own unaided work. 
Teachers must sign a declaration of authentication after the work has been completed 
confirming that: 
o any assistance which goes beyond general guidance has been recorded and taken into 
account when marking the work; 
o otherwise, apart from general guidance given in line with the parameters set out in the 
specification, the work is solely that of the candidate concerned; 
o the work was completed under the required conditions; 
o signed candidate declarations are kept on file. 
Teachers should be sufficiently familiar with the candidate’s general standard to judge 
whether the piece of work submitted is within his/her capabilities, and there should be 
sufficient supervision of every candidate to enable the work to be authenticated with 
confidence. Work may be completed outside of the centre, without supervision, provided 
that the centre is confident that the work produced is the candidate’s own.  
The forms, containing the signed candidate declarations, must be kept on file until the 
deadline for an enquiry about results has passed or until any appeal, malpractice or other 
results enquiry has been completed, whichever is later.  
2. Investigation proposal section 
Candidates use this section to detail their title, hypotheses and/or questions and/or sub-
questions, enquiry route, suggested methods of data collection and suggestions of 
analytical tools. 
 Missing or incomplete Independent Investigation Forms 
The remainder of this document should be read in conjunction with section 9 of the JCQ 
Instructions for conducting non-examination assessment. 
If a Geography Independent Investigation form is found to be missing or incomplete, the 
Awarding Organisation will in the first instance contact the centre to rectify the matter. If 
this request is not addressed satisfactorily, the Awarding Organisation will take further 
action, which may lead to a malpractice investigation. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
81 
Mark sheet  
Teachers complete this form when they mark the work, providing a mark breakdown and any 
supporting information in accordance with the Awarding Organisation’s normal procedures. 
Detecting malpractice  
Malpractice may be suspected by teachers in work as follows: 
● the style of writing is not typical of the candidate; it might be from published material, or 
from another person  
● there are instances of the same errors in the work of two or more candidates 
● there are passages quoted from publications or the internet which are not acknowledged 
in the bibliography or by in-text referencing 
● there are passages copied from examples of good practice which were distributed to the 
whole class 
● the work of one candidate is copied from another.  
Dealing with malpractice 
By centres:  
● If the centre/teacher suspects some form of malpractice, the centre must take action to 
investigate internally. The centre should have in place procedures to deal with these 
issues across qualifications.  
● The candidate and teacher should only complete the authentication section of the 
Geography Independent Investigation form once it is clear which parts of the work are the 
candidate’s own. If the matter is not resolved the candidate should be awarded zero. 
Consequences of malpractice  
If malpractice is suspected the Awarding Organisation will investigate. If malpractice is found 
to have taken place a penalty will be given dependent on the circumstances and severity of 
the malpractice. 
For full information regarding malpractice please see the JCQ document ‘Suspected 
Malpractice in Examinations and Assessments’. 
Security and backups 
It is the centre’s responsibility to keep the work that students have submitted for 
assessment secure. 
Secure storage is defined as a securely-locked cabinet or cupboard. Where students are 
producing artefacts, secure storage is defined as a classroom studio or workshop that is 
locked or supervised from the end of one session to the start of the next. 
The rules on storage also apply to electronic data. For example, centres should collect 
memory sticks for secure storage between sessions or restrict student access to specific 
areas of the centre’s IT network. 
For materials stored electronically, centres are strongly advised to utilise firewall protection 
and virus-checking software, and to employ an effective backup strategy, so that an up-to-
date archive of students’ evidence is maintained. 
Further information 
For up-to-date advice on teacher involvement and administration of non-examination 
assessment, please refer to the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ) document GCE, ELC and 
Project qualifications – Instructions for Conducting Non-examined Assessments, available on 
the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
82 
3 Assessment information 
Paper 1 (Paper code: 9GE0/01) 
● First assessment: May/June 2018. 
● The assessment is 2 hours and 15 minutes. 
● The assessment is out of 105 marks. 
● The assessment consists of three sections. 
● Section A: students must answer all questions.  
● Section B: students answer either Question 2 (Glaciated Landscapes and Change) or 
Question 3 (Coastal Landscapes and Change) in Section B. 
● Section C: students must answer all questions. 
● The paper may include short open, open response, calculations and resource-linked 
questions. The examination includes 12-mark and 20-mark extended writing questions. 
● Calculators may be used in the examination. 
Content assessed 
● Section A assesses Area of study 1, Topic 1: Tectonic Processes and Hazards. 
● Section B assesses Area of study 1, Topic 2: Landscape Systems, Processes and Change. 
This includes two optional sub-topics from which students choose one:  
2A Glaciated Landscapes and Change or 2B Coastal Landscapes and Change. 
● Section C assesses Area of study 3, Topic 5: The Water Cycle and Water Insecurity and 
Topic 6: The Carbon Cycle and Energy Security. 
 
Paper 2 (Paper code: 9GE0/02) 
● First assessment: May/June 2018. 
● The assessment 2 hours and 15 minutes. 
● The assessment is out of 105 marks. 
● The assessment consists of four sections. 
● Section A: students must answer all questions. 
● Section B: students must answer all questions. 
● Section C: students answer either Question 3 (Regenerating Places) or Question 4 
(Diverse Places). 
● Section D: students answer either Question 5 (Health, Human Rights and Intervention) 
or Question 6 (Migration, Identity and Sovereignty).  
● The paper may include short open, open response, calculations and resource-linked 
questions. The examination includes 12-mark and 20-mark extended writing questions.  
● Calculators may be used in the examination. 
Content assessed  
● Section A assesses Area of study 2, Topic 3: Globalisation. 
● Section B assesses Area of study 4, Topic 7: Superpowers. 
● Section C assesses Area of study 2, Topic 4: Shaping Places. This comprises two optional 
sub-topics from which students choose one: 4A Regenerating Places or  
4B Diverse Places. 
● Section D assesses Area of study 4, Topic 8: Global Development and Connections. This 
comprises two optional sub-topics from which students choose one: 8A Health, Human 
Rights and Intervention or 8B Migration, Identity and Sovereignty. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
83 
 
Paper 3 (Paper code: 9GE0/03)  
● First assessment: May/June 2018. 
● The assessment is 2 hours and 15 minutes. 
● The assessment is out of 70 marks. 
● Students must answer all questions. 
● The paper may include open response, calculations and resource-linked questions. The 
examination includes 8-mark, 18-mark and 24-mark extended writing questions. 
● Calculators may be used in the examination. 
Content assessed 
● Synoptic assessment of geographical skills, knowledge and understanding (within a  
place-based context) from compulsory content drawn from different parts of the course. 
 
Non-examination assessment: Independent Investigation (Paper code: 9GE0/04) 
● The student undertakes an independent investigation, producing a written report of  
3000–4000 words.  
● The student defines a question or issue relating to the compulsory or optional content. 
● The student’s investigation will incorporate fieldwork data (collected individually or as part 
of a group) and own research and/or secondary data. 
● The report will evidence independent analysis and evaluation of data, presentation of data 
findings and extended writing. 
● The report is internally assessed and externally moderated.  
● The independent investigation report must be submitted at the end of the course. 
● Centres must ensure that independent investigation reports submitted are valid for the 
series in which they are submitted. 
Content assessed 
The fieldwork which forms the focus and context of the individual investigation may be either 
human, physical or integrated physical-human. The topic must relate to an aspect of 
geography in the specification, and facilitate the development of the following core skills: 
● research relevant literature sources and understand and write up the theoretical or 
comparative context for a research question 
● define the research questions which underpin field investigations 
● demonstrate practical knowledge and understanding of field methodologies appropriate to 
the investigation of core human and physical processes 
● observe and record phenomena in the field and devise, implement and justify practical 
approaches taken in the field, including frequency/timing of observation, sampling, and 
data collection approaches so that good quality data/ information can be collected 
● demonstrate knowledge and understanding of the techniques appropriate for analysing 
field data and information and for representing results, and show ability to select suitable 
quantitative or qualitative approaches and to apply them 
● demonstrate the ability to interrogate and critically examine field data in order to comment 
on its accuracy and/or the extent to which it is representative, and use the experience to 
extend geographical understanding 
● show the ability to write up field results clearly and logically, using a range of presentation 
methods and apply existing knowledge, theory and concepts in order to understand field 
observations and make a well argued case 
● evaluate and reflect on fieldwork investigations, explain how the results relate to the wider 
context and show an understanding of the ethical dimensions of field research. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
84 
Assessment Objectives 
 
Students must: 
% in 
GCE  
A Level 
AO1 Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of places, environments, 
concepts, processes, interactions and change, at a variety of scales 
34 
AO2 Apply knowledge and understanding in different contexts to 
interpret, analyse and evaluate geographical information and issues 
40 
AO3 Use a variety of relevant quantitative, qualitative and fieldwork skills 
to: 
● investigate geographical questions and issues 
● interpret, analyse and evaluate data and evidence 
● construct arguments and draw conclusions 
26 
Total 100% 
 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
Paper 
Assessment Objectives Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives AO1 % AO2 % AO3 % 
Paper 1 13 15.75 1.25 30 
Paper 2 13 15.75 1.25 30 
Paper 3 5.5 6 8.5 20 
Non-examination 
assessment: Independent 
Investigation 
2.5 2.5 15 20 
Total for GCE A Level 34% 40% 26% 100% 
 
NB: Totals have been rounded either up or down. 
Synoptic assessment 
Synoptic assessment requires students to work across different parts of a qualification and to 
show their accumulated knowledge and understanding of a topic or subject area. 
Synoptic assessment enables students to show their ability to combine their skills, knowledge 
and understanding with breadth and depth of the subject. 
Synopticity will be assessed in Paper 3. 
Sample assessment materials 
Sample papers and mark schemes can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced 
GCE in Geography Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
85 
4 Administration and general information 
Entries 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for this qualification can be found in 
our UK Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations officers and is 
available on our website: qualifications.pearson.com 
Discount code and performance tables 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more than one GCE qualification with 
the same discount code will have only one of the grades they achieve counted for the 
purpose of the school and college performance tables. This will be the grade for the larger 
qualification (i.e. the A Level grade rather than the AS grade). If the qualifications are the 
same size, then the better grade will be counted (please see Appendix 12: Codes). 
Students should be advised that if they take two GCE qualifications with the same discount 
code, colleges, universities and employers they wish to progress to are likely to take the 
view that this achievement is equivalent to only one GCE. The same view may be taken if 
students take two GCE qualifications that have different discount codes but have significant 
overlap of content. Students or their advisers who have any doubts about their subject 
combinations should check with the institution they wish to progress to before embarking on 
their programmes. 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, 
special consideration and malpractice 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality policy requires all students to 
have equal opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our qualifications 
to be awarded in a way that is fair to every student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the Equality Act 2010) are not, 
when they are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in comparison to 
students who do not share that characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification and that 
this achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their peers. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be available in English. All student work must be in 
English. 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with special 
educational needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to:  
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the assessment.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
86 
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an individual 
student with a disability, without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding bodies comply with the duty under the 
Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students will 
then know what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for assessment.  
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable adjustments 
where a person with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in undertaking an 
assessment. The awarding organisation is required to take reasonable steps to overcome 
that disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be unique to that individual and 
therefore might not be in the list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of factors, 
which will include: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding 
organisation, timeframes or affects the security or integrity of the assessment. This is 
because the adjustment is not ‘reasonable’. 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student's mark or grade to 
reflect temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the examination/ 
assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a material effect on a 
candidate’s ability to take an assessment or demonstrate their level of attainment in an 
assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to apply for access arrangements 
and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special 
consideration, please refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk. 
For up-to-date advice on teacher involvement and administration of non-examination 
assessments, please refer to the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ) document Instructions 
for conducting non-examination assessments (new GCE and GCSE specifications) available 
on the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
87 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that compromises or seeks to 
compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in controlled assessments discovered before the candidate has signed 
the declaration of authentication form does not need to be reported to Pearson. 
Candidate malpractice found in controlled assessments after the declaration of authenticity 
has been signed, and in examinations must be reported to Pearson on a JCQ Form M1 
(available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The completed form can be emailed 
to candidatemalpractice@pearson.com. Please provide as much information and supporting 
documentation as possible. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies 
with Pearson. 
Failure to report candidate malpractice constitutes staff or centre malpractice.  
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and maladministration of 
our qualifications. As with candidate malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is any act that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of assessment or undermines the integrity 
of the qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported 
immediately, before any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson on a  
JCQ Form M2(a) (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form, 
supporting documentation and as much information as possible can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com. Note that the final decision regarding  
appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the document 
General and Vocational Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments Policies and Procedures, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice. 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to comply with the requirements of 
Ofqual's General Conditions of Recognition. 
This A Level qualification will be graded and certificated on a six-grade scale from A* to E 
using the total subject mark. Individual papers/ non-examination assessment component are 
not graded. 
The first certification opportunity for this qualification will be 2018. 
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum judged by Pearson to be of 
sufficient standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U result. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
88 
Student recruitment and progression 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this qualification. 
Students who would benefit most from studying this qualification are likely to have a Level 2 
qualification, such as a GCSE in Geography.  
Progression 
Students can progress from this qualification to: 
● a range of different, relevant academic or vocational higher education qualifications 
● employment in a relevant sector 
● further training. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
89 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Geographical skills 91 
Appendix 2: Fieldwork skills 93 
Appendix 3: Definitions 94 
Appendix 4: Exam command word definitions 95 
Appendix 5: Geography independent investigation form 96 
Appendix 6: Descriptions of the level of independence required at  different 
stages of the Independent Investigation 98 
Appendix 7: Independent  investigation mark sheet 100 
Appendix 8: Fieldwork statement 107 
Appendix 9: The context for the development of this qualification 108 
Appendix 10: Transferable skills 110 
Appendix 11: Level 3 Extended Project qualification 111 
Appendix 12: Codes 113 
Appendix 13: Rationale for Teacher Guidance 114 
Appendix 14: Geography NEA teacher guidance 117 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
90 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
91 
Appendix 1: Geographical skills 
Competence in using geographical skills should be developed during study of compulsory and 
optional topics, not as a separate theme or topic. While the relative balance of quantitative 
and qualitative methods and skills will differ between topics, students must be introduced to 
a roughly equal balance of quantitative and qualitative methods and skills across the 
specification as a whole. This specification requires students to use their prior knowledge and 
understanding of the geographical, mathematical and statistical skills required at GCSE. In 
addition, all of these skills listed below are compulsory and may be assessed across any of 
the areas of study.  
This specification requires students to:  
● understand the nature and use of different types of geographical information, including 
qualitative and quantitative, primary and secondary, images, factual text and 
discursive/creative material, digital data, numerical and spatial data and innovative forms 
of data, including crowd-sourced and 'big data' and including dot maps, kite diagrams, 
linear and logarithmic scales, dispersion diagrams, aerial, oblique, ground, satellite 
images, GIS  
● collect, analyse and interpret such information, and demonstrate the ability to understand 
and apply suitable analytical approaches for the different information types including, 
qualitative approaches such as coding and sampling and quantitative approaches 
such as measures of dispersion, measures of correlation and association from the 
following statistical tests: t-tests, Spearman’s rank, Chi-squared, Gini Co-efficient, Lorenz 
curve  
● undertake informed and critical questioning of data sources, analytical methodologies, 
data reporting and presentation, including the ability to identify sources of error in data 
and to identify the misuse of data  
● communicate and evaluate findings, draw well-evidenced conclusions informed by wider 
theory, and construct extended written argument about geographical matters.  
This specification requires students to demonstrate all of the following skills.  
1. Qualitative data  
a) use and understand a mixture of methodological approaches, including using 
interviews  
b) interpret and evaluate a range of source material including textual and visual 
sources, such as oral accounts, newspapers, creative media, social media, aerial, 
oblique, ground photographs, sketches and drawings  
c) understand the opportunities and limitations of qualitative techniques such as 
coding and sampling, and appreciate how they actively create particular 
geographical representations  
d) understand the ethical and socio-political implications of collecting, studying and 
representing geographical data about human communities. 
2. Quantitative data 
a) understand what makes data geographical and the geospatial technologies (e.g. 
GIS) that are used to collect, analyse and present geographical data  
b) demonstrate an ability to collect and to use digital, geo-located data, and to 
understand a range of approaches to the use and analysis of such data 
c) use, interpret and analyse geographical information including dot maps, kite 
diagrams, linear and logarithmic scales, dispersion diagrams, satellite images, GIS 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
92 
d) understand the purposes and difference between the following and be able to use 
them in appropriate contexts: 
i. descriptive statistics of central tendency and dispersion, including Gini  
Co-efficient and Lorenz curve 
ii. descriptive measures of difference and association from the following 
statistical tests: t-tests, Spearman’s rank, chi-squared; inferential statistics 
and the foundations of relational statistics, including measures of correlation 
and lines of best fit on a scatter plot 
iii. measurement, measurement errors, and sampling. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
93 
Appendix 2: Fieldwork skills 
A Level students must undertake a minimum of four days of fieldwork. Centres will be 
required to provide evidence of this fieldwork in the form of a written fieldwork statement. 
Fieldwork must be carried out in relation to processes in both physical and human geography 
and must evidence all of the skills listed below. 
A Level fieldwork skills requirements 
Fieldwork 
skill 
number 
Fieldwork skill description 
 
Students are required to: 
1 research relevant literature sources and understand and write up the 
theoretical or comparative context for a research question 
2 define the research questions which underpin field investigations 
3 demonstrate practical knowledge and understanding of field methodologies 
appropriate to the investigation of core human and physical processes 
4 observe and record phenomena in the field and devise, implement and justify 
practical approaches taken in the field, including frequency/timing of 
observation, sampling, and data collection approaches so that good quality 
data/ information can be collected 
5 demonstrate knowledge and understanding of the techniques appropriate for 
analysing field data and information and for representing results, including 
GIS, and show ability to select suitable quantitative or qualitative approaches 
and to apply them 
6 demonstrate the ability to interrogate and critically examine field data in order 
to comment on its accuracy and/or the extent to which it is representative, 
and use the experience to extend geographical understanding 
7 show the ability to write up field results clearly and logically, using a range of 
presentation methods and apply existing knowledge, theory and concepts in 
order to understand field observations and make a well argued case 
8 evaluate and reflect on fieldwork investigations, explain how the results relate 
to the wider context and show an understanding of the ethical dimensions of 
field research. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
94 
Appendix 3: Definitions 
Terms used in this specification and their definition. 
 
Term Definition 
Developed country Country with very high human development (VHHD) 
Developing country Country with low human development (LHD), a poor country 
Emerging country Country with high and medium human development (HMHD), 
recently emerging country 
Megacity Urban area with a population of over 10 million 
 
Human Development is measured by the Human Development Index (HDI). For further 
information on which countries are categorised as Low, Medium, High and Very High Human 
Development by HDI please go to this website: http://hdr.undp.org 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
95 
Appendix 4: Exam command word 
definitions 
This table lists the command words that could be used in the examinations for this 
qualification and their definitions. 
 
Command word Definition 
Analyse Use geographical skills to investigate an issue by systematically 
breaking it down into individual components and making logical, 
evidence-based connections on the causes and effects or 
interrelationships between the components. 
Assess Use evidence to determine the relative significance of something. 
Give balanced consideration to all factors and identify which are the 
most important. 
Calculate Produce a numerical answer, showing relevant working. 
Complete Create a graphical representation of geographical information by 
adding detail to a resource that has been provided 
Draw/Plot Create a graphical representation of geographical information. 
Evaluate Measure the value or success of something and ultimately provide a 
balanced and substantiated judgement/conclusion. Review 
information and then bring it together to form a conclusion, drawing 
on evidence such as strengths, weaknesses, alternatives and 
relevant data. 
Explain Provide a reasoned explanation of how or why something occurs. An 
explanation requires understanding to be demonstrated through the 
justification or exemplification of points that have been identified. 
Suggest For an unfamiliar scenario, provide a reasoned explanation of how or 
why something may occur. A suggested explanation requires a 
justification/exemplification of a point that has been identified. 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
96 
Appendix 5: Geography independent investigation form 
 
Candidate name Candidate number Examination Series 
Centre name Centre number 
Investigation title 
 
 
How the title links to specification content 
Planned investigation hypothesis or question/sub-questions 
 
 
 
Investigation focus – indication of how the enquiry will enable the candidate to address their investigation title and explore their theme in relation to 
the chosen geographical area. 
 
 
Planned methodology – indication of qualitative and/or quantitative techniques including primary and, if relevant, 
secondary data collection techniques, indication of the planned sampling strategy or strategies. 
 
 
 
Individual/Group data 
collection 
(Delete as appropriate) 
Teacher’s approval and comments  
 
 
Teacher signature 
 
Date  
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
97 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography 9GE0/04 
Centre name: 
 
Centre number: 
Candidate name: 
 
Candidate number: 
Assignment Mark awarded Comments 
[NB: Comment box expands as you start entering text] 
Independent Investigation  
 
 
 
 
TOTAL  
/
70 
 
Teacher declaration I declare that: 
● any assistance which goes beyond general guidance has been recorded and 
taken into account when marking the work; 
● otherwise, apart from general guidance given in line with the parameters set 
out in the specification, the work is solely that of the candidate concerned; 
● the work was completed under the required conditions; 
● signed candidate declarations will be kept on file. 
Candidate declaration 
I declare that, apart from collaboration with other candidates and general guidance 
from the teacher, where these are acceptable within the parameters of the 
specification, this is my own unaided work. 
Assessor name: Date: Candidate signed: Date: 
Assessor signed:    
Additional candidate declaration 
By signing this additional declaration you agree to your work being used to support Professional Development, Online Support and Training of both Centre-Assessors and 
Pearson Moderators. If you have any concerns please email: emgeography@pearson.com 
Candidate signed:  Date:  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
98 
Appendix 6: Descriptions of the level of independence required at  
different stages of the Independent Investigation 
 
Investigation stage What is the level of independence 
expected? 
What does this level of independence mean in practice 
at this stage? (The following is not exhaustive) 
1. Exploring focus Collaboration allowed Centres may want to give candidates a free choice of 
investigations focusing on any of the compulsory or optional 
content or they may wish to provide candidates with a theme 
or a range of themes. However, it is not acceptable for 
candidates to choose from a list of titles or investigations 
provided by the centre1. 
Candidates may discuss together, and with their teacher, 
ideas and research for appropriate geographical questions.  
2. Title of the investigation, focus of investigation 
(sub-questions), purpose of investigation.  
Independent work Following the first stage candidates must finalise the draft 
title of their investigation. This must be done by each 
candidate on his/her own. In the Geography Independent 
Investigation Form and final written report candidates must 
provide a clear justification and contextualisation of how 
their enquiry will help them to address their title and explore 
their theme in relation to the chosen geographical location.  
3. Devising methodology and sampling 
framework 
Collaboration allowed Candidates may collaborate when planning and selecting 
methodologies/sampling strategies.  
4. Primary data collection  Collaboration allowed Primary data collection may be carried out individually or in 
groups.  
5. Secondary data collection (if relevant) Independent work Must be carried out independently. Candidates select 
secondary sources of data on their own.  
 
1 This applies also to third party fieldwork providers. Teachers must ensure that at all times they remain confident in the authenticity and independence of the candidate’s work. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
99 
 
Investigation stage What is the level of independence 
expected? 
What does this level of independence mean in practice 
at this stage? (The following is not exhaustive) 
6. Data/information presentation Independent work  Candidates select and use appropriate data presentation 
methods on their own. 
7. Data analysis and explanation/interpretation Independent work  Candidates select and use appropriate data analysis 
techniques and independently interpret and analyse the 
results on their own.  
8. Conclusions and evaluation Independent work Candidates evaluate the findings of their investigation and 
reach a balanced and supported conclusion on their own.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
100 
 
 
Appendix 7: Independent  
investigation mark sheet 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography 9GE0/04 
Centre name: 
 
Centre number: 
Candidate name: 
 
Candidate number: 
Title of Independent Investigation  
Mark awarded   Moderated mark 
(For Pearson use only) 
 
Assessment criterion Total 
marks 
Marks 
awarded 
Moderator mark 
(For Pearson 
use only) 
a- Purpose of the Independent Investigation 12   
b- Field Methodologies and Data Collection 10   
c- Data Representation, Analysis, Interpretation 
and Evaluation of Techniques and 
Methodologies used 
24   
d- Conclusions and Critical Evaluation of the 
Overall Investigation 
24   
Total marks 70   
Details of any additional advice/support given (e.g. for candidates with special considerations) 
 
Candidate declaration – I can confirm that I have produced the attached work without 
assistance other than that which is acceptable under the guidelines given by the teacher.  
I confirm that the total numbers of words is/is not* in accordance with the word limit. 
Signed candidate:  
Internal Assessor declaration – I can confirm that the candidate’s work was conducted under 
the conditions laid out by the specification. I have authenticated the candidate’s work and am 
satisfied that to the best of my knowledge the work produced is solely that of the candidate. 
Assessor Name: Date: 
Assessor: 
Additional Candidate declaration:  
Signed candidate:  
By signing the above declaration you agree to your controlled assessment task(s) being used 
to support Professional Development, Online Support and Training of both Centre-Assessors 
and Edexcel Moderators. If you have any concerns regarding this please contact 
teachinggeography@pearson.com 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
101 
 
Purpose of the Independent Investigation  
(12 marks) 
(AO1: 4 marks, AO2: 4 marks and AO 3: 4 marks) 
Descriptor  Mark 
range 
Actual 
Mark 
Comment 
No rewardable material.    
● Demonstrates isolated elements of geographical 
knowledge and understanding of location, geographical 
theory and comparative context, which are frequently 
irrelevant or inaccurate. (AO1) 
● May attempt to apply understanding to find links 
between the investigation’s context and a broader 
geographical context but links are irrelevant with 
frequent inaccuracies. (AO2) 
● May attempt to investigate frequently irrelevant and 
narrow range of geographical sources in order to 
identify/obtain geographical information and data that 
is frequently inaccurate and only occasionally supports 
the investigation; the aim, question or hypothesis is 
generic or unlinked to research information, and 
provides an unfocused framework for investigation, 
with flawed consideration of manageability and/or 
scale; planned enquiry process is limited in clarity and 
structure. (AO3) 
1–4   
● Demonstrates geographical knowledge and 
understanding of location, geographical theory and 
comparative context which is relevant but narrow or 
incomplete, and may include some inaccuracies. (AO1) 
● Applies understanding to find links between the 
investigation’s context and a broader geographical 
context; links are mainly relevant and coherent but 
may include some inaccuracies. (AO2) 
● Investigates a range of mainly relevant geographical 
sources in order to identify/obtain mainly accurate 
geographical information and data that supports most 
parts of the investigation; research information is used 
to construct a generally valid aim, question or 
hypothesis that provides a mostly appropriate 
framework for investigation with some consideration of 
manageability and/or scale; planned enquiry process is 
adequately structured and clear. (AO3) 
5–8   
● Demonstrates accurate and relevant geographical 
knowledge and understanding of location, geographical 
theory and comparative context throughout. (AO1) 
● Applies understanding to find coherent and relevant 
links between the investigation’s context and a broader 
geographical context. (AO2) 
● Investigates a wide range of relevant geographical 
sources in order to identify/obtain accurate 
geographical information and data that support the 
investigation; research information is used to construct 
a justified aim, question or hypothesis that provides an 
appropriate framework for investigation at a 
manageable scale; planned enquiry process is logically 
structured and comprehensive. (AO3) 
9–12   
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
102 
 
Field Methodologies and Data Collection  
(10 marks) 
(AO3: 10 marks) 
Descriptor  Mark 
range 
Actual 
Mark 
Comment 
No rewardable material.    
● An inappropriate balance between range and depth 
of methods chosen to collect data and information 
relevant to the geographical focus. (AO3) 
● A sampling framework is absent or is not relevant to 
the topic being investigated. (AO3) 
● No consideration of either frequency or timing of 
observations. (AO3) 
● Research planning shows limited understanding of 
the ethical dimensions of field research methods. 
(AO3) 
● Poor quality data and information as a result of 
inaccurate use of methods with low levels of 
accuracy/precision. (AO3) 
1–3   
● Chooses methods to collect data and information 
relevant to the geographical topic. (AO3) 
● A sampling framework is considered but may not be 
technically valid or successfully implemented. (AO3) 
● Consideration of either frequency or timing of 
observations. (AO3) 
● Research planning shows understanding of the 
ethical dimensions of field research methods, which 
may be generic or incomplete. (AO3) 
● Data and information collected using methods with 
inconsistent accuracy/precision. (AO3) 
4–7   
● Chooses appropriate methods to collect a range of 
data and information relevant to the geographical 
topic. (A03) 
● Designs a valid sampling framework explicitly linked 
and appropriate to the geographical focus being 
investigated. (AO3) 
● Considers both frequency and timing of 
observations. (AO3) 
● Research planning shows appropriate and relevant 
understanding of the ethical dimensions of field 
research methods. (AO3) 
● Obtains reliable data and information as a result of 
consistent use of methods with high levels of 
accuracy/precision. (AO3) 
8–10   
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
103 
 
Data Representation, Analysis, Interpretation and Evaluation of Techniques and 
Methodologies used  
(24 marks) 
(AO3: 24 marks) 
Descriptor  Mark 
range 
Actual 
Mark 
Comment 
No rewardable material.  Marks  
● Indiscriminate use of geographical skills to 
deconstruct data; connections used to show the 
statistical/ geographical significance of data are 
unsupported or linked to flawed evidence. (AO3) 
● Provides a flawed or incomplete appraisal of 
techniques and methodologies used including: 
o ethical dimensions of field research 
o utility and validity of chosen methodologies. (AO3) 
● Any attempt to synthesise research findings is 
incoherent; conclusions may be attempted but are 
frequently flawed and unsupported or linked to 
irrelevant evidence. (AO3) 
● Conclusions, if attempted, are simplistic and generic; 
may attempt to support conclusions with frequently 
irrelevant references to fieldwork data or information; 
responses are presented in a manner that is unclear 
and/or technically inaccurate. (AO3) 
1–6   
● Uses geographical skills, which may not be the most 
appropriate, to deconstruct data in order to show 
connections that lack support from evidence and the 
statistical/ geographical significance of data, which 
may be incomplete and lack accuracy. (AO3) 
● Provides a narrow or imbalanced appraisal of 
techniques and methodologies used including: 
o ethical dimensions of field research 
o utility and validity of chosen methodologies. (AO3) 
● Synthesises research findings in a superficial manner 
to form some rational conclusions that are 
occasionally supported by evidence which might be 
limited or incomplete. (AO3) 
● Communicates conclusions that are supported by 
fieldwork data or information which are occasionally 
relevant; responses are presented in a manner which 
may be occasionally incoherent and is sometimes 
technically accurate. (AO3) 
7-12   
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
104 
 
Data Representation, Analysis, Interpretation and Evaluation of Techniques and 
Methodologies used  
continued 
Descriptor  Mark 
range 
Actual 
Mark 
Comment 
● Uses appropriate geographical skills to deconstruct 
data in order to show partially evidenced connections 
and mostly accurate statistical/geographical 
significance of data. (AO3) 
● Provides a generally balanced appraisal, that may lack 
detail in some aspects of techniques and 
methodologies used including: 
o ethical dimensions of field research 
o utility and validity of chosen methodologies. (AO3)  
● Synthesises research findings coherently to form 
rational conclusions that are mostly supported by 
evidence. (AO3) 
● Communicates conclusions that are supported by 
mostly relevant fieldwork data or information 
presented in a manner which is appropriate and mostly 
technically accurate. (AO3) 
13–18   
● Uses appropriate geographical skills to deconstruct 
data in order to show evidenced connections and 
accurate statistical/geographical significance of data. 
(AO3) 
● Provides detailed and balanced appraisal of techniques 
and methodologies used including: 
o ethical dimensions of field research 
o utility and validity of chosen methodologies. (AO3)  
● Synthesises research findings coherently to form 
rational evidence-based conclusions. (AO3) 
● Communicates convincing conclusions that are 
supported by the clear and technically accurate 
presentation of relevant fieldwork data or information. 
(AO3) 
19–24   
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
105 
 
Conclusions and Critical Evaluation of the Overall Investigation  
(24 marks) 
(AO1: 4 marks, AO2: 4 marks and AO 3: 16 marks) 
Descriptor  Mark 
range 
Actual 
Mark 
Comment 
No rewardable material.    
● Demonstrates isolated elements of geographical 
knowledge and understanding of location, 
geographical theory and comparative context, which 
are frequently irrelevant or inaccurate. (AO1) 
● May attempt to apply understanding to find links 
between the investigation’s conclusions and a broader 
geographical context, but these may be inaccurate or 
irrelevant. (AO2). 
● Synthesis of research findings is indiscriminate and 
only occasionally coherent. (AO3)  
● Appraisal of the reliability of evidence and validity of 
conclusions is imbalanced and frequently narrow or 
flawed. (AO3) 
● A simplistic, undeveloped argument is expressed 
through flawed or largely incoherent lines of 
reasoning that demonstrate use of an unfocused 
enquiry process. Uses limited accurate geographical 
terminology. (AO3) 
● Conclusions, if attempted, are simplistic; may 
attempt to support conclusions with limited links to 
evidence and concepts which are frequently 
irrelevant. (AO3) 
1-6   
● Demonstrates geographical knowledge and 
understanding of location, geographical theory and 
comparative context, which are occasionally relevant 
and accurate. (AO1) 
● Applies understanding to find links between the 
investigation’s conclusions and a broader 
geographical context with limited coherence. (AO2). 
● Synthesis of research findings is limited, but makes 
some coherent points. (AO3)  
● Appraisal of the reliability of evidence and validity of 
conclusions is imbalanced and includes some minor 
flaws. (AO3) 
● A simplistic argument is expressed through lines of 
reasoning, with some coherence that demonstrate 
use of an inconsistently structured enquiry process. 
Uses some accurate geographical terminology. (AO3)  
● Conclusions are simplistic, but occasionally supported 
with some relevant links to evidence and concepts. 
(AO3) 
7-12   
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
106 
 
Descriptor  Mark 
range 
Actual 
Mark 
Comment 
● Demonstrates mostly accurate and relevant 
geographical knowledge and understanding of 
location, geographical theory and comparative 
context. (AO1) 
● Applies understanding to find largely coherent and 
relevant links between the investigation’s conclusions 
and a broader geographical context. (AO2) 
● Synthesises most aspects of the research findings in 
a largely coherent manner. (AO3) 
● Provides a mainly appropriate appraisal of the 
reliability of evidence and validity of conclusions. 
(AO3) 
● A developed argument which considers a relevant 
selection of factors in an uneven manner and which is 
expressed through logical lines of reasoning that are 
clear, but not fully developed and demonstrates a use 
of an appropriately structured enquiry process. Uses 
mostly accurate geographical terminology.(AO3)  
● Conclusions are mostly supported by drawing 
together a selection of mostly relevant evidence and 
concepts linked to the investigation. (AO3) 
13-18   
● Demonstrates accurate and relevant geographical 
knowledge and understanding of location, 
geographical theory and comparative context 
throughout. (AO1) 
● Applies understanding to find coherent and relevant 
links between the investigation’s conclusions and a 
broader geographical context. (AO2) 
● Synthesises research findings coherently and 
comprehensively. (AO3) 
● Provides a balanced appraisal of the reliability of 
evidence and validity of conclusions. (AO3) 
● A balanced and concise, well-developed argument is 
expressed through sustained logical lines of reasoning 
that demonstrates use of a structured and 
comprehensive enquiry process. Uses accurate 
geographical terminology throughout. (AO3)  
● Convincing conclusions that are fully supported by 
drawing together a selection of relevant evidence and 
concepts linked to the entire purpose of the 
investigation. (AO3) 
19-24   
 
 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
107 
 
Appendix 8: Fieldwork statement 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography 9GE0/04 
Centre name:  
 
 
Centre number: 
All students must carry out four days of fieldwork outside of the classroom and school 
grounds. 
Details of fieldwork 
Fieldwork day 1 
 
Fieldwork date: _______________________ 
 
Location: ____________________________ 
 
Number of students: ___________________ 
Summary of geographical issues/questions 
investigated: 
 
 
 
Fieldwork day 2 
 
Fieldwork date: _______________________ 
 
Location: ____________________________ 
 
Number of students: ___________________ 
Summary of geographical issues/questions 
investigated: 
Fieldwork day 3 
 
Fieldwork date: ______________________ 
 
Location: ___________________________ 
 
Number of students: __________________ 
Summary of geographical issues/questions 
investigated: 
 
 
 
Fieldwork day 4 
 
Fieldwork date: _______________________ 
 
Location: ____________________________ 
 
Number of students: ___________________ 
Summary of geographical issues/questions 
investigated 
 
Head teacher declaration 
I declare that the fieldwork days recorded above have been carried out in accordance with 
the geography fieldwork requirements. 
 
Head teacher name:  
Head teacher signature:  Date:  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
108 
Appendix 9: The context for the 
development of this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] and our 
ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
● reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with those 
taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
● consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including learned bodies, 
subject associations, higher-education academics, teachers and employers to ensure this 
qualification is suitable for a UK context 
● reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in their 
documents GCE Qualification Level Conditions and Requirements and GCE Subject Level 
Conditions and Requirements for Geography, published in March 2015. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification Principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
● demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning and 
measuring higher-order skills 
● rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and valid 
assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in end users of the knowledge, skills 
and competencies of certified students 
● inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students develop at 
different rates and have different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
● empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills,  
see Appendix 10: Transferable Skills. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
109 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
May 2014 
“The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important change to the 
education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications will assist them in 
helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an ‘Expert 
Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or because of 
our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the world as diverse as 
Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification development 
process that has included: 
● Extensive international comparability of subject content against the highest-performing 
jurisdictions in the world 
● Benchmarking assessments against UK and overseas providers to ensure that they are at 
the right level of demand 
● Establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-specific 
expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
● Subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future oriented. The 
design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, meaning learner outcomes 
have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a learner’s 
success in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident that we have 
supported the development of qualifications that are outstanding for their coherence, 
thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as representing world-class best 
practice.
”    
  
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Lee Sing Kong 
Director, National Institute of Education, 
Singapore 
  
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
  
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
 
All titles correct as at May 2014 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
110 
Appendix 10: Transferable skills 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently flagged the 
need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable them to respond with 
confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines skills, or 
competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that can be learned and 
that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform an activity or task and can be 
built upon and extended through learning.’ 
[1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected and 
evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this process, we 
identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the most evidence-based and 
robust skills framework. We adapted the framework slightly to include the Program for 
International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT Literacy and Collaborative Problem Solving 
(CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves: [2]  
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve general 
cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and communicate.[3] 
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, oral communication, written communication, assertive 
communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, service 
orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared understanding, 
taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team organisation. 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work stress, 
adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, and physical 
adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual teams, 
work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and able to acquire 
new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher education, 
as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the teaching and learning of 
this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning materials, developed with 
stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
 
 
[1]  OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012) 
[2]  Koenig J A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop (National 
Academies Press, 2011) 
[3]  PISA – The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy (2011) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
111 
Appendix 11: Level 3 Extended Project 
qualification 
What is the Extended Project? 
The Extended Project is a standalone qualification that can be taken alongside GCEs. It 
supports the development of independent learning skills and helps to prepare students for 
their next step – whether that be higher education study or employment. The qualification: 
● is recognised by higher education for the skills it develops  
● is worth half of an Advanced GCE qualification at grades A*–E 
● carries UCAS points for university entry. 
The Extended Project encourages students to develop skills in the following areas: research, 
critical thinking, extended writing and project management. Students identify and agree a 
topic area of their choice for in-depth study (which may or may not be related to a GCE 
subject they are already studying), guided by their teacher. 
Students can choose from one of four approaches to produce: 
● a dissertation (for example an investigation based on predominately secondary research) 
● an investigation/field study (for example a practical experiment) 
● a performance (for example in music, drama or sport)  
● an artefact (for example creating a sculpture in response to a client brief or solving an 
engineering problem). 
The qualification is non-examination assessment based and students are assessed on the 
skills of managing, planning and evaluating their project. Students will research their topic, 
develop skills to review and evaluate the information, and then present the final outcome of 
their project. 
The Extended Project has 120 guided learning hours (GLH) consisting of a 40-GLH taught 
element that includes teaching the technical skills (for example research skills) and an  
80-GLH guided element that includes mentoring students through the project work. The 
qualification is 100% internally assessed and externally moderated. 
How to link the Extended Project with geography 
The Extended Project creates the opportunity to develop transferable skills for progression to 
higher education and to the workplace, through the exploration of either an area of personal 
interest or a topic of interest from within the geography qualification content.  
Through the Extended Project, students will develop skills that support their study of 
geography, including: 
● conducting, organising and using research  
● independent reading in the subject area  
● planning, project management and time management  
● defining a hypothesis to be tested in investigations  
● collecting, handling and interpreting data and evidence  
● evaluating arguments and processes, including arguments in favour of alternative 
interpretations of data and evaluation of experimental methodology  
● critical thinking. 
In the context of the Extended Project, critical thinking refers to the ability to identify and 
develop arguments for a point of view or hypothesis and to consider and respond to 
alternative arguments and interpretations of information. This supports the development of 
evaluative skills, through evaluating geographical data, and using qualitative and 
quantitative evidence to support informed judgements and propose evidence-based solutions 
to geographical issues. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
112 
Types of Extended Project related to geography 
Students may produce a dissertation on any topic that can be researched and argued, for 
example a controversial geographical issue such as landscape management or public opinion 
on re-branding or re-imaging of an urban or rural area. 
A dissertation might involve an investigation such as: 
● the impact of changes to the built environment in a chosen urban or rural area 
● an investigation into the success of coastal management approaches in a chosen area. 
The dissertation uses secondary research sources to provide a reasoned defence or a point of 
view, with consideration of alternative interpretations of data and evidence. 
An alternative might be an investigative project or field study involving the collection of data 
from primary research, for example: 
● a study of the impact of human activity on a glaciated area  
● a survey of historical change in an area. 
A field study might consider an issue that lends itself to primary research, for example an 
investigation into local perceptions of the impact of a regeneration project in a rural or urban 
area. 
Using the Extended Project to support breadth and depth 
In the Extended Project, students are assessed on the quality of the work they produce and 
the skills they develop and demonstrate through completing this work. Students should 
demonstrate that they have extended themselves in some significant way beyond what they 
have been studying in geography. Students can demonstrate extension in one or more 
dimensions:  
● deepening understanding – where a student explores a topic in greater depth than in 
the specification content. This could be an in-depth exploration of one aspect of one of the 
synoptic themes specified in the specification 
● broadening skills – where a student learns a new skill. This might be learning a new 
statistical technique that can be used in the analysis of either primary or secondary data 
collected by the student 
● widening perspectives – where the student’s project spans different subjects. A student 
studying geography with business may wish to research the impact of tourism on a 
particular region or locality. 
A wide range of information to support the delivery and assessment of the Extended Project, 
including the specification, teacher guidance for all aspects, an editable scheme of work and 
exemplars for all four approaches, can be found on our website. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
113 
Appendix 12: Codes 
 
Type of code Use of code Code 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for performance 
tables is assigned a discount code that 
indicates the subject area to which it 
belongs. 
Discount codes are published by the DfE. 
Please see the GOV.UK 
website* 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes  
Each qualification title is allocated an 
Ofqual Regulated Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) code. 
The RQF code is known as a Qualification 
Number (QN). This is the code that 
features in the DfE Section 96 and on the 
LARA as being eligible for 16–18 and 19+ 
funding, and is to be used for all 
qualification funding purposes. The QN will 
appear on students’ final certification 
documentation. 
The QN for this 
qualification is: 
601/8417/6 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to 
enter students for a qualification. Centres 
will need to use the entry codes only when 
claiming students’ qualifications. 
A Level – 9GE0 
 
Paper codes These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be 
entered for individual papers. 
Paper 1: 9GE0/01 
Paper 2: 9GE0/02 
Paper 3: 9GE0/03 
Non-examination 
assessment: 9GE0/04 
 
*www.gov.uk/government/publications/2018-performance-tables-discount-code  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
114 
Appendix 13: Rationale for Teacher 
Guidance 
Guidance permitted at different stages: 
● Investigation title stage (guidance and approval) 
● Planning and investigation stage (guidance and approval) 
 
Teachers can Rationale 
provide broad parameters for candidates’ 
investigation proposals (including themes 
from the specification, locations, 
availability of equipment, time 
constraints); 
Teachers may need to set the broad parameters 
of their candidates’ investigations as there may 
be only certain equipment available at the 
centre, which will potentially limit the range and 
scope of the investigations.  
For specifications with optionality, teachers in a 
centre may lack the expertise to assess an 
investigation reliably if it is within an option not 
being studied as part of the A Level course at 
the centre. Teachers may therefore want to set 
limitations on the overall themes which 
candidates can target for their investigations.  
Teachers may wish to inform candidates of the 
locations being used for the centre’s fieldwork 
excursions so that candidates are aware of these 
locations before they decide on their titles.  
Teachers may wish to inform candidates of the 
time constraints (for example when work needs 
to submitted for marking) so that candidates are 
aware of the time available to complete the 
work, as this could affect the investigations 
which they choose. 
explain what independence means (see 
table below). 
To help avoid malpractice teachers need to be 
able to explain to candidates where there can be 
collaboration and what this entails at the stages 
where it is allowed.  
advise on health and safety 
considerations, the use of equipment and 
potential ethical concerns. 
Where appropriate, teachers need to be allowed 
to give advice on health and safety 
considerations, the use of equipment and 
potential ethical concerns to ensure that 
candidates undertake their investigations in a 
safe and ethical manner. 
discuss with candidates their initial 
exploratory planning and tentative 
investigation titles. 
Teachers need to be able to give generic 
guidance at this point to ensure that candidates’ 
proposed investigations are achievable (for 
example, in terms of the resources available at 
the centre and the appropriateness of the title 
compared to the specification requirements). 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
115 
 
Teachers must Rationale 
confirm that the provisional title has the 
potential to meet the assessment criteria 
and offer general guidance on any 
necessary amendments.  
The DfE subject content states that the 
investigation must ‘be based on a question 
defined and developed by the student 
individually to address aims, questions and/or 
hypothesis relating to any of the core or non-
core content’. However, it would be 
unreasonable to allow a candidate to embark on 
an investigation which does not offer access to 
the assessment criteria. Therefore teachers 
must check the title and ensure that it is fit for 
purpose.  
review each candidate’s Geography 
Independent Investigation Form. Within 
this review teachers should ensure that 
the proposed investigation can suitably 
access the specification requirements and 
give guidance on the methodology and 
analytical tools that the candidate plans to 
use. 
Teachers must review candidates’ Geography 
Independent Investigation Forms to ensure that 
the proposed investigations are suitable, 
accessible and achievable with the resources 
available, as well as allowing access to the mark 
scheme. This review will also allow teachers to 
determine whether the candidates have decided 
upon their titles and subsequent plans 
individually, with collaboration evident only in 
the areas where it is specifically allowed. 
promote good practice such as 
referencing and using a bibliography 
system. 
Candidates must be made aware of good 
practice surrounding referencing and using a 
bibliography to help ensure that independence 
can be recognised and to avoid or to detect 
malpractice. 
store work securely once it is handed in 
for formal assessment.  
Teachers must securely store work once 
completed to avoid opportunities for 
malpractice. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
116 
 
Teachers must not Rationale 
provide candidates with a choice of titles 
or tasks from which candidates then 
choose.  
The DfE subject content states that candidates’ 
investigations must ‘be based on a question or 
issue defined and developed by the student 
individually to address aims, questions and/or 
hypotheses relating to any of the core or non-
core content’. If a teacher provides titles then 
candidates have not developed and defined the 
question or issue and it would constitute 
malpractice. 
give specific guidance to individual 
candidates about how to improve work to 
meet the assessment criteria. The 
guidance provided prior to final 
submission should only enable candidates 
to take the initiative in making 
amendments, rather than detailing what 
amendments should be made. This means 
that teachers must not provide templates 
and model answers for specific candidates 
work.  
The investigation must be independent, with 
collaboration only allowed in specific areas. 
Specific guidance to improve a candidate’s work 
would mean that the work was no longer 
independent. This feedback would need to be 
recorded on the mark form and taken into 
account when the work is marked. 
mark work provisionally and share that 
mark so that the candidate may then 
improve it.  
This would provide an indeterminate level of 
specific guidance which could not be taken into 
account when the work was (finally) marked. It 
is therefore not permitted and would constitute 
malpractice. 
return work to candidates after it has 
been submitted and marked.  
The work may be required for an extended 
sample either during the moderation period or at 
the Enquiry About Results (EAR) stage. 
give guidance on how to make 
improvements to the draft in order to 
meet the assessment criteria so that 
candidates are no longer engaged in 
independent learning. 
Guidance on how to make improvements to the 
draft in order to meet the assessment criteria 
would constitute detailed feedback to improve a 
candidate’s work, meaning that the work was no 
longer independent. This feedback would need 
to be recorded on the mark form and taken into 
account when the work is marked. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
117 
Appendix 14: Geography NEA teacher guidance 
This table is about demonstrating what is considered to be specific guidance and what is considered to be general guidance. Specific guidance 
can constitute malpractice in certain circumstances and must always be recorded and taken into account when marking candidates’ 
investigations. 
 
Investigation stage  Specific guidance  General guidance  Reasoning  
Exploring focus  Give candidates a list of titles from 
which to choose  
Give candidates an area of 
specification content they must 
focus on in their investigation 
Discuss specification content to find 
potential themes and relevance for 
an investigation 
Broadly outline the stages of the 
investigation, mark scheme 
expectations and the Geography 
Independent Investigation form.  
Teachers will need to provide an 
introduction to candidates. This 
could include detailing the 
equipment available from the school 
and/or describing expectations of 
the NEA through the mark scheme 
The investigation must be an 
independent piece of work by the 
candidate so teachers shouldn’t be 
giving candidates direct information 
such as titles. 
Title of the investigation, focus of 
investigation (sub-questions), 
purpose of investigation 
Give candidates a list of titles from 
which to choose 
Make significant changes to a 
candidates title so it is re-written 
Give candidates or make strong 
suggestions about the sub-questions 
Tell candidates what the purpose of 
the investigation is so they all have 
a similar approach/idea and this is 
reflected in their draft/final 
investigation write up 
Suggest that groups of candidates 
work on the same title but with 
minor changes such as an area 
reference  
Explore and discuss with candidates 
what makes a good title for an 
investigation and the 
value/importance of breaking this 
down into sub-questions. 
Direct candidates to material 
produced by exam boards on what 
makes a good title 
Give candidates an example title to 
critique and amend which is 
unrelated to any investigations a 
candidate may be interested in 
pursuing  
The teacher acts as the facilitator, 
encouraging candidates to plan their 
investigations and to ‘read around’ 
to get to grips with their title and 
sub-questions 
The teacher provides opportunities 
for candidates to set themselves up 
as independent learners through 
general discussions around the title, 
sub-questions, choosing a 
geographical area for study.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
118 
 
Investigation stage  Specific guidance  General guidance  Reasoning  
 Suggest that candidates use the 
same title but with different  
sub-questions 
  
Devising methodology and sampling 
framework 
Give candidates individual data 
collection technique suggestions 
relevant to their own investigation 
Tell candidates which sampling 
technique to use for their individual 
investigation 
Outline a range of fieldwork/data 
collection techniques relevant to 
human and physical investigations 
Provide opportunities for candidates 
to explore through literature and 
online resources a variety of data 
collection techniques 
Provide opportunities for candidates 
to research and reflect on sampling 
techniques appropriate to their 
investigation  
Encourage candidates to plan their 
methodology thinking about why 
particular techniques for data 
collection/sampling have been 
chosen and what they want/expect 
to find out 
 
Teachers should not be giving 
candidates suggestions for their 
methodology or giving them 
sampling techniques to try as this 
takes ownership of the investigation 
away from the candidate and 
discourages them from being 
independent 
The teacher acts as facilitator, 
encouraging candidates to plan their 
data collection and find out about 
techniques relevant to their own 
individual investigation 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Geography – Specification  
Issue 6 – December 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
119 
 
Investigation stage  Specific guidance  General guidance  Reasoning  
Primary data collection  Teach and guide candidates through 
each data collection technique 
relevant to their individual 
investigation  
Take a whole class/es on a fieldtrip 
and teach them all the same primary 
data collection techniques specific to 
an investigation or narrow range of 
investigations (such as coasts 
fieldwork where candidates may be 
taught the same data collection 
techniques for longshore drift, beach 
profiles and sediment sampling 
whereby ownership is taken away 
from candidates as they all have 
access to the same information and 
data sets) 
Produce fieldwork information on 
primary data collection techniques 
specific to individual candidate titles 
(such as coasts working through a 
narrow range of primary data 
collection techniques specific to 
individual titles, as outlined in the 
preceding bullet point) 
Outline and discuss with candidates 
what makes ‘good’/valuable primary 
data  
Provide opportunities for candidates 
to explore a range of data collection 
techniques, suggesting candidates 
use several techniques in their 
investigation, in order to ascertain 
what works well/ doesn’t as part of 
their evaluation 
Suggest candidates work in small 
groups with similar topic areas to 
collect primary data as a larger 
sample of data can potentially be 
collected. 
 
The teacher acts as the facilitator, 
encouraging candidates to plan their 
data collection and find out about 
techniques relevant to their own 
individual investigation 
Teachers as facilitators encourage 
candidates to ‘read around’ and 
discuss data collection techniques so 
that candidates can independently 
justify their choices of primary data 
collection and evaluate the success 
of those choices 
Teachers can suggest candidates 
work collaboratively in small groups 
with similar topic areas to collect 
primary data. This does not however 
prevent candidates from collecting 
additional data pertinent to their 
individual investigations. 
 
DB061224 9781446950395_GCE2016_AL_GEOG_ISSUE6.DOCX.1–126/0 
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office:  80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121
