A Level 
Chemistry
Specification
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry (9CH0)
First teaching from September 2015
First certification from 2017 Issue 3
 
 
About Pearson 
We are the world’s leading learning company operating in countries all around the 
world. We provide content, assessment and digital services to learners, educational 
institutions, employers, governments and other partners globally. We are 
committed to helping equip learners with the skills they need to enhance their 
employability prospects and to succeed in the changing world of work. We believe 
that wherever learning flourishes so do people. 
References to third party materials made in this specification are made in good 
faith. Pearson does not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of 
materials, which may be subject to change, or any opinions expressed therein. 
(Materials may include textbooks, journals, magazines and other publications and 
websites.) 
 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
 
ISBN 978 1 446 92953 7 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2024 
 
 
Summary of Pearson Edexcel Level 3  
Advanced GCE in Chemistry (9CH0) specification  
Issue 3 changes 
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this current 
issue 
Page 
number 
Adjusted font so that symbols for Aluminum, Chlorine and Thallium are more 
clear. 
Removal of ‘Relation in electronegativity difference’ table 
97 
 
If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, contact us via 
our website at: qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/contact-us.html 
 
 
 
 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
May 2014 
  The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important 
change to the education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications 
will assist them in helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an 
‘Expert Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or 
because of our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the 
world as diverse as Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries 
across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification 
development process that has included: 
• Extensive international comparability of subject content against the highest-
performing jurisdictions in the world 
• Benchmarking assessments against UK and overseas providers to ensure that 
they are at the right level of demand 
• Establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-
specific expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
• Subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future 
oriented. The design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, 
meaning learner outcomes have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a 
learner’s success in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident 
that we have supported the development of qualifications that are outstanding for 
their coherence, thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as 
representing world-class best practice.  
  
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Lee Sing Kong  
Director, National Institute of 
Education, Singapore 
  
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
  
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
 
All titles correct as at May 2014 
“ 
” 
 
 
Introduction 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry is designed for use in 
schools and colleges. It is part of a suite of GCE qualifications offered by Pearson. 
Purpose of the specification 
This specification sets out: 
• the objectives of the qualification 
• any other qualifications that a student must have completed before taking the 
qualification 
• any prior knowledge and skills that the student is required to have before taking 
the qualification 
• any other requirements that a student must have satisfied before they will be 
assessed or before the qualification will be awarded 
• the knowledge and understanding that will be assessed as part of the 
qualification 
• the method of assessment and any associated requirements relating to it 
• the criteria against which a student’s level of attainment will be measured (such 
as assessment criteria). 
 
  
Rationale 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry meets the following 
purposes, which fulfil those defined by the Office of Qualifications and Examinations 
Regulation (Ofqual) for GCE qualifications in their GCE Qualification Level 
Conditions and Requirements document, published in April 2014. 
The purposes of this qualification are to: 
• define and assess achievement of the knowledge, skills and understanding that 
will be needed by students planning to progress to undergraduate study at UK 
higher education institutions, particularly (although not only) in the same 
subject area 
• set out a robust and internationally comparable post-16 academic course of 
study to develop that knowledge, skills and understanding 
• enable higher education institutions to identify accurately the level of 
attainment of students 
• provide a basis for school and college accountability measures at age 18 
• provide a benchmark of academic ability for employers. 
Qualification aims and objectives 
The aims and objectives of the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
are to enable students to develop: 
• essential knowledge and understanding of different areas of the subject and 
how they relate to each other 
• a deep appreciation of the skills, knowledge and understanding of scientific 
methods 
• competence and confidence in a variety of practical, mathematical and  
problem-solving skills 
• their interest in and enthusiasm for the subject, including developing an interest 
in further study and careers associated with the subject 
• an understanding of how society makes decisions about scientific issues and 
how the sciences contribute to the success of the economy and society. 
 
 
The context for the development of this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] 
and our ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
• reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with 
those taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
• consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including subject 
associations, higher education academics, teachers and employers to ensure 
this qualification is suitable for a UK context 
• reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in 
their document GCE Qualification Level Conditions and Requirements and by the 
Department for Education (DfE) in their GCE AS and A level regulatory 
requirements for biology, chemistry, physics and psychology document, published 
in April 2014. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
● demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep 
learning and measuring higher-order skills 
● rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing 
reliable and valid assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in 
end users of the knowledge, skills and competencies of certified students 
● inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that 
students develop at different rates and have different learning needs, and 
focusing on progression 
● empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills,  
see Appendix 1. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Contents 
Qualification at a glance 1 
Knowledge, skills and understanding 5 
Science Practical Endorsement 45 
Marking and standardisation 49 
Malpractice 50 
Assessment 53 
Assessment summary 53 
Assessment Objectives and weightings 55 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 56 
Entry and assessment information 57 
Student entry 57 
Forbidden combinations and discount code 57 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special 
consideration 57 
Equality Act 2010 and Pearson equality policy 59 
Synoptic assessment 59 
Awarding and reporting 59 
Language of assessment 60 
Other information 61 
Student recruitment 61 
Prior learning and other requirements 61 
Progression 61 
Relationship between Advanced Subsidiary GCE and Advanced 
GCE 61 
Progression from Advanced Subsidiary GCE to Advanced GCE 62 
Relationship between GCSE and Advanced GCE 62 
Progression from GCSE to Advanced GCE 62 
Appendix 1: Transferable skills 65 
Appendix 2: Level 3 Extended Project qualification 67 
Appendix 3: Codes 71 
Appendix 4: Practical competency authentication 
sheet 73 
Appendix 5: Working scientifically 75 
Appendix 5a: Practical skills identified for indirect 
assessment and developed through teaching and 
learning 77
 
 
  
Appendix 5b: Practical skills identified for direct 
assessment and developed through teaching and 
learning 79 
Appendix 5c: Use of apparatus and techniques 81 
Appendix 5d: Mapping between Appendix 5c and core 
practicals (chemistry) 83 
Appendix 6: Mathematical skills and exemplifications 85 
Appendix 7: Command words used in examination 
papers 91
 
Appendix 8: Data Booklet 93 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
1 
Qualification at a glance 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry consists of three 
externally examined papers and the Science Practical Endorsement. 
Students are expected to carry out the sixteen core practical experiments that are 
identified in the topics. 
Students must complete all assessment in May/June in any single year. 
 
Paper 1: Advanced Inorganic and Physical Chemistry 
 *Paper code: 9CH0/01 
• Externally assessed 
• Availability: May/June 
• First assessment: 2017 
30% of the 
total 
qualification 
Overview of content 
This paper will examine the following topics. 
• Topic 1: Atomic Structure and the Periodic Table 
• Topic 2: Bonding and Structure 
• Topic 3: Redox I 
• Topic 4: Inorganic Chemistry and the Periodic Table 
• Topic 5: Formulae, Equations and Amounts of Substance 
• Topic 8: Energetics I 
• Topic 10: Equilibrium I 
• Topic 11: Equilibrium II 
• Topic 12: Acid-base Equilibria 
• Topic 13: Energetics II 
• Topic 14: Redox II 
• Topic 15: Transition Metals 
Overview of assessment 
• Assessment is 1 hour 45 minutes. 
• The paper consists of 90 marks. 
• The paper may include multiple-choice, short open, open-response, 
calculations and extended writing questions. 
• The paper will include questions that target mathematics at Level 2 or above 
(see Appendix 6: Mathematical skills and exemplifications). Overall, a 
minimum of 20% of the marks across the three papers will be awarded for 
mathematics at Level 2 or above. 
 
*See Appendix 3: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant 
to this qualification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
2 
 
Paper 2: Advanced Organic and Physical Chemistry 
 *Paper code: 9CH0/02 
• Externally assessed 
• Availability: May/June 
• First assessment: 2017 
30% of the 
total 
qualification 
Overview of content 
This paper will examine the following topics. 
• Topic 2: Bonding and Structure 
• Topic 3: Redox I 
• Topic 5: Formulae, Equations and Amounts of Substance 
• Topic 6: Organic Chemistry I 
• Topic 7: Modern Analytical Techniques I 
• Topic 9: Kinetics I 
• Topic 16: Kinetics II 
• Topic 17: Organic Chemistry II 
• Topic 18: Organic Chemistry III 
• Topic 19: Modern Analytical Techniques II 
Overview of assessment 
• Assessment is 1 hour 45 minutes. 
• The paper consists of 90 marks. 
• The paper may include multiple-choice, short open, open-response, 
calculations and extended writing questions. 
• The paper will include questions that target mathematics at Level 2 or above 
(see Appendix 6: Mathematical skills and exemplifications). Overall, a 
minimum of 20% of the marks across the three papers will be awarded for 
mathematics at Level 2 or above. 
 
*See Appendix 3: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant 
to this qualification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
3 
 
Paper 3: General and Practical Principles in Chemistry  
*Paper code: 9CH0/03 
• Externally assessed 
• Availability: May/June 
• First assessment: 2017 
40% of the 
total 
qualification 
Overview of content 
• Questions in this paper may draw on any of the topics in this specification. 
• The paper will include synoptic questions that may draw on two or more 
different topics listed. 
• The paper will include questions that assess conceptual and theoretical 
understanding of experimental methods (indirect practical skills) that will draw 
on students’ experiences of the core practicals. 
Overview of assessment 
• Assessment is 2 hours 30 minutes. 
• The paper consists of 120 marks. 
• The paper may include short open, open-response, calculations and extended 
writing questions. 
• The paper will include questions that target mathematics at Level 2 or above 
(see Appendix 6: Mathematical skills and exemplifications). Overall, a 
minimum of 20% of the marks across the three papers will be awarded for 
mathematics at Level 2 or above. 
• Some questions will assess conceptual and theoretical understanding of 
experimental methods (see Appendix 5: Working scientifically). 
 
*See Appendix 3: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant 
to this qualification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
4 
 
Science Practical Endorsement**  
*Paper code: 9CH0/04 
• Internally assessed and externally monitored by Pearson. 
• Availability: May/June 
• First assessment: 2017 
Overview of content 
The assessment of practical skills is a compulsory requirement of the course of 
study for A level chemistry. It will appear on all students’ certificates as a 
separately reported result, alongside the overall grade for the qualification.  
Students must carry out a minimum of 12 practical activities which, together, 
meet the requirements of Appendices 5b (Practical skills identified for direct 
assessment and developed through teaching and learning) and 5c (Use of 
apparatus and techniques) from the prescribed subject content.  
The practical activities prescribed in this specification (the "core practicals") 
provide opportunities for demonstrating competence in all the skills identified, 
together with the use of apparatus and techniques for each subject. However, 
students can also demonstrate these competencies in any additional practical 
activity undertaken throughout the course of study which covers the requirements 
of Appendix 5c. 
Overview of assessment 
Students' practical work will be assessed by teachers, using common practical 
assessment criteria (CPAC) that are consistent across exam boards. These criteria 
can be found on pages 48–49. 
Students who demonstrate the required standard across all the requirements of 
the CPAC will receive a ‘pass’ grade. 
Students may work in groups but teachers who award a pass to their students 
need to be confident of individual students’ competence. 
The correct application of CPAC to students' work will be monitored through a 
system of visits to centres. These visits will be coordinated across the exam 
boards by JCQ, to ensure that all centres are visited regularly, although not 
necessarily in each science subject. 
 
*See Appendix 3: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant 
to this qualification. 
 
**Students will be assessed separately for the Science Practical Endorsement. The 
Endorsement will not contribute to the overall grade for this qualification, but the 
result will be recorded on the student’s certificate. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
5 
 
Knowledge, skills and understanding 
Content overview 
Students will be expected to demonstrate and apply the knowledge, understanding 
and skills described in the content. They will also be expected to analyse, interpret 
and evaluate a range of scientific information, ideas and evidence using their 
knowledge, understanding and skills. 
To demonstrate their knowledge, students should be able to undertake a range of 
activities, including the ability to recall, describe and define, as appropriate. To 
demonstrate their understanding, students should be able to explain ideas and to 
use their knowledge to apply, analyse, interpret and evaluate, as appropriate. 
Core practicals will be assessed through examination. 
There are opportunities for students to develop mathematical skills throughout the 
content. They are required to apply the skills to relevant chemistry contexts. Please 
see Appendix 6: Mathematical skills and exemplifications for further information. 
Practical skills 
Practical work is central to any study of chemistry. For this reason, the specification 
includes 16 core practical activities which form a thread linking theoretical 
knowledge and understanding to practical scenarios. In following this thread, 
students will build on practical skills learned at GCSE, becoming confident practical 
chemists, handling apparatus competently and safely. Using a variety of apparatus 
and techniques, they should be able to design and carry out both the core practical 
activities and their own investigations, collecting data which can be analysed and 
used to draw valid conclusions.  
One important aspect of practical work is the ability to evaluate and manage 
potential risks. The variety of different practical techniques and scenarios in the 
core practical activities give students scope to consider risk management in 
different contexts.  
Students should also consider the ethical issues presented by their work in the 
laboratory, which might include consideration for using minimum quantities of 
resources, such as through microscale procedures; the safe disposal of waste 
materials, especially from organic reactions; and appropriate consideration for 
other people involved in their own work or who is working nearby. 
Also central to the development of practical skills is the ability to communicate 
information and ideas through the use of appropriate terminology and ICT. Being 
able to communicate clearly the findings of practical work is arguably as important 
as the collection of accurate data.  
In carrying out practical activities, students will be expected to use their knowledge 
and understanding to pose scientific questions which can be investigated through 
experimental activities. Such activities will enable students to collect data, analyse 
it for correlations and causal relationships, and to develop solutions to the 
questions posed.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
6 
Questions within written examination papers will aim to assess the knowledge and 
understanding that students gain while carrying out practical activities, within the 
context of the 16 core practical activities, as well as in novel practical scenarios. 
The written papers will test the skills of students in planning practical work – both 
in familiar and unfamiliar applications – including risk management and the 
selection of apparatus, with reasons. As part of data handling, students will be 
expected to use significant figures appropriately, to process data and to plot 
graphs. In analysing outcomes and drawing valid conclusions, students should 
critically consider methods and data, including assessing measurement 
uncertainties and errors.  
Examination papers will also provide the opportunity for students to evaluate the 
wider role of the scientific community in validating new knowledge and the ways in 
which society as a whole uses science to inform decision making. Within this, they 
could be asked to consider the implications and applications of chemistry in terms 
of associated benefits and risks. Students may also be asked to evaluate 
methodology, evidence and data and resolve conflicting evidence. 
Success in questions that indirectly assess practical skills within written papers will 
come more naturally to those candidates who have a solid foundation of laboratory 
practice and who, having carried them out, have a thorough understanding of 
practical techniques. Therefore, where possible, teachers should consider adding 
additional experiments to the core practical activities. The 16 core practicals will 
provide the basis from which some of the Paper 3 examination questions will be 
drawn. 
Teachers should note that the completion of the 16 core practical activities can also 
provide evidence of competence for the Science Practical Endorsement (please see 
page 45) and that evidence must be provided for the 12 practical techniques listed 
in Appendix 5c through a minimum of 12 core practical activities.  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
7 
Topic 1: Atomic Structure and the Periodic Table 
In order to develop their practical skills, students should be encouraged to carry out 
a range of practical experiments related to this topic. Possible experiments include 
the use of hand-held spectroscopes to investigate spectra from flame tests. 
Mathematical skills that could be developed in this topic include calculating a 
relative atomic mass from isotopic composition data, using simple probability to 
calculate the peak heights for the mass spectrum of chlorine molecules, using 
logarithms to compare successive ionisation energies for an element. 
Within this topic, students can consider how models for the atom have developed 
over time, as new evidence has become available. They can also consider how data 
is used to investigate relationships, such as between the magnitude of ionisation 
energy and the structure of an atom. 
 
Students should: 
1. know the structure of an atom in terms of electrons, protons and neutrons 
2. know the relative mass and relative charge of protons, neutrons and electrons 
3. know what is meant by the terms ‘atomic (proton) number’ and ‘mass number’ 
4. be able to determine the number of each type of sub-atomic particle in an atom, 
molecule or ion from the atomic (proton) number and mass number 
5. understand the term ‘isotopes’ 
6. be able to define the terms ‘relative isotopic mass’ and ‘relative atomic mass’, 
based on the 12C scale 
7. understand the terms ‘relative molecular mass’ and ‘relative formula mass’, 
including calculating these values from relative atomic masses 
 Definitions of these terms will not be expected. 
 The term ‘relative formula mass’ should be used for compounds with giant 
structures. 
8. be able to analyse and interpret data from mass spectrometry to calculate 
relative atomic mass from relative abundance of isotopes and vice versa 
9. be able to predict the mass spectra, including relative peak heights, for diatomic 
molecules, including chlorine 
10. understand how mass spectrometry can be used to determine the relative 
molecular mass of a molecule 
 Limited to the m/z value for the molecular ion, M+, giving the relative molecular 
mass of the molecule. 
11. be able to define the terms ‘first ionisation energy’ and ‘successive ionisation 
energies’ 
12. understand how ionisation energies are influenced by the number of protons, the 
electron shielding and the electron sub-shell from which the electron is removed 
13. understand reasons for the general increase in first ionisation energy across a 
period 
14. understand reasons for the decrease in first ionisation energy down a group 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
8 
 
Students should: 
15. understand how ideas about electronic configuration developed from: 
 i the fact that atomic emission spectra provide evidence for the existence  
 of quantum shells  
 ii the fact that successive ionisation energies provide evidence for the existence
 of quantum shells and the group to which the element belongs 
 iii the fact that the first ionisation energy of successive elements provides
 evidence for electron sub-shells 
16. know the number of electrons that can fill the first four quantum shells 
17. know that an orbital is a region within an atom that can hold up to two electrons 
with opposite spins 
18. know the shape of an s-orbital and a p-orbital 
19. know the number of electrons that occupy s, p and d-subshells 
20 know that electrons fill subshells singly, before pairing up, and that two electrons 
in the same orbital must have opposite spins 
21. be able to predict the electronic configurations, using 1s notation and electrons-
in-boxes notation, of: 
 i atoms, given the atomic number, Z, up to Z = 36 
 ii ions, given the atomic number, Z, and the ionic charge, for s and p block ions  
 only, up to Z = 36 
22. know that elements can be classified as s, p and d-block elements 
23. understand that electronic configuration determines the chemical properties of an 
element 
24. understand periodicity in terms of a repeating pattern across different periods 
25. understand reasons for the trends in the following properties of the elements 
from periods 2 and 3 of the Periodic Table: 
      i the melting and boiling temperatures of the elements, based on given data, in 
terms of structure and bonding 
      ii ionisation energy based on given data or recall of the plots of ionisation energy 
versus atomic number 
26. be able to illustrate periodicity using data, including electronic configurations, 
atomic radii, melting and boiling temperatures and first ionisation energies 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
9 
Topic 2: Bonding and Structure 
In order to develop their practical skills, students should be encouraged to carry out 
a range of practical experiments related to this topic. Possible experiments include 
investigating the migration of ions, for example in a U-tube of copper(II) chromate, 
seeing the effect of a charged rod on a flow of water. 
Mathematical skills that could be developed in this topic include representing 
shapes of molecules with suitable sketches, plotting data to investigate trends in 
boiling temperatures of alkanes. 
Within this topic, students can consider the strengths and weaknesses of the 
models used to describe different types of bonding. As part of their study of 
electron-pair repulsion theory, students can see how chemists can make 
generalisations and use them to make predictions. 
 
Students should: 
Topic 2A: Bonding 
1. know that ionic bonding is the strong electrostatic attraction between oppositely 
charged ions 
2. understand the effects that ionic radius and ionic charge have on the strength of 
ionic bonding 
3. understand the formation of ions in terms of electron loss or gain 
4. be able to draw electronic configuration diagrams of cations and anions using 
dot-and-cross diagrams 
5. understand reasons for the trends in ionic radii down a group and for a set of 
isoelectronic ions, e.g. N3– to Al3+ 
6. understand that the physical properties of ionic compounds and the migration of 
ions provide evidence for the existence of ions 
7. know that a covalent bond is the strong electrostatic attraction between two 
nuclei and the shared pair of electrons between them 
8. be able to draw dot-and-cross diagrams to show electrons in covalent substances, 
including: 
 i molecules with single, double and triple bonds 
 ii species exhibiting dative covalent (coordinate) bonding, including Al2Cl6 and  
 ammonium ion 
9. understand the relationship between bond lengths and bond strengths for 
covalent bonds 
10. understand that the shape of a simple molecule or ion is determined by the 
repulsion between the electron pairs that surround a central atom 
11. understand reasons for the shapes of, and bond angles in, simple molecules and 
ions with up to six outer pairs of electrons (any combination of bonding pairs and 
lone pairs) 
 Examples should include BeCl2, BCl3, CH4, NH3, NH4+, H2O, CO2, PCl5(g) and 
SF6(g) and related molecules and ions; as well as simple organic molecules in 
this specification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
10 
 
 
Students should: 
12. be able to predict the shapes of, and bond angles in, simple molecules and ions 
analogous to those specified above using electron-pair repulsion theory 
13. know that electronegativity is the ability of an atom to attract the bonding 
electrons in a covalent bond 
14. know that ionic and covalent bonding are the extremes of a continuum of 
bonding type and that electronegativity differences lead to bond polarity in bonds 
and molecules 
15. understand that molecules with polar bonds may not be polar molecules and be 
able to predict whether or not a given molecule is likely to be polar 
16. understand the nature of intermolecular forces resulting from the following 
interactions: 
      i London forces (instantaneous dipole – induced dipole) 
 ii permanent dipoles 
 iii hydrogen bonds 
17. understand the interactions in molecules, such as H2O, liquid NH3 and liquid HF, 
which give rise to hydrogen bonding 
18. understand the following anomalous properties of water resulting from hydrogen 
bonding: 
 i its relatively high melting temperature and boiling temperature 
 ii the density of ice compared to that of water 
19. be able to predict the presence of hydrogen bonding in molecules analogous to 
those mentioned above 
20. understand, in terms of intermolecular forces, physical properties shown by 
materials, including: 
 i the trends in boiling temperatures of alkanes with increasing chain length 
 ii the effect of branching in the carbon chain on the boiling temperatures of
 alkanes 
 iii the relatively low volatility (higher boiling temperatures) of alcohols compared
 to alkanes with a similar number of electrons 
 iv the trends in boiling temperatures of the hydrogen halides, HF to HI 
21. understand factors that influence the choice of solvents, including: 
 i water, to dissolve some ionic compounds, in terms of the hydration of the ions 
 ii water, to dissolve simple alcohols, in terms of hydrogen bonding 
 iii water, as a poor solvent for compounds (to include polar molecules such as
 halogenoalkanes), in terms of inability to form hydrogen bonds 
 iv non-aqueous solvents, for compounds that have similar intermolecular forces
 to those in the solvent 
22. know that metallic bonding is the strong electrostatic attraction between metal 
ions and the delocalised electrons 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
11 
 
Students should: 
Topic 2B: Structure 
23. know that giant lattices are present in: 
 i ionic solids (giant ionic lattices) 
 ii covalently bonded solids, such as diamond, graphite and silicon(IV) oxide
 (giant covalent lattices) 
 iii solid metals (giant metallic lattices) 
24. know that the structure of covalently bonded substances such as iodine, I2, and 
ice, H2O, is simple molecular 
25. know the different structures formed by carbon atoms, including graphite, 
diamond and graphene 
26. be able to predict the type of structure and bonding present in a substance from 
numerical data and/or other information 
27. be able to predict the physical properties of a substance, including melting and 
boiling temperature, electrical conductivity and solubility in water, in terms of: 
 i the types of particle present (atoms, molecules, ions, electrons) 
 ii the structure of the substance 
 iii the type of bonding and the presence of intermolecular forces, where relevant 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
12 
Topic 3: Redox I 
In order to develop their practical skills, students should be encouraged to carry out 
a range of practical experiments related to this topic. Possible experiments include 
simple test tube reactions to investigate redox systems. 
Mathematical skills that could be developed in this topic include using an algebraic 
method to work out the oxidation number of an element within a complex species, 
balancing equations for redox reactions by combining ionic half-equations. 
Within this topic, students can consider how the concept of oxidation number 
provides a more considered route for the process of balancing chemical equations. 
 
Students should: 
1. know what is meant by the term ‘oxidation number’ 
2. be able to calculate the oxidation number of elements in compounds and ions 
 The use of oxidation numbers in peroxides and metal hydrides is expected. 
3. understand oxidation and reduction in terms of electron transfer and changes in 
oxidation number, applied to reactions of s- and p-block elements 
4. understand oxidation and reduction in terms of electron loss or electron gain 
5. know that oxidising agents gain electrons 
6. know that reducing agents lose electrons 
7. understand that a disproportionation reaction involves an element in a single 
species being simultaneously oxidised and reduced 
8. know that oxidation number is a useful concept in terms of the classification of 
reactions as redox and as disproportionation 
9. be able to indicate the oxidation number of an element in a compound or ion, 
using a Roman numeral 
10. be able to write formulae given oxidation numbers 
11. understand that metals, in general, form positive ions by loss of electrons with 
an increase in oxidation number 
12. understand that non-metals, in general, form negative ions by gain of electrons 
with a decrease in oxidation number 
13. be able to write ionic half-equations and use them to construct full ionic 
equations 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
13 
Topic 4: Inorganic Chemistry and the Periodic Table 
In order to develop their practical skills, students should be encouraged to carry out 
a range of practical experiments related to this topic. Possible experiments include 
reacting Group 2 elements with water, heating nitrates and carbonates of Group 1 
and 2 elements, investigating flame colours of s-block elements, preparing iodine 
from seaweed, investigating displacement reactions in the halogens, reacting 
Group 1 halides with concentrated sulfuric acid. 
Mathematical skills that could be developed in this topic include manipulating data 
on the solubility of hydroxides. 
Within this topic, students can consider how data can be used to make predictions 
based on patterns and relationships, for example by predicting properties of 
Group 7 elements. 
 
Students should: 
Topic 4A: The elements of Groups 1 and 2 
1. understand reasons for the trend in ionisation energy down Group 2 
2. understand reasons for the trend in reactivity of the Group 2 elements down the 
group 
3. know the reactions of the elements Mg to Ba in Group 2 with oxygen, chlorine 
and water 
4. know the reactions of the oxides of Group 2 elements with water and dilute acid, 
and their hydroxides with dilute acid 
5. know the trends in solubility of the hydroxides and sulfates of Group 2 elements 
6. understand reasons for the trends in thermal stability of the nitrates and the 
carbonates of the elements in Groups 1 and 2 in terms of the size and charge of 
the cations involved 
7. understand the formation of characteristic flame colours by Group 1 and 2 
compounds in terms of electron transitions 
 Students will be expected to know the flame colours for Groups 1 and 2 
compounds. 
8. understand experimental procedures to show: 
 i patterns in thermal decomposition of Group 1 and 2 nitrates and carbonates 
 ii flame colours in compounds of Group 1 and 2 elements 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
14 
 
Students should: 
Topic 4B: The elements of Group 7 (halogens) 
9. understand reasons for the trends in melting and boiling temperatures, physical 
state at room temperature, and electronegativity for Group 7 elements 
10. understand reasons for the trend in reactivity of Group 7 elements down the 
group 
11. understand the trend in reactivity of Group 7 elements in terms of the redox 
reactions of Cl2, Br2 and I2 with halide ions in aqueous solution, followed by the 
addition of an organic solvent 
12. understand, in terms of changes in oxidation number, the following reactions of 
the halogens: 
 i oxidation reactions with Group 1 and 2 metals 
 ii the disproportionation reaction of chlorine with water and the use of chlorine
 in water treatment 
  iii the disproportionation reaction of chlorine with cold, dilute aqueous sodium
 hydroxide to form bleach 
 iv the disproportionation reaction of chlorine with hot alkali 
 v reactions analogous to those specified above 
13. understand the following reactions: 
 i solid Group 1 halides with concentrated sulfuric acid, to illustrate the trend in
 reducing ability of the hydrogen halides  
 ii precipitation reactions of the aqueous anions Cl–, Br– and I– with aqueous
 silver nitrate solution, followed by aqueous ammonia solution 
 iii hydrogen halides with ammonia and with water (to produce acids) 
14. be able to make predictions about fluorine and astatine and their compounds, in 
terms of knowledge of trends in halogen chemistry 
Topic 4C: Analysis of inorganic compounds 
15. know reactions, including ionic equations where appropriate, for identifying: 
 i carbonate ions, CO32-, and hydrogencarbonate ions, HCO3–, using an aqueous  
 acid to form carbon dioxide 
 ii sulfate ions, SO42-, using acidified barium chloride solution 
 iii ammonium ions, NH4+, using sodium hydroxide solution and warming to form  
 ammonia 
 Tests for halide ions and for the ions of Group 1 and 2 metals are also required, 
but are covered elsewhere in this Topic. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
15 
Topic 5: Formulae, Equations and Amounts of Substance 
In order to develop their practical skills, students should be encouraged to carry out 
a range of practical experiments related to this topic. Possible experiments include 
determining a simple empirical formula such as MgO or CuO, determining the 
number of moles of water of crystallisation in a salt such as Epsom salts, 
performing a wide range of titrations involving different indicators, preparing salts. 
Mathematical skills that could be developed in this topic include converting between 
units such as cm3 and dm3, using standard form with the Avogadro constant, 
rearranging formulae for calculating moles in solids and in solutions, calculating 
atom economy, dealing with percentage errors. 
Within this topic, students first encounter core practicals and can consider ideas of 
measurement uncertainty, evaluating their results in terms of systematic and 
random errors. They can also consider how the concept of atom economy is useful 
to help chemists make decisions so that reactions can be made more efficient in 
terms of resources. 
 
Students should: 
1. know that the mole (mol) is the unit for amount of a substance 
2. be able to use the Avogadro constant, L, (6.02 × 1023 mol-1) in calculations 
3. know that the molar mass of a substance is the mass per mole of the substance 
in g mol-1 
4. know what is meant by the terms ‘empirical formula’ and ‘molecular formula’ 
5.  be able to use experimental data to calculate  
 i. empirical formulae  
 ii. molecular formulae including the use of pV = nRT for gases and volatile liquids 
 Calculations of empirical formula may involve composition by mass or percentage 
composition by mass data. 
6. be able to write balanced full and ionic equations, including state symbols, for 
chemical reactions 
7. be able to calculate amounts of substances (in mol) in reactions involving mass, 
volume of gas, volume of solution and concentration 
 These calculations may involve reactants and/or products. 
8. be able to calculate reacting masses from chemical equations, and vice versa, 
using the concepts of amount of substance and molar mass 
9. be able to calculate reacting volumes of gases from chemical equations, and vice 
versa, using the concepts of amount of substance 
10. be able to calculate reacting volumes of gases from chemical equations, and vice 
versa, using the concepts of molar volume of gases 
CORE PRACTICAL 1: Measure the molar volume of a gas 
11. be able to calculate solution concentrations, in mol dm-3 and g dm-3, including 
simple acid-base titrations using a range of acids, alkalis and indicators 
 The use of both phenolphthalein and methyl orange as indicators will be 
expected. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
16 
 
Students should: 
CORE PRACTICAL 2: Prepare a standard solution from a solid acid and use it 
to find the concentration of a solution of sodium hydroxide 
CORE PRACTICAL 3: Find the concentration of a solution of hydrochloric acid 
12. be able to: 
 i calculate measurement uncertainties and measurement errors in experimental
 results 
 ii comment on sources of error in experimental procedures 
13. understand how to minimise the percentage error and percentage uncertainty in 
experiments involving measurements 
14. be able to calculate percentage yields and percentage atom economies using 
chemical equations and experimental results 
 molar mass of the desired productAtom economy of a reaction =  × 100%
sum of the molar masses of all products
 
 
15. be able to relate ionic and full equations, with state symbols, to observations 
from simple test tube reactions, to include: 
 i displacement reactions 
 ii reactions of acids 
 iii precipitation reactions 
16. understand risks and hazards in practical procedures and suggest appropriate 
precautions where necessary 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
17 
Topic 6: Organic Chemistry I 
In order to develop their practical skills, students should be encouraged to carry out 
a range of practical experiments related to this topic. Possible experiments include 
cracking of artificial crude oil, extracting limonene from orange peel, dehydrating an 
alcohol to an alkene, preparing a simple halogenoalkane such as 1-bromobutane, 
simple test tube reactions for different functional groups. 
Mathematical skills that could be developed in this topic include calculating the yield 
of a reaction or an atom economy. 
Within this topic, students can consider how the polymer industry provides useful 
solutions for many modern applications, but poses questions about sustainability of 
resources and the feasibility of recycling. They will also encounter practical organic 
chemistry, showing them how chemists work safely with potentially hazardous 
chemicals by managing risks. 
 
Students should: 
Topic 6A: Introduction to organic chemistry 
1. know that a hydrocarbon is a compound of hydrogen and carbon only 
2. be able to represent organic molecules using empirical formulae, molecular 
formulae, general formulae, structural formulae, displayed formulae and skeletal 
formulae 
3. know what is meant by the terms ‘homologous series’ and ‘functional group’ 
4. be able to name compounds relevant to this specification using the rules of 
International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) nomenclature 
 Students will be expected to know prefixes for compounds up to C10 
5. be able to classify reactions as addition, elimination, substitution, oxidation, 
reduction, hydrolysis or polymerisation 
6. understand the term ‘structural isomerism’ and determine the possible structural, 
displayed and skeletal formulae of an organic molecule, given its molecular 
formula 
7. understand the term ‘stereoisomerism’, as illustrated by E/Z isomerism 
(including cis-trans isomerism where two of the substituent groups are the same) 
Topic 6B: Alkanes 
8. know the general formula for alkanes 
9. know that alkanes and cycloalkanes are saturated hydrocarbons 
10. understand that alkane fuels are obtained from the fractional distillation, cracking 
and reforming of crude oil 
Reforming is described as the processing of straight-chain hydrocarbons into 
branched-chain alkanes and cyclic hydrocarbons for efficient combustion. 
11. know that pollutants, including carbon monoxide, oxides of nitrogen and sulfur, 
carbon particulates and unburned hydrocarbons, are formed during the 
combustion of alkane fuels 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
18 
 
Students should: 
12. understand the problems arising from pollutants from the combustion of fuels, 
limited to the toxicity of carbon monoxide and the acidity of oxides of nitrogen 
and sulfur 
13. understand how the use of a catalytic converter solves some problems caused by 
pollutants 
14. understand the use of alternative fuels, including biodiesel and alcohols derived 
from renewable sources such as plants, in terms of a comparison with 
non-renewable fossil fuels 
15. know that a radical: 
 i is a species with an unpaired electron and is represented in mechanisms by a 
 single dot 
 ii is formed by homolytic fission of a covalent bond and results in the formation 
 of radicals 
16. understand the reactions of alkanes with: 
 i oxygen in air (combustion) 
 ii halogens, in terms of the mechanism of radical substitution through initiation,
 propagation and termination steps 
      The use of curly half-arrows is not expected in this mechanism. 
17. understand the limitations of the use of radical substitution reactions in the 
synthesis of organic molecules, in terms of further substitution reactions and the 
formation of a mixture of products 
Topic 6C: Alkenes 
18. know the general formula for alkenes 
19. know that alkenes and cycloalkenes are unsaturated hydrocarbons 
20. understand the bonding in alkenes in terms of σ- and π- bonds 
21. know what is meant by the term ‘electrophile’ 
22. understand the addition reactions of alkenes with: 
 i hydrogen, in the presence of a nickel catalyst, to form an alkane 
 Knowledge of the application of this reaction to the manufacture of margarine 
by catalytic hydrogenation of unsaturated vegetable oils is expected. 
 ii halogens to produce dihalogenoalkanes 
 iii hydrogen halides to produce halogenoalkanes 
 iv steam, in the presence of an acid catalyst, to produce alcohols 
 v potassium manganate(VII), in acid conditions, to oxidise the double bond and
 produce a diol 
23. understand that heterolytic bond fission of a covalent bond results in the 
formation of ions 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
19 
 
Students should: 
24. understand the mechanism of the electrophilic addition reactions between 
alkenes and: 
 i halogens 
 ii hydrogen halides, including addition to unsymmetrical alkenes 
 iii other given binary compounds 
 Use of the curly arrow notation is expected − curly arrows should start from 
either a bond or from a lone pair of electrons. 
 Knowledge of the relative stability of primary, secondary and tertiary carbocation 
intermediates is expected. 
25. know the qualitative test for a C=C double bond using bromine or bromine water 
26. know that alkenes form polymers through addition polymerisation 
 Be able to identify the repeat unit of an addition polymer given the monomer, 
and vice versa. 
27. know that waste polymers can be separated into specific types of polymer for: 
 i recycling 
 ii incineration to release energy 
 iii use as a feedstock for cracking 
28. understand, in terms of the use of energy and resources over the life cycle of 
polymer products, that chemists can contribute to the more sustainable use of 
materials 
29. understand how chemists limit the problems caused by polymer disposal by: 
 i developing biodegradable polymers 
 ii removing toxic waste gases caused by incineration of plastics 
Topic 6D: Halogenoalkanes 
30. know that halogenoalkanes can be classified as primary, secondary or tertiary 
31. understand what is meant by the term ‘nucleophile’ 
32. understand the reactions of halogenoalkanes with: 
 i aqueous potassium hydroxide to produce alcohols (where the hydroxide ion
 acts as a nucleophile) 
 ii aqueous silver nitrate in ethanol (where water acts as a nucleophile) 
 iii potassium cyanide to produce nitriles (where the cyanide ion acts as a 
nucleophile) 
 Students should know this as an example of increasing the length of the 
carbon chain. 
 iv ammonia to produce primary amines (where the ammonia molecule acts as a
 nucleophile) 
 v ethanolic potassium hydroxide to produce alkenes (where the hydroxide ion
 acts as a base) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
20 
 
Students should: 
33. understand that experimental observations and data can be used to compare the 
relative rates of hydrolysis of: 
 i primary, secondary and tertiary halogenoalkanes 
 ii chloro-, bromo-, and iodoalkanes 
 using aqueous silver nitrate in ethanol 
CORE PRACTICAL 4: Investigation of the rates of hydrolysis of some 
halogenoalkanes 
34. know the trend in reactivity of primary, secondary and tertiary halogenoalkanes 
35. understand, in terms of bond enthalpy, the trend in reactivity of chloro-, bromo-, 
and iodoalkanes 
36. understand the mechanisms of the nucleophilic substitution reactions between 
primary halogenoalkanes and: 
 i aqueous potassium hydroxide 
 ii ammonia 
Topic 6E: Alcohols 
37. know that alcohols can be classified as primary, secondary or tertiary 
38. understand the reactions of alcohols with: 
 i oxygen in air (combustion) 
 ii halogenating agents: 
• PCl5 to produce chloroalkanes 
• 50% concentrated sulfuric acid and potassium bromide to produce 
bromoalkanes 
• red phosphorus and iodine to produce iodoalkanes 
      iii potassium dichromate(VI) in dilute sulfuric acid to oxidise primary alcohols to 
aldehydes (including a test for the aldehyde using Benedict’s/Fehling’s 
solution) and carboxylic acids, and secondary alcohols to ketones 
In equations, the oxidising agent can be represented as [O]. 
 iv concentrated phosphoric acid to form alkenes by elimination 
  Descriptions of the mechanisms of these reactions are not expected. 
39. understand the following techniques used in the preparation and purification of a 
liquid organic compound: 
 i heating under reflux 
 ii extraction with a solvent in a separating funnel 
 iii distillation 
 iv drying with an anhydrous salt 
 v boiling temperature determination 
CORE PRACTICAL 5: The oxidation of ethanol 
CORE PRACTICAL 6: Chlorination of 2-methylpropan-2-ol using concentrated 
hydrochloric acid 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
21 
Topic 7: Modern Analytical Techniques I 
In order to develop their practical skills, students should be encouraged to carry out 
a range of practical experiments related to this topic. Hands-on practical work is 
limited in this topic, although many universities allow students to visit and learn 
about instrumentation first hand. 
Mathematical skills that could be developed in this topic include analysing 
fragmentation patterns in mass spectra. 
Within this topic, students can consider how different instrumental methods can 
provide evidence for analysis. They can see how accurate and sensitive methods of 
analysis can be applied to the study of chemical changes, but also to detect drugs 
such as in blood or urine testing in sport. 
 
Students should: 
Topic 7A: Mass spectrometry 
1. be able to use data from a mass spectrometer to: 
 i determine the relative molecular mass of an organic compound from the  
 molecular ion peak 
 ii suggest possible structures of a simple organic compound from the m/z of the  
 molecular ion and fragmentation patterns 
Topic 7B: Infrared (IR) spectroscopy 
2. be able to use data from infrared spectra to deduce functional groups present in 
organic compounds and to predict infrared absorptions, given wavenumber data, 
due to familiar functional groups, including: 
 i C–H stretching absorption in alkanes, alkenes and aldehydes 
 ii C=C stretching absorption in alkenes 
 iii O–H stretching absorption in alcohols 
 iv C=O stretching absorption in aldehydes and ketones 
 v C=O stretching absorption and the broad O-H stretching absorption in
 carboxylic acids 
 vi N–H stretching absorption in amines 
CORE PRACTICAL 7: Analysis of some inorganic and organic unknowns 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
22 
Topic 8: Energetics I 
In order to develop their practical skills, students should be encouraged to carry out 
a range of practical experiments related to this topic. Possible experiments include 
a wide variety of calorimetry experiments involving displacement and neutralisation 
reactions, investigating the enthalpy of combustion of a homologous series of 
alcohols. 
Mathematical skills that could be developed in this topic include plotting and 
extrapolating graphs of temperature rise against time for displacement reactions, 
calculating enthalpy changes in J and in kJ mol
-1, using algebra to solve Hess’s law 
problems, calculating enthalpy changes using bond enthalpies. 
Within this topic, students can consider how the use of Hess’s Law can facilitate the 
study of energy changes in reactions which are not directly measureable. They can 
also consider the value of a general chemical concept, such as mean bond enthalpy, 
and why the use of a simplification such as this has some benefits, as well as some 
short-comings. 
 
Students should:  
1. know that standard conditions are 100 kPa and a specified temperature, usually 
298 K 
2. know that the enthalpy change is the heat energy change measured at constant 
pressure 
3. be able to construct and interpret enthalpy level diagrams showing an enthalpy 
change, including appropriate signs for exothermic and endothermic reactions 
 Activation energy is not shown in enthalpy level diagrams but it is shown in 
reaction profile diagrams. 
4. be able to define standard enthalpy change of: 
 i reaction 
 ii formation 
 iii combustion 
 iv neutralisation 
5. understand experiments to measure enthalpy changes in terms of: 
 i processing results using the expression: 
  energy transferred = mass x specific heat capacity × temperature change 
 (Q=mcΔT) 
 ii evaluating sources of error and assumptions made in the experiments 
  Students will need to consider experiments where: 
o substances are mixed in an insulated container and the temperature 
change is measured 
o enthalpy of combustion is measured, such as using a series of alcohols in a 
spirit burner 
o the enthalpy change cannot be measured directly. 
6. be able to calculate enthalpy changes in kJ mol-1 from given experimental results 
 Both a sign and units are expected in the final answer. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
23 
 
Students should:  
7. be able to construct enthalpy cycles using Hess’s Law 
8. be able to calculate enthalpy changes from data using Hess’s Law 
CORE PRACTICAL 8: To determine the enthalpy change of a reaction using 
Hess’s Law 
9. know what is meant by the terms ‘bond enthalpy’ and ‘mean bond enthalpy’ 
10. be able to calculate an enthalpy change of reaction using mean bond enthalpies 
and explain the limitations of this method of calculation 
11. be able to calculate mean bond enthalpies from enthalpy changes of reaction 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
24 
Topic 9: Kinetics I 
In order to develop their practical skills, students should be encouraged to carry out 
a range of practical experiments related to this topic. Possible experiments include 
investigating a variety of factors that influence the rates of reaction between, for 
example, marble chips and hydrochloric acid, or sodium thiosulfate and hydrochloric 
acid, investigating catalysis using hydrogen peroxide. 
Mathematical skills that could be developed in this topic include calculating rates 
from reaction time, plotting graphs and having an appreciation of the nature of the 
graph for a Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution. 
Within this topic, students can consider how the use of models in chemistry is 
illustrated by the way in which the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution and collision 
theory can account for the effects of changing variables on the rate of a chemical 
reaction. 
 
Students should:  
1. understand, in terms of collision theory, the effect of a change in concentration, 
temperature, pressure and surface area on the rate of a chemical reaction 
2. understand that reactions only take place when collisions take place with 
sufficient energy, known as activation energy 
3. be able to calculate the rate of a reaction from: 
 i data showing the time taken for reaction 
 ii the gradient of a suitable graph, by drawing a tangent, either for initial rate, 
or at a time, t 
4. understand qualitatively, in terms of the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution of 
molecular energies, how changes in temperature affect the rate of a reaction 
5. understand the role of catalysts in providing alternative reaction routes of lower 
activation energy 
6. be able to draw the reaction profiles for uncatalysed and catalysed reactions 
7. be able to interpret the action of a catalyst in terms of a qualitative 
understanding of the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution of molecular energies 
8. understand the use of a solid (heterogeneous) catalyst for industrial reactions, in 
the gas phase, in terms of providing a surface for the reaction 
9. understand the economic benefits of the use of catalysts in industrial reactions 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
25 
Topic 10: Equilibrium I 
In order to develop their practical skills, students should be encouraged to carry out 
a range of practical experiments related to this topic. Possible experiments include 
investigating equilibrium systems, such as iron(III) – thiocyanate, or the effect of 
temperature on the equilibrium between [Co(H2O)6]2+ and [CoCl4]2– 
Mathematical skills that could be developed in this topic include deriving an 
algebraic expression for the equilibrium constant. 
Within this topic, students can consider how an appreciation of equilibrium 
processes, coupled with kinetics, can lead chemists to redevelop manufacturing 
processes to make them more efficient. 
 
Students should: 
1. know that many reactions are readily reversible and that they can reach a state 
of dynamic equilibrium in which: 
 i the rate of the forward reaction is equal to the rate of the backward reaction 
 ii the concentrations of reactants and products remain constant 
2. be able to predict and justify the qualitative effect of a change in temperature, 
concentration or pressure on a homogeneous system in equilibrium 
3. evaluate data to explain the necessity, for many industrial processes, to reach a 
compromise between the yield and the rate of reaction 
4. be able to deduce an expression for Kc , for homogeneous and heterogeneous 
systems, in terms of equilibrium concentrations 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
26 
Topic 11: Equilibrium II 
In order to develop their practical skills, students should be encouraged to carry out 
a range of practical experiments related to this topic. Possible experiments include 
determining the value for an equilibrium constant for a simple esterification 
reaction. 
Mathematical skills that could be developed in this topic include constructing 
expressions for Kc and Kp and calculating values with relevant units, estimating the 
change to the value of an equilibrium constant when a variable changes. 
Within this topic, students can consider how chemists can use the concept of 
equilibria to predict quantitatively the direction and extent of chemical change. 
 
Students should: 
1. be able to deduce an expression for Kp, for homogeneous and heterogeneous 
systems, in terms of equilibrium partial pressures in atm 
2. be able to calculate a value, with units where appropriate, for the equilibrium 
constant (Kc and Kp) for homogeneous and heterogeneous reactions, from 
experimental data 
3. know the effect of changing temperature on the equilibrium constant (Kc and Kp), 
for both exothermic and endothermic reactions 
4. understand that the effect of temperature on the position of equilibrium is 
explained using a change in the value of the equilibrium constant 
5. understand that the value of the equilibrium constant is not affected by changes 
in concentration or pressure or by the addition of a catalyst 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
27 
Topic 12: Acid-base Equilibria 
In order to develop their practical skills, students should be encouraged to carry out 
a range of practical experiments related to this topic. Possible experiments include 
a series of pH titrations to determine titration curves, calculating an ionisation 
constant for a pH indicator, making up and investigating the properties of buffer 
solutions and using a pH meter. 
Mathematical skills that could be developed in this topic include the use of 
logarithms and exponentials for converting from concentration to pH and vice 
versa, rearranging Ka expressions into expressions suitable for calculating pH of a 
buffer solution, plotting and interpreting titration curves. 
Within this topic, students can consider how the historical development of theories 
explaining acid and base behaviour show that scientific ideas change as a result of 
new evidence and fresh thinking. They can also relate their study of buffer solutions 
to a range of applications in living cells, medicines, foods and the natural 
environment. 
 
Students should: 
1. know that a Brønsted–Lowry acid is a proton donor and a Brønsted–Lowry base is 
a proton acceptor 
2. know that acid-base reactions involve the transfer of protons 
3. be able to identify Brønsted–Lowry conjugate acid-base pairs 
4. be able to define the term ‘pH’ 
5. be able to calculate pH from hydrogen ion concentration 
6. be able to calculate the concentration of hydrogen ions, in mol dm-3, in a solution 
from its pH, using the expression [H+] = 10–pH 
7. understand the difference between a strong acid and a weak acid in terms of 
degree of dissociation 
8. be able to calculate the pH of a strong acid 
9. be able to deduce the expression for the acid dissociation constant, Ka, for a 
weak acid and carry out relevant calculations 
10. be able to calculate the pH of a weak acid making relevant assumptions 
11. be able to define the ionic product of water, Kw 
12. be able to calculate the pH of a strong base from its concentration, using Kw 
13. be able to define the terms ‘pKa’ and ‘pKw’ 
14. be able to analyse data from the following experiments: 
 i measuring the pH of a variety of substances, e.g. equimolar solutions of
 strong and weak acids, strong and weak bases, and salts 
 ii comparing the pH of a strong acid and a weak acid after dilution 10, 100 and
 1000 times 
15. be able to calculate Ka for a weak acid from experimental data given the pH of a 
solution containing a known mass of acid 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
28 
 
Students should: 
16. be able to draw and interpret titration curves using all combinations of strong 
and weak monobasic acids and bases 
17. be able to select a suitable indicator, using a titration curve and appropriate data 
18. know what is meant by the term ‘buffer solution’ 
19. understand the action of a buffer solution 
20. be able to calculate the pH of a buffer solution given appropriate data 
21. be able to calculate the concentrations of solutions required to prepare a buffer 
solution of a given pH 
22. understand how to use a weak acid–strong base titration curve to: 
 i demonstrate buffer action 
 ii determine Ka from the pH at the point where half the acid is neutralised 
23. understand why there is a difference in enthalpy changes of neutralisation values 
for strong and weak acids 
24. understand the roles of carbonic acid molecules and hydrogencarbonate ions in 
controlling the pH of blood 
CORE PRACTICAL 9: Finding the Ka value for a weak acid 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
29 
Topic 13: Energetics II 
In order to develop their practical skills, students should be encouraged to carry out 
a range of practical experiments related to this topic. Possible experiments include 
measuring enthalpy change of solution, investigating enthalpy and entropy changes 
in reactions such as neutralisations. 
Mathematical skills that could be developed in this topic include calculating the 
missing value from a Born-Haber cycle using algebraic expressions, using natural 
logarithms when calculating an equilibrium constant from ΔG. 
Within this topic, students can consider how chemists evaluate theoretical models 
by comparing the real and ideal properties of chemicals, for example in the study of 
theoretical and experimental lattice energies. The study of entropy shows students 
how chemists use formal, abstract thinking to answer fundamental questions about 
the stability of chemicals and the direction of chemical change. 
 
Students should: 
Topic 13A: Lattice energy 
1. be able to define lattice energy as the energy change when one mole of an ionic 
solid is formed from its gaseous ions 
2. be able to define the terms: 
 i enthalpy change of atomisation, ΔatH 
 ii electron affinity 
3. be able to construct Born-Haber cycles and carry out related calculations 
4. know that lattice energy provides a measure of ionic bond strength 
5. understand that a comparison of the experimental lattice energy value (from a 
Born-Haber cycle) with the theoretical value (obtained from electrostatic theory) 
in a particular compound indicates the degree of covalent bonding 
6. understand the meaning of polarisation as applied to ions 
7. know that the polarising power of a cation depends on its radius and charge 
8. know that the polarisability of an anion depends on its radius and charge 
9. be able to define the terms ‘enthalpy change of solution, ΔsolH’, and ‘enthalpy 
change of hydration, ΔhydH’ 
10. be able to use energy cycles and energy level diagrams to carry out calculations 
involving enthalpy change of solution, enthalpy change of hydration and lattice 
energy 
11. understand the effect of ionic charge and ionic radius on the values of: 
 i lattice energy 
 ii enthalpy change of hydration 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
30 
 
Students should: 
Topic 13B: Entropy 
12. understand that, since some endothermic reactions can occur at room 
temperature, enthalpy changes alone do not control whether reactions occur 
13. know that entropy is a measure of the disorder of a system and that the natural 
direction of change is increasing total entropy (positive entropy change) 
14. understand why entropy changes occur during: 
 i changes of state 
 ii dissolving of a solid ionic lattice 
 iii reactions in which there is a change in the number of moles from reactants to
 products 
  Students should be able to discuss typical reactions in terms of disorder and 
 enthalpy change, including: 
o dissolving ammonium nitrate crystals in water 
o reacting ethanoic acid with ammonium carbonate 
o burning magnesium ribbon in air 
o mixing solid barium hydroxide, Ba(OH)2.8H2O, with solid ammonium 
chloride. 
15. understand that the total entropy change in any reaction is the entropy change in 
the system added to the entropy change in the surroundings, shown by the 
expression:  
ΔStotal = ΔSsystem + ΔSsurroundings 
16. be able to calculate the entropy change for the system, ΔSsystem , in a reaction, 
given the entropies of the reactants and products 
17. be able to calculate the entropy change in the surroundings, and hence ΔStotal , 
using the expression: 
 
∆∆= −surroundings
HS T
 
18. know that the balance between the entropy change and the enthalpy change 
determines the feasibility of a reaction and is represented by the equation  
  ΔG = ΔH − TΔSsystem  
19. be able to use the equation ΔG = ΔH − TΔSsystem to: 
 i predict whether a reaction is feasible 
 ii determine the temperature at which a reaction is feasible 
20. be able to use the equation ΔG = −RT ln K to show that reactions which are 
feasible in terms of ΔG have large values for the equilibrium constant and vice 
versa 
21. understand why a reaction for which the ΔG value is negative may not occur in 
practice 
22. know that reactions that are thermodynamically feasible may be inhibited by 
kinetic factors 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
31 
Topic 14: Redox II 
In order to develop their practical skills, students should be encouraged to carry out 
a range of practical experiments related to this topic. Possible experiments include 
investigating redox systems (especially within transition metals), setting up a 
variety of electrochemical cells, investigating disproportionation in copper(I) salts, 
performing redox titrations using potassium manganate(VII) or iodine-thiosulfate. 
Mathematical skills that could be developed in this topic include calculating redox 
potentials, balancing redox equations from half cells, calculations involving redox 
titrations. 
Within this topic, students can consider how ideas developed in different contexts 
within chemistry can be shown to be related to a major explanatory principle. Here, 
cell emfs and equilibrium constants are shown to be related to the fundamental 
criterion for the feasibility of a chemical reaction: the total entropy change. 
Students can also consider how chemists continue to search for alternative sources 
of energy, through the development of fuel cells. 
 
Students should: 
1. understand the terms ‘oxidation’ and ‘reduction’ in terms of electron transfer, 
applied to s-, p- and d-block elements 
2. understand the terms ‘oxidation’ and ‘reduction’ in terms of changes in oxidation 
number, applied to s-, p- and d-block elements 
3. know what is meant by the term ‘standard electrode potential’, Eo 
4. know that the standard electrode potential, Eo, refers to conditions of: 
 i 298 K temperature 
 ii 100 kPa pressure of gases 
 iii 1.00 mol dm-3 concentration of ions 
5. know the features of the standard hydrogen electrode and understand why a 
reference electrode is necessary 
6. understand that different methods are used to measure standard electrode 
potentials of: 
 i metals or non-metals in contact with their ions in aqueous solution 
 ii ions of the same element with different oxidation numbers 
CORE PRACTICAL 10: Investigating some electrochemical cells 
7. be able to calculate a standard emf, Eo cell, by combining two standard electrode 
potentials 
8. be able to write cell diagrams using the conventional representation of half-cells 
9. understand the importance of the conditions when measuring the electrode 
potential, E 
10. be able to predict the thermodynamic feasibility of a reaction using standard 
electrode potentials 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
32 
 
Students should: 
11. understand that Eo cell is directly proportional to the total entropy change and to 
ln K for a reaction 
12. understand the limitations of predictions made using standard electrode 
potentials, in terms of kinetic inhibition and departure from standard conditions 
13. know that standard electrode potentials can be listed as an electrochemical series 
14. understand how disproportionation reactions relate to standard electrode 
potentials 
15. understand the application of electrode potentials to storage cells 
16. understand that the energy released on the reaction of a fuel with oxygen is 
utilised in a fuel cell to generate a voltage 
 Knowledge that methanol and other hydrogen-rich fuels are used in fuel cells is 
expected. 
17. know the electrode reactions that occur in a hydrogen-oxygen fuel cell 
 Knowledge of hydrogen-oxygen fuel cells with both acidic and alkaline 
electrolytes is expected. 
18. be able to carry out both structured and non-structured titration calculations 
including Fe2+/MnO4−, and I2/S2O32− 
19. understand the methods used in redox titrations 
CORE PRACTICAL 11: Redox titration 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
33 
Topic 15: Transition Metals 
In order to develop their practical skills, students should be encouraged to carry out 
a range of practical experiments related to this topic. Possible experiments include 
the stepwise reduction of vanadium(V) to vanadium(II), investigating the reactions 
of copper(II) ions or chromium(III) ions, using sodium hydroxide and ammonia 
solution to identify transition metal ions, investigating autocatalysis, preparing a 
complex transition metal salt. 
Mathematical skills that could be developed in this topic include investigating the 
geometry of different transition metal complexes. 
Within this topic, students can consider the model for the filling of electron orbitals 
encountered in Topic 1, and see how limitations in that model indicate the need for 
more sophisticated explanations. They can also appreciate that catalyst research is 
a frontier area, and one which provides an opportunity to show how the scientific 
community reports and validates new knowledge. 
 
Students should: 
Topic 15A: Principles of transition metal chemistry 
1. be able to deduce the electronic configurations of atoms and ions of the d-block 
elements of period 4 (Sc–Zn), given the atomic number and charge (if any) 
2. know that transition metals are d-block elements that form one or more stable 
ions with incompletely-filled d-orbitals 
3. understand why transition metals show variable oxidation number 
4. know what is meant by the term ‘ligand’ 
5. understand that dative (coordinate) bonding is involved in the formation of 
complex ions 
6. know that a complex ion is a central metal ion surrounded by ligands 
7. know that transition metals form coloured ions in solution 
8. understand that the colour of aqueous ions, and other complex ions, results from 
the splitting of the energy levels of the d-orbitals by ligands 
9. understand why there is a lack of colour in some aqueous ions and other complex 
ions 
10. understand that colour changes in transition metal ions may arise as a result of 
changes in: 
 i oxidation number 
 ii ligand 
 iii coordination number 
11. understand the meaning of the term ‘coordination number’ 
12. understand why H2O, OH− and NH3 act as monodentate ligands 
13. understand why complexes with six-fold coordination have an octahedral shape, 
such as those formed by metal ions with H2O, OH− and NH3 as ligands 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
34 
 
Students should: 
14. know that transition metal ions may form tetrahedral complexes with relatively 
large ligands such as Cl− 
15. know that square planar complexes are also formed by transition metal ions and 
that cis-platin is an example of such a complex 
16. understand why cis-platin used in cancer treatment is supplied as a single isomer 
and not in a mixture with the trans form 
17. be able to identify bidentate ligands, such as NH2CH2CH2NH2 and multidentate 
ligands, such as EDTA4− 
18. know that haemoglobin is an iron(II) complex containing a multidentate ligand 
 The structure of the haem group will not be assessed. 
19. know that a ligand exchange reaction occurs when an oxygen molecule bound to 
haemoglobin is replaced by a carbon monoxide molecule 
Topic 15B: Reactions of transition metal elements 
20. know the colours of the oxidation states of vanadium (+5, +4, +3 and +2) in its 
compounds 
21. understand redox reactions for the interconversion of the oxidation states of 
vanadium (+5, +4, +3 and +2), in terms of the relevant Eo values 
22. understand, in terms of the relevant Eo values, that the dichromate(VI) ion, 
Cr2O72−: 
 i can be reduced to Cr3+ and Cr2+ ions using zinc in acidic conditions 
 ii can be produced by the oxidation of Cr3+ ions using hydrogen peroxide in
 alkaline conditions (followed by acidification) 
23. know that the dichromate(VI) ion, Cr2O72−, can be converted into chromate(VI) 
ions as a result of the equilibrium 
 2CrO42−+ 2H+ ⇌ Cr2O72−+ H2O 
24. be able to record observations and write suitable equations for the reactions of 
Cr
3+(aq), Fe2+(aq), Fe3+(aq), Co2+(aq) and Cu2+(aq) with aqueous sodium 
hydroxide and aqueous ammonia, including in excess 
25. be able to write ionic equations to show the difference between ligand exchange 
and amphoteric behaviour for the reactions in (24) above 
26. understand that ligand exchange, and an accompanying colour change, occurs in 
the formation of: 
 i [Cu(ΝΗ3)4(Η2Ο)2]2+ from [Cu(Η2Ο)6]2+  via Cu(OH)2(Η2Ο)4 
 ii [CuCl4]2− from [Cu(Η2Ο)6]2+ 
 iii [CoCl4]2− from [Co(Η2Ο)6]2+ 
27. understand that the substitution of small, uncharged ligands (such as H2O) by 
larger, charged ligands (such as Cl−) can lead to a change in coordination 
number 
28. understand, in terms of the large positive increase in ΔSsystem, that the 
substitution of a monodentate ligand by a bidentate or multidentate ligand leads 
to a more stable complex ion 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
35 
 
Students should: 
29. know that transition metals and their compounds can act as heterogeneous and 
homogeneous catalysts 
30. know that a heterogeneous catalyst is in a different phase from the reactants and 
that the reaction occurs at the surface of the catalyst 
31. understand, in terms of oxidation number, how V2O5 acts as a catalyst in the 
contact process 
32. understand how a catalytic converter decreases carbon monoxide and nitrogen 
monoxide emissions from internal combustion engines by: 
 i adsorption of CO and NO molecules onto the surface of the catalyst 
 ii weakening of bonds and chemical reaction 
 iii desorption of CO2 and N2 product molecules from the surface of the catalyst 
33. know that a homogeneous catalyst is in the same phase as the reactants and 
appreciate that the catalysed reaction will proceed via an intermediate species 
34. understand the role of Fe2+ ions in catalysing the reaction between I− and S2O82− 
ions 
35. know the role of Mn2+ ions in autocatalysing the reaction between MnO4− and 
C2O42− ions 
CORE PRACTICAL 12: The preparation of a transition metal complex 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
36 
Topic 16: Kinetics II 
In order to develop their practical skills, students should be encouraged to carry out 
a range of practical experiments related to this topic. Possible experiments include 
investigating different methods for tracking rates of reaction by gas collection or 
change in mass or colour change, investigating clock reactions such as Harcourt-
Essen, using a simple rates experiment to calculate an activation energy. 
Mathematical skills that could be developed in this topic include plotting and 
justifying the shapes of rate–concentration and concentration–time graphs, 
calculating half-life of a reaction, calculating activation energy from a suitable 
graph, rearranging the Arrhenius equation in the form y = mx + c. 
Within this topic, students can consider different methods used to measure reaction 
rates and collect valid data. Through the analysis of this data, and a knowledge of 
rate equations, they can see how chemists are able to propose models to describe 
the mechanisms of chemical reactions. 
 
Students should: 
1. understand the terms: 
 i  rate of reaction 
 ii  rate equation 
 iii  order with respect to a substance in a rate equation 
 iv  overall order of reaction 
 v  rate constant 
 vi  half-life 
 vii  rate-determining step 
 viii activation energy 
 ix  heterogeneous and homogenous catalyst 
2. be able to determine and use rate equations of the form: 
 rate = k[A]m[B]n, where m and n are 0, 1 or 2 
3. be able to select and justify a suitable experimental technique to obtain rate data 
for a given reaction, including: 
 i titration 
 ii colorimetry 
 iii mass change 
 iv volume of gas evolved 
 v other suitable technique(s) for a given reaction 
4. understand experiments that can be used to investigate reaction rates by: 
 i an initial-rate method, carrying out separate experiments where different
 initial concentrations of one reagent are used 
  A ‘clock reaction’ is an acceptable approximation of this method 
 ii a continuous monitoring method to generate data to enable concentration-
 time or volume-time graphs to be plotted 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
37 
 
Students should: 
5. be able to calculate the rate of reaction and the half-life of a first-order reaction 
using data from a concentration-time or a volume-time graph 
6. be able to deduce the order (0, 1 or 2) with respect to a substance in a rate 
equation using data from: 
 i a concentration-time graph 
 ii a rate-concentration graph 
7. be able to deduce the order (0, 1 or 2) with respect to a substance in a rate 
equation using data from an initial-rate method 
8. understand how to: 
 i obtain data to calculate the order with respect to the reactants (and the
 hydrogen ion) in the acid-catalysed iodination of propanone 
 ii use these data to make predictions about species involved in the  
 rate-determining step 
 iii deduce a possible mechanism for the reaction 
9. be able to deduce a rate-determining step from a rate equation and vice versa 
10. be able to deduce a reaction mechanism, using knowledge from a rate equation 
and the stoichiometric equation for a reaction 
11. understand that knowledge of the rate equations for the hydrolysis of 
halogenoalkanes can be used to provide evidence for S
N1 or SN2 mechanisms for 
tertiary and primary halogenoalkane hydrolysis 
12. be able to use graphical methods to find the activation energy for a reaction from 
experimental data 
 The Arrhenius equation will be given if needed. 
CORE PRACTICAL 13a and 13b: Rates of reaction 
Following the rate of the iodine-propanone reaction by a titrimetric method 
and investigating a ‘clock reaction’ (Harcourt-Esson, iodine clock) 
CORE PRACTICAL 14: Finding the activation energy of a reaction 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
38 
Topic 17: Organic Chemistry II 
In order to develop their practical skills, students should be encouraged to carry out 
a range of practical experiments related to this topic. Possible experiments include 
investigating the reactions of different functional groups, identifying a carbonyl 
compound by preparing and finding the melting point of its 2,4-DNPH derivative, 
preparing and hydrolysing esters. 
Mathematical skills that could be developed in this topic include representing chiral 
molecules with appropriate diagrams, calculating percentage yields and 
experimental errors. 
Within this topic, students can consider how organic synthesis can produce a 
variety of important materials, such as esters for solvents, flavourings and 
perfumes. They will also continue their study of reaction mechanisms, and see the 
ways in which different mechanisms act as a pattern to describe a range of organic 
reactions. 
 
Students should: 
Topic 17A: Chirality 
1. know that optical isomerism is a result of chirality in molecules with a single 
chiral centre 
2. understand that optical isomerism results from chiral centre(s) in a molecule 
with asymmetric carbon atom(s) and that optical isomers are object and non-
superimposable mirror images 
3. know that optical activity is the ability of a single optical isomer to rotate the 
plane of polarisation of plane-polarised monochromatic light in molecules 
containing a single chiral centre 
4. understand the nature of a racemic mixture 
5. be able to use data on optical activity of reactants and products as evidence for 
SN1 and SN2 mechanisms 
Topic 17B: Carbonyl compounds 
6. be able to identify the aldehyde and ketone functional groups 
7. understand that aldehydes and ketones: 
 i do not form intermolecular hydrogen bonds and this affects their physical
 properties 
 ii can form hydrogen bonds with water and this affects their solubility 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
39 
 
 
Students should: 
8. understand the reactions of carbonyl compounds with: 
 i Fehling’s or Benedict’s solution, Tollens’ reagent and acidified 
 dichromate(VI) ions 
  In equations, the oxidising agent can be represented as [O] 
 ii lithium tetrahydridoaluminate (lithium aluminium hydride) in dry ether 
  In equations, the reducing agent can be represented as [H] 
 iii HCN, in the presence of KCN, as a nucleophilic addition reaction, using curly
 arrows, relevant lone pairs, dipoles and evidence of optical activity to show
 the mechanism 
 iv 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine (2,4-DNPH), as a qualitative test for the 
 presence of a carbonyl group and to identify a carbonyl compound given data  
 for the melting temperatures of derivatives 
  The equation for this reaction is not required 
 v iodine in the presence of alkali 
Topic 17C: Carboxylic acids 
9. be able to identify the carboxylic acid functional group 
10. understand that hydrogen bonding affects the physical properties of carboxylic 
acids, in relation to their boiling temperatures and solubility 
11. understand that carboxylic acids can be prepared by the oxidation of alcohols or 
aldehydes, and the hydrolysis of nitriles 
12. understand the reactions of carboxylic acids with: 
 i lithium tetrahydridoaluminate (lithium aluminium hydride) in dry ether 
 ii bases to produce salts 
 iii phosphorus(V) chloride (phosphorus pentachloride) 
 iv alcohols in the presence of an acid catalyst 
13. be able to identify the acyl chloride and ester functional groups 
14. understand the reactions of acyl chlorides with: 
 i water 
 ii alcohols 
 iii concentrated ammonia 
 iv amines 
15. understand the hydrolysis reactions of esters, in acidic and alkaline solution 
16. understand how polyesters are formed by condensation polymerisation reactions 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
40 
Topic 18: Organic Chemistry III 
In order to develop their practical skills, students should be encouraged to carry out 
a range of practical experiments related to this topic. Possible experiments include 
investigating the reactions of different functional groups, preparing an aromatic 
ester such as methyl benzoate, making nylon, purifying an organic solid. 
Mathematical skills that could be developed in this topic include calculating the 
resonance stability of benzene from thermodynamic data, calculating percentage 
yields. 
Within this topic, students can consider how the model for benzene structure has 
developed in response to new evidence. By this stage, their continuing practical 
experience should enable them to use techniques to carry out reactions and purify 
products efficiently and safely. 
 
Students should: 
Topic 18A: Arenes - benzene 
1. understand that the bonding in benzene has been represented using the Kekulé 
and the delocalised model, the latter in terms of overlap of p-orbitals to form  
π-bonds 
2. understand that evidence for the delocalised model of the bonding in benzene is 
provided by data from enthalpy changes of hydrogenation and carbon-carbon 
bond lengths 
 
 Students may represent the structure of benzene as: 
 
 
    or               as appropriate in equations and mechanisms. 
 
3. understand why benzene is resistant to bromination, compared with alkenes, in 
terms of delocalisation of π-bonds in benzene and the localised electron density 
of the π-bond in alkenes 
4. understand the reactions of benzene with: 
 i oxygen in air (combustion with a smoky flame) 
 ii bromine, in the presence of a catalyst 
 iii a mixture of concentrated nitric and sulfuric acids 
 iv halogenoalkanes and acyl chlorides with aluminium chloride as catalyst
 (Friedel-Crafts reaction) 
5. understand the mechanism of the electrophilic substitution reactions of benzene 
(halogenation, nitration and Friedel-Crafts reactions), including the generation of 
the electrophile 
6. understand the reaction of phenol with bromine water 
7. understand reasons for the relative ease of bromination of phenol, compared to 
benzene 

 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
41 
 
Students should: 
Topic 18B: Amines, amides, amino acids and proteins 
8. be able to identify: 
 i the amine and amide functional groups 
 ii molecules that are amino acids 
9. understand the reactions of primary aliphatic amines, using butylamine as an 
example, with: 
 i water to form an alkaline solution 
 ii acids to form salts 
 iii ethanoyl chloride 
 iv halogenoalkanes 
 v copper(II) ions to form complex ions 
10. understand reasons for the difference in basicity of ammonia, primary aliphatic 
and primary aromatic amines given suitable data 
11. understand, in terms of reagents and general reaction conditions, the preparation 
of primary aliphatic amines: 
 i from halogenoalkanes 
 ii by the reduction of nitriles 
12. know that aromatic nitro-compounds can be reduced, using tin and concentrated 
hydrochloric acid, to form amines 
13. understand that amides can be prepared from acyl chlorides 
14. know that the formation of a polyamide is a condensation polymerisation reaction 
15. be able to draw the structural formulae of the repeat units of condensation 
polymers formed by reactions between: 
 i dicarboxylic acids and diols 
 ii dicarboxylic acids and diamines 
 iii amino acids 
16. understand the properties of 2-amino acids, including: 
 i acidity and basicity in solution, as a result of the formation of zwitterions 
 ii effect of aqueous solutions on plane-polarised monochromatic light 
17. understand that the peptide bond in proteins: 
 i is formed when amino acids combine, by condensation polymerisation 
 ii can be hydrolysed to form the constituent amino acids, which can be
 separated by chromatography 
CORE PRACTICAL 15: Analysis of some inorganic and organic unknowns 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
42 
 
Students should: 
Topic 18C: Organic Synthesis 
18. be able to deduce the empirical formulae, molecular formulae and structural 
formulae of compounds from data obtained from combustion analysis, elemental 
percentage composition, characteristic reactions of functional groups, infrared 
spectra, mass spectra and nuclear magnetic resonance 
19. be able to plan reaction schemes, of up to four steps, to form both familiar and 
unfamiliar compounds 
20. understand methods of increasing the length of the carbon chain in a molecule 
by the use of magnesium to form Grignard reagents and the reactions of the 
latter with carbon dioxide and with carbonyl compounds in dry ether 
21. be able to select and justify suitable practical procedures for carrying out 
reactions involving compounds with functional groups included in the 
specification, including identifying appropriate control measures to reduce risk, 
based on data about hazards 
22. understand the following techniques used in the preparation and purification of 
organic compounds: 
 i  refluxing 
 ii  purification by washing 
 iii  solvent extraction 
 iv  recrystallisation 
 v  drying 
 vi  distillation, including steam distillation 
 vii  melting temperature determination 
 viii  boiling temperature determination 
CORE PRACTICAL 16: The preparation of aspirin 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
43 
Topic 19: Modern Analytical Techniques II 
In order to develop their practical skills, students should be encouraged to carry out 
a range of practical experiments related to this topic. Possible experiments include 
using chromatography to identify unknowns such as metals in a ‘silver’ coin or 
amino acids in a protein. 
Mathematical skills that could be developed in this topic include calculating Rf 
values, interpreting a variety of different spectra, calculating relative molecular 
masses, using the (n+1) rule for proton NMR. 
Within this topic, students can consider a wider range of instrumental methods 
used for analysis, such as NMR; and see how this technique is used in medicine 
through MRI scans. They can also see a wide range of applications that rely on a 
combination of different analytical techniques. 
 
Students should: 
Topic 19A: Mass Spectrometry 
1. be able to use data from mass spectra to: 
 i suggest possible structures of a simple organic compound given relative
 molecular masses, accurate to four decimal places 
 ii calculate the accurate relative molecular mass of a compound, given relative
 atomic masses to four decimal places, and therefore identify a compound 
Topic 19B: Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) 
2. understand that 13C NMR spectroscopy provides information about the positions 
of 13C atoms in a molecule 
3. be able to use data from 13C NMR spectroscopy to: 
 i predict the different environments for carbon atoms present in a molecule,
 given values of chemical shift, δ 
 ii justify the number of peaks present in a 13C NMR spectrum because of carbon
 atoms in different environments 
4. understand that high resolution proton NMR provides information about the 
positions of 1H atoms in a molecule 
5. be able to use data from high resolution 1H NMR spectroscopy to: 
 i predict the different types of proton present in a molecule, given values of
 chemical shift, δ 
 ii relate relative peak areas, or ratio numbers of protons, to the relative
 numbers of 1H atoms in different environments 
 iii deduce the splitting patterns of adjacent, non-equivalent protons using the
 (n+1) rule and hence suggest the possible structures for a molecule 
 iv predict the chemical shifts and splitting patterns of the 1H atoms in a given
 molecule 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
44 
 
Students should: 
Topic 19C: Chromatography 
6. know that chromatography separates components of a mixture between a mobile 
phase and a stationary phase 
7. be able to calculate Rf values from one-way chromatograms 
8. know that high performance liquid chromatography, HPLC, and gas 
chromatography, GC: 
 i are types of column chromatography 
 ii separate substances because of different retention times in the column 
 iii may be used in conjunction with mass spectrometry, in applications such as
 forensics or drugs testing in sport 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
45 
Science Practical Endorsement 
Overview 
The assessment of practical skills is a compulsory 
requirement of the course of study for A level qualifications 
in biology, chemistry and physics. It will appear on all 
students’ certificates as a separately reported result, 
alongside the overall grade for the qualification. The 
arrangements for the assessment of practical skills will be 
common to all awarding organisations. These arrangements 
include: 
● A minimum of 12 practical activities to be carried out by 
each student which, together, meet the requirements of 
Appendices 5b (Practical skills identified for direct 
assessment and developed through teaching and 
learning) and 5c (Use of apparatus and techniques) 
from the prescribed subject content, published by the 
Department for Education. The required practical 
activities will be defined by each awarding organisation. 
● Teachers will assess students against Common Practical 
Assessment Criteria (CPAC) issued by the awarding 
organisations. The CPAC are based on the requirements 
of Appendices 5b and 5c of the subject content 
requirements published by the Department for 
Education, and define the minimum standard required 
for the achievement of a pass.  
● Each student will keep an appropriate record of their 
practical work, including their assessed practical 
activities 
● Students who demonstrate the required standard across 
all the requirements of the CPAC will receive a ‘pass’ 
grade 
● There will be no separate assessment of practical skills 
for AS qualifications. 
● Students will answer questions in the AS and A level 
examination papers that assess the requirements of 
Appendix 5a (Practical skills identified for indirect 
assessment and developed through teaching and 
learning) from the prescribed subject content, published 
by the Department for Education. These questions may 
draw on, or range beyond, the practical activities 
included in the specification. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
46 
Setting practical work 
Teaching and learning 
Teachers should ensure that the core practicals listed in the 
subject content are incorporated into teaching and learning 
and that students carry them out. This is to support 
development of competency for the practical endorsement 
and also because students will be indirectly assessed on 
their practical skills in the examinations. Teachers should 
consider setting additional practical work to support 
teaching and learning. 
Teachers must devise and retain a teaching plan that shows 
when practicals will be covered in teaching and learning. 
Students should attempt all 16 practicals given in the 
qualification content. 
Conditions for assessing practical work 
Authenticity 
Students and teachers must sign the practical competency 
authentication sheet (see Appendix 4). 
Collaboration 
Students may work in pairs on some practicals where 
appropriate, provided they are able to produce individual 
evidence to meet the competency statements. 
Feedback 
Teachers may help students to understand instructions and 
may provide feedback to support development of the 
competencies. Teachers should be confident that students 
have developed their skills and thus students should be able 
to demonstrate the competencies independently by the end 
of the course. 
Resources 
Students must have access to the equipment needed to 
carry out the core practicals. Students must also have 
access to IT and internet facilities. 
Supervision 
Teachers must ensure that students are supervised 
appropriately. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
47 
Evidence of practical work 
Evidence should be collected of practical work that is 
sufficient to show that the competencies have been 
achieved. Evidence may take a variety of forms. 
The practical activities prescribed in the specification 
provide opportunities for demonstrating competence in all 
the skills identified, together with the use of apparatus and 
techniques for each subject. However, students can also 
demonstrate these competencies in any additional practical 
activity undertaken throughout the course of study which 
covers the requirements of Appendix 5c. 
Observations and notes by teachers 
Teachers should observe sufficient student practicals to 
ensure that competencies have been achieved. 
Student records 
Students should keep notes of their practical work sufficient 
to show evidence of the practical competencies on making 
and recording observations and researching, referencing 
and reporting. 
Assessing practical work 
Teachers should make a judgement of student practical 
competence using the Common Practical Assessment 
Criteria on the following pages. Teachers should include any 
comments on the practical competency authentication sheet 
(see Appendix 4) to justify the decision made. 
In order to achieve a pass, students will need to: 
● develop these competencies by carrying out a minimum 
of 12 practical activities, which allow acquisition of the 
techniques outlined in the requirements of the 
specification 
● consistently and routinely exhibit the competencies 
listed in the CPAC before the completion of the A-level 
course 
● keep an appropriate record of their practical work, 
including their assessed practical activities  
● be able to demonstrate and/or record independent 
evidence of their competency, including evidence of 
independent application of investigative approaches and 
methods to practical work. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
48 
Common Practical Assessment Criteria 
Teachers must assess student practicals against the following competencies. 
 
Criteria for the assessment of GCE Science practical competency for 
biology, chemistry and physics 
Competency The criteria for a pass 
In order to be awarded a Pass a learner must, by the 
end of the practical science assessment, consistently 
and routinely meet the criteria in respect of each 
competency listed below. 
A learner may demonstrate the competencies in any 
practical activity undertaken as part of that 
assessment throughout the course of study. 
Learners may undertake practical activities in groups. 
However, the evidence generated by each learner 
must demonstrate that he or she independently 
meets the criteria outlined below in respect of each 
competency. 
Such evidence: 
(a) will comprise both the learner’s performance 
during each practical activity and his or her 
contemporaneous record of the work that he or she 
has undertaken during that activity, and 
(b) must include evidence of independent application 
of investigative approaches and methods to practical 
work. 
1. Follows written 
procedures 
a) Correctly follows written instructions to carry out 
the experimental techniques or procedures. 
2. Applies investigative 
approaches and 
methods when using 
instruments and 
equipment 
a) Correctly uses appropriate instrumentation, 
apparatus and materials (including ICT) to carry out 
investigative activities, experimental techniques and 
procedures with minimal assistance or prompting. 
b) Carries out techniques or procedures methodically, 
in sequence and in combination, identifying practical 
issues and making adjustments when necessary. 
c) Identifies and controls significant quantitative 
variables where applicable, and plans approaches to 
take account of variables that cannot readily be 
controlled. 
d) Selects appropriate equipment and measurement 
strategies in order to ensure suitably accurate results. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
49 
 
Criteria for the assessment of GCE Science practical competency for 
biology, chemistry and physics 
3. Safely uses a range 
of practical 
equipment and 
materials 
a) Identifies hazards and assesses risks associated with 
these hazards, making safety adjustments as 
necessary, when carrying out experimental techniques 
and procedures in the lab or field. 
b) Uses appropriate safety equipment and approaches 
to minimise risks with minimal prompting. 
4. Makes and records 
observations 
a) Makes accurate observations relevant to the 
experimental or investigative procedure. 
b) Obtains accurate, precise and sufficient data for 
experimental and investigative procedures and records 
this methodically using appropriate units and 
conventions. 
5. Researches, 
references and 
reports 
a) Uses appropriate software and/or tools to process 
data, carry out research and report findings. 
b) Cites sources of information demonstrating that 
research has taken place, supporting planning and 
conclusions. 
Marking and standardisation 
The practical work is assessed by teachers. Pearson will 
support teachers in making judgements against the criteria 
for assessment. 
In coordination with other exam boards, Pearson will 
monitor how schools provide students with opportunities to 
develop and demonstrate the required practical skills and 
how they mark the assessments. 
Every school will be monitored at least once in a two-year 
period in respect of at least one of the A level science 
subjects. These monitoring visits will be coordinated by 
JCQ, who will undertake communications with centres to 
facilitate the allocation of exam board monitoring visits.  
In common with other exam boards, Pearson will require 
centres to provide a statement confirming they have taken 
reasonable steps to secure that students: 
● undertook the minimum number of practical activities, 
and  
● made a contemporaneous record of their work. 
If a school fails to provide a statement, or provides a false 
statement, this will be treated as malpractice and/or 
maladministration. 
Students will only get a certificate for the practical 
assessment if they achieve at least a grade E in the 
examined part of the qualification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
50 
Students who do not pass the practical assessment will 
have a ‘Not Classified’ outcome included on their certificate 
unless they were exempt from the assessment because of a 
disability. 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of 
assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in controlled assessments discovered 
before the candidate has signed the declaration of 
authentication form does not need to be reported to 
Pearson. 
Candidate malpractice found in controlled assessments after 
the declaration of authenticity has been signed, and in 
examinations must be reported to Pearson on a  
JCQ M1 Form (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-
office/malpractice
). The completed form can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to Investigations 
Team, Pearson, 190 High Holborn, London, WC1V 7BH. 
Please provide as much information and supporting 
documentation as possible. Note that the final decision 
regarding appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report candidate malpractice constitutes staff or 
centre malpractice.  
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate 
malpractice and maladministration of our qualifications. As 
with candidate malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is 
any act that compromises or seeks to compromise the 
process of assessment or undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and 
maladministration must be reported immediately, before 
any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson 
on a JCQ M2(a) Form (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-
office/malpractice). The form, supporting documentation 
and as much information as possible can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to Investigations 
Team, Pearson, 190 High Holborn, London, WC1V 7BH. Note 
that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies 
with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
51 
More-detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the 
latest version of the document JCQ General and Vocational 
Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-
office/malpractice. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
52 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
53 
Assessment 
Assessment summary 
Students must complete all assessment in May/June in any single year. 
 
Paper 1: Advanced Inorganic and Physical Chemistry  
*Paper code: 9CH0/01 
• Questions draw on content from Topics 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 10 and 
Topics 11–15. 
• Questions are broken down into a number of parts. 
• Availability: May/June 
• First assessment: 2017 
• The assessment is 1 hour 45 minutes. 
• The assessment consists of 90 marks. 
30% of the 
total 
qualification 
 
 
Paper 2: Advanced Organic and Physical Chemistry  
*Paper code: 9CH0/02 
• Questions draw on content from Topics 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 9 and 
Topics 16–19. 
• Questions are broken down into a number of parts. 
• Availability: May/June 
• First assessment: 2017 
• The assessment is 1 hour 45 minutes. 
• The assessment consists of 90 marks. 
30% of the 
total 
qualification 
 
 
Paper 3: General and Practical Principles in Chemistry  
*Paper code: 9CH0/03 
• Questions draw on content from Topics 1–19. 
• Questions are broken down into a number of parts. 
• Availability: May/June 
• First assessment: 2017 
• The assessment is 2 hours 30 minutes. 
• The assessment consists of 120 marks. 
40% of the 
total 
qualification 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
54 
 
Science Practical Endorsement**  
*Paper code: 9CH0/04 
• Internally assessed and externally moderated by Pearson. 
• Availability: May/June 
• First assessment: 2017 
• The practical endorsement is teacher assessed against the Common Practical 
Assessment criteria (CPAC).  
 
The sample assessment materials can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 
Advanced GCE in Chemistry Sample Assessment Materials document. 
*See Appendix 3: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant 
to this qualification. 
**Students will be assessed separately for the Science Practical Endorsement. The 
Endorsement will not contribute to the overall grade for this qualification, but the 
result will be recorded on the student’s certificate. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
55 
Assessment Objectives and weightings 
 
Students must: 
% in 
GCE 
AO1 Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of scientific ideas, 
processes, techniques and procedures 31–33 
AO2 Apply knowledge and understanding of scientific ideas, 
processes, techniques and procedures: 
• in a theoretical context 
• in a practical context 
• when handling qualitative data 
• when handling quantitative data 
41–43 
AO3 Analyse, interpret and evaluate scientific information, ideas and 
evidence, including in relation to issues, to: 
• make judgements and reach conclusions 
• develop and refine practical design and procedures 
25–27 
Total 100% 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
56 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
 
Paper AO1 AO2 AO3 
Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives 
Paper 1: Advanced Inorganic 
and Physical Chemistry 11–13% 12–14% 5–7% 30% 
Paper 2: Advanced Organic 
and Physical Chemistry 11–13% 12–14% 5–7% 30% 
Paper 3: General and 
Practical Principles in 
Chemistry 
8–10% 16–18% 13–15% 40% 
Total for this qualification 31–33% 41–43% 25–27% 100% 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
57 
Entry and assessment information 
Student entry 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for 
this qualification can be found in our UK Information 
Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations 
officers and is available on our website at: 
www.edexcel.com/iwantto/Pages/uk-information-
manual.aspx 
Forbidden combinations and discount code 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more 
than one GCE qualification with the same discount code will 
have only one of the grades they achieve counted for the 
purpose of the School and College Performance Tables – 
normally the better grade (please see Appendix 3: Codes). 
Students should be advised that if they take two 
qualifications with the same discount code, colleges, 
universities and employers are very likely to take the view 
that they have achieved only one of the two GCEs. The 
same view may be taken if students take two GCE 
qualifications that have different discount codes but have 
significant overlap of content. Students or their advisers 
who have any doubts about their subject combinations 
should check with the institution to which they wish to 
progress before embarking on their programmes. 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and 
special consideration 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. 
They allow students with special educational needs, 
disabilities or temporary injuries to: 
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the 
demands of the assessment. 
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the 
particular needs of an individual student with a disability 
without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding 
bodies comply with the duty under the Equality Act 2010 to 
make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
58 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the 
start of the course. Students will then know what is 
available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for 
assessment. 
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to 
make reasonable adjustments where a person with a 
disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in 
undertaking an assessment. The awarding organisation is 
required to take reasonable steps to overcome that 
disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be 
unique to that individual and therefore might not be in the 
list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will 
depend on a number of factors, which will include: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with 
the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves 
unreasonable costs to the awarding organisation, 
timeframes or affects the security or integrity of the 
assessment. This is because the adjustment is not 
‘reasonable’. 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a 
student's mark or grade to reflect temporary injury, illness 
or other indisposition at the time of the 
examination/assessment, which has had, or is reasonably 
likely to have had, a material effect on a candidate’s ability 
to take an assessment or demonstrate his or her level of 
attainment in an assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to 
apply for access arrangements and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, 
reasonable adjustments and special consideration, please 
refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
59 
Equality Act 2010 and Pearson equality policy 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality 
policy requires all students to have equal opportunity to 
access our qualifications and assessments, and our 
qualifications to be awarded in a way that is fair to every 
student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by 
the Equality Act 2010) are not, when they are 
undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in 
comparison to students who do not share that 
characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for 
undertaking a qualification and that this achievement 
can be compared fairly to the achievement of their 
peers. 
Teachers can find details on how to make adjustments for 
students with protected characteristics in the policy 
document Access Arrangements, Reasonable Adjustments 
and Special Consideration, which is on our website, 
www.edexcel.com/Policies. 
Synoptic assessment 
Synoptic assessment requires students to work across 
different parts of a qualification and to show their 
accumulated knowledge and understanding of a topic or 
subject area. 
Synoptic assessment enables students to show their ability 
to combine their skills, knowledge and understanding with 
breadth and depth of the subject. 
In this qualification, synoptic assessment can be found in 
Paper 3: General and Practical Principles in Chemistry. 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to 
comply with the requirements of the current Code of 
Practice published by the Office of Qualifications and 
Examinations Regulation (Ofqual). 
This qualification will be graded and certificated on a six-
grade scale from A* to E using the total subject mark. 
Individual papers are not graded. 
The first certification opportunity for the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry will be 2017. 
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum 
judged by Pearson to be of sufficient standard to be 
recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U 
result. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
60 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be available in English. 
All student work must be in English. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
61 
 
Other information 
Student recruitment 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to 
our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of 
reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and 
progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this 
qualification. 
Students who would benefit most from studying this 
qualification are likely to have a Level 2 qualification such 
as a GCSE in Additional Science or Chemistry. 
Progression 
Students can progress from this qualification to: 
● a range of different, relevant academic or vocational 
higher education qualifications 
● employment in a relevant sector 
● further training. 
Relationship between Advanced Subsidiary GCE and 
Advanced GCE 
The content for Advanced GCE in Chemistry includes all the 
content studied at Advanced Subsidiary GCE. The Advanced 
GCE in Chemistry builds on the knowledge, skills, and 
understanding achieved when studying the Advanced 
Subsidiary GCE in Chemistry. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
62 
Progression from Advanced Subsidiary GCE to 
Advanced GCE 
Students who have achieved the Advanced Subsidiary GCE 
in Chemistry can progress to the Advanced GCE in 
Chemistry. They would have covered Topics 1–10 which are 
common to both qualifications but the additional  
Topics 11–19 will need to be covered; all the assessment 
for the Advanced GCE qualification must be taken at the 
end of the course. 
Relationship between GCSE and Advanced GCE 
Students cover Key Stage 4 fundamental core concepts in 
sciences at GCSE and continue to cover these concepts and 
additional subject material in the Advanced GCE at 
Key Stage 5. 
Progression from GCSE to Advanced GCE 
Students will draw on knowledge and understanding 
achieved in GCSE Additional Science or GCSE Chemistry to 
progress to an Advanced GCE in Chemistry qualification. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
63 
 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Transferable skills 65 
Appendix 2: Level 3 Extended Project qualification 67 
Appendix 3: Codes 71 
Appendix 4: Practical competency authentication sheet 73 
Appendix 5: Working scientifically 75 
Appendix 5a: Practical skills identified for indirect assessment and 
developed through teaching and learning 77 
Appendix 5b: Practical skills identified for direct assessment and 
developed through teaching and learning 79 
Appendix 5c: Use of apparatus and techniques 81 
Appendix 5d: Mapping between Appendix 5c and core practicals 
(chemistry) 83 
Appendix 6: Mathematical skills and exemplifications 85 
Appendix 7: Command words used in examination papers 91 
Appendix 8: Data Booklet 93 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
64 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
65 
Appendix 1: Transferable skills 
 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently 
flagged the need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable 
them to respond with confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the 
world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines 
skills, or competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that 
can be learned and that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform 
an activity or task and can be built upon and extended through learning.’ 1 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected 
and evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this 
process, we identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the 
most evidence-based and robust skills framework. We adapted the framework 
slightly to include the Program for International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT 
Literacy and Collaborative Problem Solving (CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves: 2 
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve 
general cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and 
communicate3. 
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, oral communication, written 
communication, assertive communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, 
service orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and 
negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared 
understanding, taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team 
organisation. 
 
 
1 OECD (2012), Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (2012): 
http://skills.oecd.org/documents/OECDSkillsStrategyFINALENG.pdf 
2 Koenig, J. A. (2011) Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop, National Research Council 
3 PISA (2011) The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy, PISA 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
66 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work 
stress, adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, 
and physical adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual 
teams, work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and 
able to acquire new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher 
education, as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the 
teaching and learning of this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning 
materials, developed with stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
67 
 
Appendix 2: Level 3 Extended Project 
qualification 
 
What is the Extended Project? 
The Extended Project is a stand-alone qualification that can be taken alongside 
GCEs. It supports the development of 21st-century independent learning skills and 
helps to prepare students for their next step – whether that be university study or 
employment. The qualification: 
• is recognised by universities for the skills it develops 
• is worth half of an Advanced GCE qualification at grades to A*–E 
• carries UCAS points for university entry. 
The Extended Project encourages students to develop skills in the following areas: 
research, critical thinking, extended writing and project management. Students 
identify and agree a topic area of their choice (which may or may not be related to 
a GCE subject they are already studying), guided by their teacher. 
Students can choose from one of four approaches to produce: 
• a dissertation (for example an investigation based on predominately secondary 
research) 
• an investigation/field study (for example a practical experiment) 
• a performance (for example in music, drama or sport) 
• an artefact (for example creating a sculpture in response to a client brief or 
solving an engineering problem). 
The qualification is coursework based and students are assessed on the skills of 
managing, planning and evaluating their project. Students will research their topic, 
develop skills to review and evaluate the information, and then present the final 
outcome of their project. 
Students: what they need to do 
The Extended Project qualification requires students to: 
• select a topic of interest for an in-depth study and negotiate the scope of the 
project with their teacher 
• identify and draft an objective for their project (for example in the form of a 
question, hypothesis, challenge, outline of proposed performance, issue to be 
investigated or commission for a client) and provide a rationale for their choice 
• produce a plan for how they will deliver their intended objective 
• conduct research as required by the project brief, using appropriate techniques 
• carry out the project using tools and techniques safely 
• share the outcome of the project using appropriate communication methods, 
including a presentation. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
68 
Teachers: key information 
• The Extended Project has 120 guided learning hours (GLH) consisting of: 
o a 40-GLH taught element that includes teaching the technical skills (for 
example research skills) 
o an 80-GLH guided element that includes mentoring students through the 
project work. 
• Group work is acceptable, however it is important that each student provides 
evidence of their own contribution and produces their own report. 
• 100% externally moderated. 
• Four Assessment Objectives: manage, use resources, develop and realise, 
review. 
• Can be run over 1, 1½ or 2 years. 
• Can be submitted in January or June. 
What is the Extended Project for chemistry? 
How to link the Extended Project with chemistry 
The Extended Project creates the opportunity for students to develop transferable 
skills for progression to higher education and to the workplace through the 
exploration of either an area of personal interest or a topic of interest from the 
chemistry qualification content. 
For example, chemistry students could choose to carry out an investigation that 
would give them an opportunity to develop their skills in data collection, in the 
development and testing of hypotheses and in the application of mathematical 
models in data analysis. 
Skills developed 
Through the Extended Project students will develop skills in the following areas: 
• independent research skills, including skills in primary research and the 
selection of appropriate methods for data collection 
• extended reading and academic writing, including reading scientific literature 
and writing about trends or patterns in data sets 
• planning/project management, including the refining of hypotheses to be tested 
in investigations 
• data handling and evaluation, including the comparison of data from primary 
research with published data and exploration of the significance of results 
• evaluation of arguments and processes, including arguments in favour of 
alternative interpretations of data and evaluation of experimental methodology 
• critical thinking. 
In the context of the Extended Project, critical thinking refers to the ability to 
identify and develop arguments for a point of view or hypothesis and to consider 
and respond to alternative arguments. 
The Extended Project is an ideal vehicle to develop the skills identified in 
Appendix 1. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
69 
Using the Extended Project to support breadth and depth 
There is no specified material that students are expected to study and, in the 
Extended Project, students are assessed on the quality of the work they produce 
and the skills they develop and demonstrate through completing this work. 
Students can use the Extended Project to demonstrate extension in one or more 
dimensions: 
• deepening understanding: where a student explores a topic in greater depth 
than in the specification content 
• broadening skills: the student learns a new skill. In a chemistry-based 
project, this might involve learning to assemble and manipulate an unfamiliar 
piece of apparatus or learning advanced data-handling techniques 
• widening perspectives: the student’s project spans different subjects. This 
might involve discussing historical, philosophical or ethical aspects of a 
chemistry-based topic or making links with other subject areas such as 
economics. 
Choosing topics and narrowing down to a question 
A dissertation, typically around 6000 words in length, involves addressing a 
research question through a literature review and argumentative discussion while 
an investigation/field study involves data collection and analysis, leading to a 
written report of around 5000 words. 
For example, consider a student with an interest in alternatives to conventional 
fuels who decided to carry out an investigation to compare the strengths and 
weaknesses of two different types of biodiesel. The investigation involved 
secondary research to establish the theoretical background to the project, to 
explore the uses and properties of different biodiesels and to consider what 
techniques can be used to gather data. The student collected data using 
appropriately designed experiments. The student’s own data were compared with 
published data, and the trends and patterns in data analysed, with consideration of 
the significance of the results obtained, and an attempt to interpret them in the 
light of the mathematical models that the student had learned about through 
research. 
The student drew conclusions about the relative merits of the two biodiesels, basing 
these conclusions on their own research together with analysis of published data. 
Finally, the student’s project ended with a review of the effectiveness of the 
investigation and an oral presentation of the main findings and arguments 
considered. 
Chemistry-based dissertation projects can cover a wide variety of topics, as these 
examples illustrate: 
• Should legislation be used to enforce the principles of green chemistry? 
• Could nanochemistry revolutionise medicine? 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
70 
Examples of chemistry-based investigations include: 
• Are calorific values in diet foods accurate? 
• Can changing the method of synthesis significantly alter the material properties 
of a polymer? 
• Is there a correlation between the chemical composition of a chilli pepper and 
its taste? 
• Is the use of oil-dispersants an effective way of tackling oil spills? 
There is also scope for chemistry-based artefact Extended Projects. For example, a 
student might set out to design, make and test an item of apparatus such as a 
spectrometer. Extended Projects involving a performance can also be chemistry 
based. For example, a social issue relating to chemistry could be explored through 
drama. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
71 
 
Appendix 3: Codes 
 
Type of code Use of code Code number 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for performance 
tables is assigned a discount code 
indicating the subject area to which it 
belongs. 
Discount codes are published by DfE. 
Please see the GOV.UK 
website*  
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an 
Ofqual Regulated Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) code. 
The RQF code is known as a Qualification 
Number (QN). This is the code that 
features in the DfE Section 96 and on the 
LARA as being eligible for 16–18 and 19+ 
funding, and is to be used for all 
qualification funding purposes. The QN will 
appear on the student’s final certification 
documentation. 
The QN for the 
qualification in this 
publication is:  
601/5646/6 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to 
enter students for a qualification. Centres 
will need to use the entry codes only when 
claiming students’ qualifications. 
Advanced GCE – 9CH0 
Paper code These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be 
entered for individual papers. 
Paper 1: 9CH0/01 
Paper 2: 9CH0/02 
Paper 3: 9CH0/03 
Science Practical 
Endorsement: 9CH0/04  
 
*www.gov.uk/government/publications/key-stage-4-qualifications-discount-codes-
and-point-scores 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
72 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
73 
 
Appendix 4: Practical competency 
authentication sheet 
 
For students to gain the Science Practical Endorsement, centres will need to: 
• ensure that there is evidence that students have completed the necessary 
practical activities, meeting the requirements of Appendix 5c 
• ensure that there is evidence that students have met the requirements of each 
of the CPAC statements, in accordance with the guidelines provided for 
achieving the 'pass' standard 
• complete an authentication sheet for their students. 
Centres will also need to have had a satisfactory monitoring visit, according to the 
guidelines for monitoring visits, as set down by the JCQ. 
Evidence for meeting practical attendance and CPAC competency may be provided 
in a variety of formats using student lab books or practical portfolios; and registers 
or tracking spreadsheets.  
A final version of the authentication statement will be made available to schools in 
time for the first submission of entries in 2017. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
74 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
75 
 
Appendix 5: Working scientifically 
 
Appendices 5, 5a, 5b and 5c are taken from the document GCE AS and A level 
regulatory requirements for biology, chemistry, physics and psychology published 
by the DfE in April 2014. Working scientifically is achieved through practical 
activities. 
Specifications in biology, chemistry and physics must encourage the development 
of the skills, knowledge and understanding in science through teaching and learning 
opportunities for regular hands-on practical work. 
In order to develop the necessary skills, knowledge and understanding, students 
studying biology, chemistry and physics will be required to have carried out a 
minimum of 12 practical activities, which will contribute towards the Practical 
Endorsement. These skills, knowledge and understanding will also be assessed in 
written examinations in the context of these, and other, practical activities. 
The skills can be split into those which can be assessed through written 
examinations (Appendix 5a); and those that will be assessed by teachers through 
appropriate practical activities (Appendix 5b). 
The practical activities highlighted as the minimum requirement within 
specifications must cover the use of apparatus and practical techniques identified 
for each science (Appendix 5c). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
76 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
77 
 
Appendix 5a: Practical skills identified for 
indirect assessment and developed 
through teaching and learning 
 
Question papers will assess the following abilities: 
a) Independent thinking 
• solve problems set in practical contexts 
• apply scientific knowledge to practical contexts 
 
b) Use and application of scientific methods and practices 
• comment on experimental design and evaluate scientific methods 
• present data in appropriate ways 
• evaluate results and draw conclusions with reference to measurement 
uncertainties and errors 
• identify variables including those that must be controlled 
 
c) Numeracy and the application of mathematical concepts in a practical 
context 
• plot and interpret graphs 
• process and analyse data using appropriate mathematical skills as 
exemplified in the mathematical appendix for each science 
• consider margins of error, accuracy and precision of data 
 
d) Instruments and equipment 
• know and understand how to use a wide range of experimental and practical 
instruments, equipment and techniques appropriate to the knowledge and 
understanding included in the specification 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
78 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
79 
 
Appendix 5b: Practical skills identified for 
direct assessment and developed through 
teaching and learning 
 
Practical work carried out throughout the course will enable students to develop the 
following skills. 
 
a) Independent thinking 
• apply investigative approaches and methods to practical work 
 
b) Use and apply scientific methods and practices 
• safely and correctly use a range of practical equipment and materials 
• follow written instructions 
• make and record observations 
• keep appropriate records of experimental activities 
• present information and data in a scientific way 
• use appropriate software and tools to process data, carry out research and 
report findings 
 
c) Research and referencing 
• use online and offline research skills including websites, textbooks and other 
printed scientific sources of information 
• correctly cite sources of information 
 
d) Instruments and equipment 
• use a wide range of experimental and practical instruments, equipment and 
techniques appropriate to the knowledge and understanding included in the 
specification 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
80 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
81 
Appendix 5c: Use of apparatus and 
techniques 
 
Use of apparatus and techniques – chemistry 
Specifications for chemistry must give students opportunities to use relevant 
apparatus to develop and demonstrate these techniques. 
All of the techniques listed below will be assessed through a minimum of  
12 identified practical activities within each specification. These ‘core’ practicals 
must allow students to demonstrate all of the practical skills given in 5b. 
Practical techniques to be gained by candidates 
1. use appropriate apparatus to record a range of measurements (to include 
mass, time, volume of liquids and gases, temperature) 
2. use water bath or electric heater or sand bath for heating 
3. measure pH using pH charts, or pH meter, or pH probe on a data logger 
4. use laboratory apparatus for a variety of experimental techniques, including: 
• titration, using burette and pipette 
• distillation and heating under reflux, including setting up glassware using 
retort stand and clamps 
• qualitative tests for ions and organic functional groups 
• filtration, including use of fluted filter paper, or filtration under reduced 
pressure 
5. use volumetric flask, including accurate technique for making up a standard 
solution 
6. use acid-base indicators in titrations of weak/strong acids with weak/strong 
alkalis 
7. purify: 
• a solid product by recrystallization 
• a liquid product, including use of separating funnel 
8. use melting point apparatus 
9. use thin-layer or paper chromatography 
10. set up electrochemical cells and measuring voltages 
11. safely and carefully handle solids and liquids, including corrosive, irritant, 
flammable and toxic substances 
12. measure rates of reaction by at least two different methods, for example: 
• an initial rate method such as a clock reaction 
• a continuous monitoring method 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
82 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
83 
 
Appendix 5d: Mapping between Appendix 5c 
and core practicals (chemistry) 
 
This qualification gives students opportunities to use relevant apparatus to develop 
practical skills and demonstrate competency in a range of practical techniques. 
All of the techniques listed in Appendix 5c will be assessed through a series of core 
practical activities within this specification. 
To achieve the Science Practical Endorsement, students need to show competence in 
the 12 practical techniques listed in Appendix 5c: Use of apparatus and techniques. 
The following table shows how each core practical activity, listed in the content, maps 
to the required practical techniques in Appendix 5c: Use of apparatus and techniques. 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
84 
 
Chemistry Core Practical Practical technique in Appendix 5c 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
1: Measuring the molar 
volume of a gas             
2: Preparation of a standard 
solution from a solid acid             
3: Finding the concentration 
of a solution of hydrochloric 
acid 
            
4: Investigation of the rates 
of hydrolysis of 
halogenoalkanes 
            
5: The oxidation of ethanol             
6: Chlorination of  
2-methylpropan-2-ol with 
concentrated hydrochloric 
acid 
            
7: Analysis of some inorganic 
and organic unknowns             
8: To determine the enthalpy 
change of a reaction using 
Hess’s Law 
            
9. Finding the Ka value for 
a weak acid 
            
10. Investigating some 
electrochemical cells             
11. Redox titration             
12. The preparation of a 
transition metal complex             
13a and 13b: Following 
the rate of the iodine-
propanone reaction by a 
titrimetric method and 
investigating a ‘clock 
reaction’ (Harcourt-Esson, 
iodine clock) 
            
14. Finding the activation 
energy of a reaction             
15. Analysis of some 
inorganic and organic 
unknowns 
            
16. The preparation of 
aspirin             
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
85 
 
Appendix 6: Mathematical skills and 
exemplifications 
 
The information in this appendix has been taken directly from the document  
GCE AS and A level regulatory requirements for biology, chemistry, physics and 
psychology published by the Department for Education in April 2014. 
In order to be able to develop their skills, knowledge and understanding in science, 
students need to have been taught, and to have acquired competence in, the 
appropriate areas of mathematics relevant to the subject as indicated in the table 
of coverage below. 
The assessment of quantitative skills will include at least 10% level 2 or above 
mathematical skills for biology and psychology, 20% for chemistry and 40% for 
physics. These skills will be applied in the context of the relevant science A Level. 
All mathematical content must be assessed within the lifetime of the specification. 
The following tables illustrate where these mathematical skills may be developed 
and could be assessed in each of the sciences. Those shown in bold type would only 
be tested in the full A Level course. 
This list of examples is not exhaustive. These skills could be developed in other 
areas of specification content. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
86 
 
 Mathematical skills Exemplification of mathematical skill in the 
context of A Level chemistry (assessment is 
not limited to the examples given below) 
(i)  B.0 – arithmetic and numerical computation  
B.0.0 Recognise and make use of 
appropriate units in calculation 
Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
• convert between units, e.g. cm3 to dm3 as 
part of volumetric calculations 
• give units for an equilibrium constant or 
a rate constant 
• understand that different units are used in 
similar topic areas, so that conversions may 
be necessary, e.g. entropy in J mol
-1 K-1 and 
enthalpy changes in kJ mol-1 
B.0.1 Recognise and use expressions in 
decimal and ordinary form 
Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
• use an appropriate number of decimal places 
in calculations, e.g. for pH 
• carry out calculations using numbers in 
standard and ordinary form, e.g. use of 
Avogadro’s number 
• understand standard form when applied to 
areas such as (but not limited to) Kw 
• convert between numbers in standard and 
ordinary form 
• understand that significant figures need 
retaining when making conversions between 
standard and ordinary form, e.g. 0.0050 mol 
dm
-3 is equivalent to 5.0 x 10-3 mol dm-3 
B.0.2 Use ratios, fractions and 
percentages 
Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
• calculate percentage yields 
• calculate the atom economy of a reaction 
• construct and/or balance equations using 
ratios 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
87 
 
 Mathematical skills Exemplification of mathematical skill in the 
context of A Level chemistry (assessment is 
not limited to the examples given below) 
B.0.3 Make estimates of the results of 
calculations (without using a 
calculator). 
Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
• evaluate the effect of changing 
experimental parameters on measurable 
values, e.g. how the value of Kc would 
change with temperature given different 
specified conditions 
B.0.4 Use calculators to find and use 
power, exponential and 
logarithmic functions 
Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
• carry out calculations using the Avogadro 
constant 
• carry out pH and pKa calculations 
• make appropriate mathematical 
approximations in buffer calculations 
(ii)  B.1 – handling data 
B.1.1 Use an appropriate number of 
significant figures 
Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
• report calculations to an appropriate number 
of significant figures given raw data quoted 
to varying numbers of significant figures 
• understand that calculated results can only 
be reported to the limits of the least accurate 
measurement 
B.1.2 Find arithmetic means Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
• calculate weighted means, e.g. calculation of 
an atomic mass based on supplied isotopic 
abundances 
• select appropriate titration data (i.e. 
identification of outliers) in order to calculate 
mean titres 
B.1.3 Identify uncertainties in 
measurements and use simple 
techniques to determine 
uncertainty when data are 
combined 
Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
● determine uncertainty when two burette 
readings are used to calculate a titre value 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
88 
 
 Mathematical skills Exemplification of mathematical skill in the 
context of A Level chemistry (assessment is 
not limited to the examples given below) 
(iii) B.2 – algebra 
B.2.1 Understand and use the symbols: 
=, <, <<, >>, >, ∝, ~, 
equilibrium sign 
No exemplification required. 
B.2.2 Change the subject of an 
equation 
Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
• carry out structured and unstructured mole 
calculations, e.g. calculate a rate constant 
k from a rate equation 
B.2.3 Substitute numerical values into 
algebraic equations using 
appropriate units for physical 
quantities 
Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
• carry out structured and unstructured mole 
calculations 
• carry out rate calculations 
• calculate the value of an equilibrium 
constant KC 
B.2.4 Solve algebraic equations Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
• carry out Hess’s law calculations 
• calculate a rate constant k from a rate 
equation 
B.2.5 Use logarithms in relation to 
quantities that range over 
several orders of magnitude 
Students may be tested on their ability to: 
• carry out pH and pKa calculations 
(iv) B.3 – graphs 
B.3.1 Translate information between 
graphical, numerical and algebraic 
forms 
Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
• interpret and analyse spectra 
• determine the order of a reaction from a 
graph 
• derive rate expression from a graph 
B.3.2 Plot two variables from 
experimental or other data 
Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
• plot concentration–time graphs from 
collected or supplied data and draw an 
appropriate best-fit curve 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
89 
 
 Mathematical skills Exemplification of mathematical skill in the 
context of A Level chemistry (assessment is 
not limited to the examples given below) 
B.3.3 Determine the slope and 
intercept of a linear graph 
Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
• calculate the rate constant of a zero-
order reaction by determination of the 
gradient of a concentration–time graph 
B.3.4 Calculate rate of change from 
a graph showing a linear 
relationship 
Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
• calculate the rate constant of a zero-
order reaction by determination of the 
gradient of a concentration–time graph 
B.3.5 Draw and use the slope of a 
tangent to a curve as a 
measure of rate of change 
Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
• determine the order of a reaction using 
the initial rates method 
(v)  B.4 – geometry and trigonometry 
B.4.1 Appreciate angles and shapes in  
regular 2D and 3D structures. 
Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
• predict/identify shapes of and bond angles in 
molecules with and without a lone pair(s), for 
example NH3, CH4, H2O etc 
B.4.2 Visualise and represent 2D and 
3D forms including two-
dimensional representations of 3D 
objects 
Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
• draw different forms of isomers 
• identify chiral centres from a 2D or 3D 
representation 
B.4.3 Understand the symmetry of 2D 
and 3D shapes 
Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
• describe the types of stereoisomerism shown 
by molecules/complexes 
• identify chiral centres from a 2D or 3D 
representation 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
90 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
91 
Appendix 7: Command words used in 
examination papers 
 
The following table lists the command words used in the external assessments. 
 
Command word Definition 
Add/Label Requires the addition or labelling to a stimulus material given 
in the question, for example labelling a diagram or adding 
units to a table. 
Assess Give careful consideration to all the factors or events that 
apply and identify which are the most important or relevant. 
Make a judgement on the importance of something, and 
come to a conclusion where needed. 
Calculate Obtain a numerical answer, showing relevant working. If the 
answer has a unit, this must be included. 
Comment on Requires the synthesis of a number of variables from 
data/information to form a judgement. 
Compare and 
contrast 
Looking for the similarities and differences of two (or more) 
things. Should not require the drawing of a conclusion. 
Answer must relate to both (or all) things mentioned in the 
question. 
The answer must include at least one similarity and one 
difference. 
Complete Requires the completion of a table/diagram. 
Criticise Inspect a set of data, an experimental plan or a scientific 
statement and consider the elements. Look at the merits and 
faults of the information presented and back judgements 
made by giving evidence.  
Deduce Draw/reach conclusion(s) from the information provided. 
Describe To give an account of something. Statements in the response 
need to be developed as they are often linked but do not 
need to include a justification or reason. 
Determine The answer must have an element which is quantitative from 
the stimulus provided, or must show how the answer can be 
reached quantitatively. To gain maximum marks there must 
be a quantitative element to the answer. 
Devise Plan or invent a procedure from existing principles/ideas 
Discuss • Identify the issue/situation/problem/argument that is 
being assessed within the question. 
• Explore all aspects of an 
issue/situation/problem/argument. 
• Investigate the issue/situation etc by reasoning or 
argument. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
92 
 
Command word Definition 
Draw Produce a diagram either using a ruler or using freehand. 
Evaluate Review information then bring it together to form a 
conclusion, drawing on evidence including strengths, 
weaknesses, alternative actions, relevant data or information. 
Come to a supported judgement of a subject’s qualities and 
relation to its context. 
Explain An explanation requires a justification/exemplification of a 
point. The answer must contain some element of 
reasoning/justification, this can include mathematical 
explanations. 
Give/State/Name All of these command words are really synonyms. They 
generally all require recall of one or more pieces of 
information. 
Give a 
reason/reasons 
When a statement has been made and the requirement is 
only to give the reasons why. 
Identify Usually requires some key information to be selected from a 
given stimulus/resource. 
Justify Give evidence to prove (either the statement given in the 
question or an earlier answer) 
Plot Produce a graph by marking points accurately on a grid from 
data that is provided and then drawing a line of best fit 
through these points. A suitable scale and appropriately 
labelled axes must be included if these are not provided in 
the question. 
Predict Give an expected result. 
Show that Verify the statement given in the question. 
Sketch Produce a freehand drawing. For a graph this would need a 
line and labelled axis with important features indicated, the 
axis are not scaled. 
State what is 
meant by 
When the meaning of a term is expected but there are 
different ways of how these can be described. 
Write When the questions ask for an equation. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
93 
 
Appendix 8: Data Booklet 
 
This appendix shows the data included in a Data Booklet that will be available on 
our website. Centres will be sent copies of the Data Booklet for the first 
examination series. 
Centres can make additional fresh copies by printing the Data Booklet from our 
website. Candidates must use an unmarked copy of the Data Booklet in 
examinations. 
Acknowledgement of source 
The data used in the Data Booklet is derived from the Nuffield Advanced Science, 
Revised Book of Data (ISBN 058235448X), Nuffield Foundation. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
94 
 
Physical constants 
 
Avogadro constant (L)   6.02 x 1023 mol-1 
 
Elementary charge (e)   1.60 x 10-19 C 
 
Gas constant (R)     8.31 J mol-1 K-1 
 
Molar volume of ideal gas: 
 at r.t.p.      24 dm3 mol-1 
 
Specific heat capacity of water 4.18 J g
-1 K-1  
 
Ionic product of water (Kw)  1.00 x 10-14 mol2 dm-6 
 
1 dm3 = 1 000 cm3 = 0.001 m3 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
95 
 
Infrared spectroscopy 
 
Correlation of infrared absorption wavenumbers with molecular structure 
 
Group Wavenumber range/cm-1 
C-H stretching vibrations  
Alkane 2962-2853 
Alkene 3095-3010 
Alkyne 3300 
Arene 3030 
Aldehyde 2900-2820 and 2775-2700 
  
C-H bending variations  
Alkane 1485-1365 
Arene 5 adjacent hydrogen atoms 750 and 700 
4 adjacent hydrogen atoms 750 
3 adjacent hydrogen atoms 780 
2 adjacent hydrogen atoms 830 
1 adjacent hydrogen atom 880 
  
N-H stretching vibrations  
Amine 3500-3300 
Amide 3500-3140 
  
O-H stretching vibrations  
Alcohols and phenols 3750-3200 
Carboxylic acids 3300-2500 
  
C=C stretching vibrations  
Isolated alkene 1669-1645 
Arene 1600, 1580, 1500, 1450 
  
C=O stretching vibrations  
Aldehydes, saturated alkyl 1740-1720 
Ketones, alkyl 1720-1700 
Ketones, aryl 1700-1680 
Carboxylic acids, alkyl 1725-1700 
Carboxylic acids, aryl 1700-1680 
Carboxylic acid, anhydrides  1850-1800 and 1790-1740 
Acyl halides, chlorides 1795 
Acyl halides, bromides 1810  
Esters, saturated 1750-1735 
Amides 1700-1630 
  
Triple bond stretching vibrations  
C≡N 2260-2215 
C≡C 2260-2100 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
96 
 
1H nuclear magnetic resonance chemical shifts relative to 
tetramethylsilane (TMS) 
            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13C nuclear magnetic resonance chemical shifts relative to 
tetramethylsilane (TMS) 
             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TMS 
CH2O 
  220     200     180    160    140     120     100      80      60      40       20       0       -20     -40 
C–Cl 
 
C–Br 
C–C 
Arene 
        O 
 
C–C–H 
 
C=C 
C-OH 
C–C 
C-N 
        O 
 
C–C–C 
 
    O 
 
–C–N 
 
    O 
 
–C–O 
 
12.0       11.0        10.0         9.0         8.0          7.0           6.0         5.0           4.0         3.0         2.0            1.0         0.0 
δ/ppm for TMS 
 
H–C–C=C 
   alkenes 
   arenes 
H–C–N 
 amine 
 amide 
C–N–H 
amine 
 
Ar–N–H 
phenylamines 
 
CON–H 
amide 
 
H–C–C=O 
aldehyde 
ketone 
ester 
amide 
acid 
 
H–C–O– 
 alcohol 
ether 
ester 
         –O–H 
         alcohol 
 
     H–C–halogen 
   halogenoalkane 
   R2CHF>R2CHCl> 
   R2CHBr>R2CHI 
CH3OH 
 
   3.39 
 
 
propanone 
         
     2.10 
 
       
 
 
ethene 
 
  5.28 
 
 
benzene 
 
    7.27 
 
 
Ar–O–H 
phenol 
 
COO–H 
carboxylic acid 
 
H–C–C 
alkane 
R3CH>R2CH2> 
RCH3 
H–C=C 
alkene 
Ar–H 
arene ring 
    O 
 
– C–H 
aldehyde 
TMS 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
97 
 
Pauling electronegativities 
 
Pauling electronegativity index 
 
       H 
2∙1 
         He 
Li 
1∙0 
Be 
1∙5 
          B 
2∙0 
C 
2∙5 
N 
3∙0 
O 
3∙5 
F 
4∙0 
Ne 
Na 
0∙9 
Mg 
1∙2 
          Al 
1∙5 
Si 
1∙9 
P 
2∙1 
S 
2∙5 
Cl 
3∙0 
Ar 
K 
0∙8 
Ca 
1∙0 
Sc 
1∙3 
Ti 
1∙5 
V 
1∙6 
Cr 
1∙6 
Mn 
1∙5 
Fe 
1∙8 
Co 
1∙8 
Ni 
1∙8 
Cu 
1∙9 
Zn 
1∙6 
Ga 
1∙6 
Ge 
2∙0 
As 
2∙0 
Se 
2∙4 
Br 
2∙8 
Kr 
Rb 
0∙8 
Sr 
1∙0 
Y 
1∙2 
Zr 
1∙3 
Nb 
1∙6 
Mo 
2∙1 
Tc 
1∙9 
Ru 
2∙2 
Rh 
2∙2 
Pd 
2∙2 
Ag 
1∙9 
Cd 
1∙6 
In 
1∙7 
Sn 
1∙9 
Sb 
1∙9 
Te 
2∙1 
I 
2∙5 
Xe 
Cs 
0∙7 
Ba 
0∙9 
La 
1∙1 
Hf 
1∙3 
Ta 
1∙5 
W 
2∙3 
Re 
1∙9 
Os 
2∙2 
Ir 
2∙2 
Pt 
2∙2 
Au 
2∙5 
Hg 
2∙0 
Tl 
1∙6 
Pb 
1∙8 
Bi 
1∙9 
Po 
2∙0 
At 
2∙2 
Rn 
 
 
Indicators 
 
  pKin 
(at 298 K) 
acid pH range alkaline 
1 Thymol blue (acid) 1.7 red 1.2−2.8 yellow 
2 Screened methyl orange 3.7 purple 3.2−4.2 green 
3 Methyl orange 3.7 red 3.2−4.4 yellow 
4 Bromophenol blue 4.0 yellow 2.8−4.6 blue 
5 Bromocresol green 4.7 yellow 3.8−5.4 blue 
      
6 Methyl red 5.1 red 4.2−6.3 yellow 
7 Litmus  red 5.0−8.0 blue 
8 Bromothymol blue 7.0 yellow 6.0−7.6 blue 
9 Phenol red 7.9 yellow 6.8−8.4 red 
10 Phenolphthalein (in 
ethanol) 
9.3 colourless 8.2−10.0 red 
      
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
98 
Standard electrode potentials 
 
Eo Standard electrode potential of aqueous system at 298 K, that is, standard 
emf of electrochemical cell in the hydrogen half-cell forms the left-hand side 
electrode system.  
 
 Right-hand electrode system Eo/V 
1 Na+ + e- ⇌ Na -2.71 
2 Mg2+  + 2e- ⇌ Mg -2.37 
3 Al3+  + 3e- ⇌ Al -1.66 
4 V2+ + 2e- ⇌ V -1.18 
5 Zn2+ + 2e- ⇌ Zn -0.76 
6 Cr3+ + 3e- ⇌ Cr -0.74 
7 Fe2+ + 2e- ⇌ Fe -0.44 
8 Cr3+ + e- ⇌ Cr2+ -0.41 
9 V3+ + e- ⇌ V2+ -0.26 
10 Ni2+ + 2e- ⇌ Ni -0.25 
11 H+ + e- ⇌ ½H2 0.00 
12 ½S4O62- + e- ⇌ S2O32- +0.09 
13 Cu2+ + e- ⇌ Cu+ +0.15 
14 Cu2+ + 2e- ⇌ Cu +0.34 
15 VO2+ + 2H+ + e- ⇌ V3+ + H2O +0.34 
16 ½O2 + H2O + 2e- ⇌ 2OH- +0.40 
17 S2O32- + 6H+ + 4e- ⇌ 2S + 3H2O +0.47 
18 Cu+ + e- ⇌ Cu +0.52 
19 ½I2 + e- ⇌ I- +0.54 
20 3O2 + 2H+ + 2e- ⇌ H2O2 +0.68 
21 Fe3+ + e- ⇌ Fe2+ +0.77 
22 Ag+ + e- ⇌ Ag +0.80 
23 NO3- + 2H+ + e- ⇌ NO2 + H2O +0.80 
24 ClO- + H2O + 2e- ⇌ Cl- + 2OH- +0.89 
25 VO2+ + 2H+ + e- ⇌ VO2+ + H2O +1.00 
26 ½Br2 + e- ⇌ Br- +1.09 
27 ½O2 + 2H+ + 2e- ⇌ H2O +1.23 
28 ½Cr2O
2
7
- + 7H+ + 3e- ⇌ Cr3+ + 27 H2O +1.33 
29 ½Cl2 + e-⇌ Cl- +1.36 
30 MnO4- + 8H+ + 5e- ⇌ Mn2+ + 4H2O +1.51 
31 ½ H2O2 + H+ + e- ⇌ H2O +1.77  
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Chemistry 
Specification – Issue 3 – February 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
99 
 
 
 
 
 
DB260224 9781446929537_GCE2015_AL_CHEM_ISS3.DOC.1–110/0 
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office:  80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121
