Specification
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu
(listening, reading and writing) (9UR0)
First teaching from September 2018
First certification from 2020 Issue 1
A Level 
Urdu

 
 
 
Contents 
1 Introduction 2 
Why choose the Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu? 2 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this qualification 3 
Qualification at a glance 4 
2 Subject content and assessment information 7 
Themes, sub-themes and research subjects 8 
Paper 1: Translation into English, reading comprehension and writing (research 
question) in Urdu 10 
Paper 2: Translation into Urdu and written response to works 21 
Paper 3: Listening, reading and writing in Urdu 28 
Assessment Objectives 34 
3 Administration and general information 35 
Entries 35 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special consideration and 
malpractice 35 
Student recruitment and progression 38 
Appendix 1: Prescribed literary texts and films 41 
Appendix 2: Grammar list 42 
Appendix 3: The context for the development of this qualification 47 
Appendix 4: Transferable skills 49 
Appendix 5: Level 3 Extended Project qualification 50 
Appendix 6: Codes 52 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) 
– Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
2 
1 Introduction 
Why choose the Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE 
in Urdu? 
We believe languages should appeal to all students. Our new Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE 
in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) has been developed to inspire all students to have an 
appreciation of the language, literature, film and culture of Pakistan and areas of India where 
Urdu is an official language. 
We have listened to feedback from the languages community – subject associations, 
academics and advisors, together with teachers and students – and have designed a 
motivating course of study that will enable your students to develop advanced level 
knowledge and understanding of the Urdu language, the culture of Pakistan and areas of 
India where Urdu is an official language. 
As well as practical and valuable language and transferable study skills. This specification will 
help to prepare students for higher education and enhance their employability profile. 
Inspiring and engaging themes – our qualification features familiar and popular themes, 
as well as some new content that provides clear links to some of the most fundamental and 
interesting aspects of the culture of Pakistan and areas of India where Urdu is an official 
language. 
Popular literary texts and films – we offer a choice of literary texts and films that includes 
contemporary and more classic titles. 
Rewards creativity – our assessments place an emphasis on communication and grammar, 
as well as providing plenty of opportunities for students to apply their knowledge 
independently and creatively. Clear mark schemes encourage students to develop ideas, use 
language to persuade and analyse, and give critical responses in their writing. 
Clear and coherent structure – our qualification has a straightforward structure with four 
engaging themes: ارﺗﻘﺎﭘﺎﮐﺴﺘﺎﻧﯽ ﻣﻌﺎﺷﺮے ﮐﺎ ; ﺗﻤﺪن اور ﻓﻨﻮنِ ﻟﻄﯿﻔہاردو ﺑﻮﻟﻨﮯ واﻟﯽ دﻧﯿﺎ ﻣﯿﮟ  ;ﮨﺠﺮت ) ﺗﺮک ِ وطﻦ ( اور 
ﺜﻘﺎﻓﺘﯽ ﻣﻌﺎﺷﺮهاﻟﮐﺜﯿﺮ ; رُخﮐﮯ ﭘﺎﮐﺴﺘﺎﻧﯽ  ﺳﯿﺎﺳﺖ . 
The four themes are studied alongside two works (either two literary texts or one literary 
text and one film) and are assessed through three externally-examined papers.  
Manageable content – we have worked closely with teachers and students to ensure that 
our content is manageable and appropriate so that you and your students can be confident 
that you have enough time to cover what you need to at the appropriate depth. 
Continuous progression – our content builds on the understanding developed at  
Key Stage 4 and gives students the opportunity to learn and apply important transferable 
skills in critical thinking and analysis, enabling them to make a smooth transition to the next 
level of study. However, students do not need to have studied GCSE Urdu to follow this 
course.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
3 
Supporting you in planning and implementing 
this qualification 
Our Getting Started Guide, available on our website, gives you an overview of the new  
A Level qualification to help you get to grips with the changes to content and assessment 
and to help you understand what these changes mean for you and your students. 
Teaching and learning 
There will be lots of free teaching and learning support to help you deliver the new 
qualification, including: 
● support with teaching literature and film 
● support for the independent research. 
ResultsPlus 
ResultsPlus provides the most detailed analysis available of your students’ exam 
performance. It can help you identify the topics and skills where further learning would 
benefit your students. 
Get help and support 
Our subject advisor service, led by Alistair Drewery, and our online community will ensure 
that you receive help and guidance from us, and that you can share ideas and information 
with other teachers. You can sign up to receive e-newsletters to keep up to date with 
qualification updates and product and service news. 
Learn more at qualifications.pearson.com 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) 
– Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
4 
Qualification at a glance 
Content and assessment overview 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) consists of 
three externally-examined papers that assess listening, reading and writing skills. These 
assessments will be set and marked by Pearson.  
Students must complete all assessments in May/June in any single year. 
 
Paper 1: Translation into English, reading comprehension and writing (research 
question) in Urdu  (*Paper code: 9UR0/01) 
Written examination: 2 hours 30 minutes 
40% of the qualification 
80 marks 
Content overview 
Section A draws on vocabulary and structures from any one of the sub-themes within the 
four themes listed on pages 8–9. 
Section B draws on vocabulary and structures across all sub-themes from within the four 
themes listed on pages 8–9.  
Section C is based on independent research selected and carried out by the student. The 
research must be based on one of the research subjects listed on pages 8–9. All aspects of 
the chosen research subject must be studied. Students use information from their research 
findings and from an unseen written text to answer the question. 
Assessment overview 
Students are not permitted access to a dictionary during the examination or any 
documentation related to their research  
The examination is made up of: 
Section A: Translation into English (20 marks) 
An unseen passage to be translated from Urdu to English. 
Section B: Reading (20 marks) 
A reading assessment based on a variety of text types and genres. Students must respond 
to a series of comprehension questions. 
Section C: Writing (research question) (40 marks) 
A reading and writing question based on an aspect of the student’s chosen research 
subject. Students read a text and then answer a question, incorporating information and 
ideas from both the text and their research findings. 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
5 
Paper 2: Translation into Urdu and written response to works  
 (*Paper code: 9UR0/02) 
Written examination: 2 hours and 40 minutes 
30% of the qualification 
110 marks 
Content overview 
Section A draws on vocabulary and structures from any one of the sub-themes within the 
four themes listed on pages 8–9.  
Sections B and C draw on the study of two discrete Urdu works: either two literary texts or 
one literary text and one film. The works must be taken from the list provided in  
Appendix 1: Prescribed literary texts and films. The literary texts listed include a novel, 
short essays and a play. All of the films are feature length. 
Assessment overview 
This paper includes a translation exercise and two essays on either two literary texts or one 
literary text and one film (students must not answer questions on two films). 
During the examination, students are not permitted access to a dictionary or any 
documentation relating to the works. 
Section A: Translation into Urdu (20 marks) 
Students translate an unseen passage from English into Urdu. 
Section B: Written response to works (literary texts) (45 marks) 
Students must write an extended response on either one or two of the literary texts listed 
in Appendix 1: Prescribed literary texts and films. 
Students select one question from a choice of two for each of their chosen literary text(s).  
If a student answers questions on two literary texts, then they do not complete Section C. 
Section C: Written response to works (films) (45 marks) 
Students who answer only one question from a literary text in the Section B must write an 
extended response on one of the films listed in Appendix 1: Prescribed literary texts and 
films. 
Students select one question from a choice of two for their chosen film. 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) 
– Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
6 
Paper 3: Listening, reading and writing in Urdu (*Paper code: 9UR0/03) 
Written examination: 2 hours and 15 minutes 
30% of the qualification 
60 marks 
Content overview 
Section A draws on vocabulary and structures across all sub-themes within the four themes 
listed on pages 8–9.  
The Section B draws on vocabulary and structures from any one of the sub-themes within 
the four themes listed on pages 8–9. There is one unseen listening source and one unseen 
written source that students must respond to. 
Assessment overview 
This paper includes a listening comprehension and a question that assesses listening, 
reading and writing skills together. 
Students are not permitted access to a dictionary during the examination. 
Section A: Listening comprehension (30 marks) 
A listening assessment based on a recording that features male and female Urdu speakers. 
Students will respond to comprehension questions based on a variety of contexts and 
sources. 
The listening audio files for the sample assessment materials are available on the Pearson 
Edexcel website. 
Section B: Listening, reading and writing question (30 marks) 
Students summarise a listening source and a text that are based on the same sub-theme. 
Students then evaluate the points of view in both sources, stating which views they agree 
with and why. 
 
*See Appendix 6: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to this 
qualification. 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
7 
2 Subject content and assessment information 
Qualification aims and objectives 
The aims and objectives of this qualification are to enable students to: 
● enhance their linguistic skills and promote and develop their capacity for critical thinking on 
the basis of their knowledge and understanding of the language, culture and society of 
Pakistan and areas of India where Urdu is an official language. 
● develop control of the language system to convey meaning, using written skills, including 
an extended range of vocabulary, for both practical and intellectual purposes as increasingly 
confident, accurate and independent users of Urdu 
● develop their ability to understand language in spoken and written form and to interact 
effectively with users of Urdu in writing  
● develop language skills and strategies, including comprehension strategies such as using 
contextual clues and cues, and communication strategies to build fluency and confidence in 
writing 
● develop speaking skills as part of their courses of study, although there will be no 
assessment of those skills  
● engage critically with intellectually stimulating texts, films and other materials in the 
original language, developing an appreciation of sophisticated and creative uses of Urdu and 
understanding them within their cultural and social context 
● develop knowledge about matters central to the society and culture, past and present, of 
Pakistan and areas of India where Urdu is an official language. 
● translate texts from English into Urdu, and from Urdu into English 
● foster their ability to learn other languages 
● equip themselves with transferable skills such as autonomy, resourcefulness, creativity, 
critical thinking, and linguistic, cultural and cognitive flexibility that will enable them to 
proceed to further study or employment 
● develop their capacity for critical and analytical thinking through the language of study 
● develop as independent researchers through the language of study. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) 
– Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
8 
Themes, sub-themes and research subjects 
Papers 1, 2 and 3 will be based on content from the following four themes. 
The four themes address a range of content related to society past and present, as well as 
aspects of the political and artistic culture of Pakistan and areas of India where Urdu is an 
official language. 
Themes 1, 3, and 4 focus on aspects of the society and politics of Pakistan only. Theme 2 
focuses on political and artistic culture in the Urdu speaking world, i.e. Pakistan and areas 
of India where Urdu is an official language.  
Each theme is broken into two sub-themes and a research subject (highlighted in bold).  
Each sub-theme and research subject is divided into a series of aspects. 
Students are required to select only one research subject for Paper 1 and must cover all three 
aspects of the research subject. Students must base their research on only one country/area. 
For Themes 1, 3 and 4, students must focus on Pakistan only; for Theme 2, students must 
focus on either Pakistan or one of the areas of India where Urdu is an official language. 
Teachers should consider cultural sensitivities when giving guidance to students on selecting 
an appropriate research subject. See pages 12-13 of the specification for further guidance on 
the independent research. 
 
ﻣﻮﺿﻮع1: ﭘﺎﮐﺴﺘﺎﻧﯽ ﻣﻌﺎﺷﺮے ﮐﺎ ارﺗﻘﺎ 
Theme 1 is set in the context of Pakistan. This themes covers society past and present. If the 
research subject is chosen from this theme, it must focus on Pakistan only. 
 
 ﺧﺎﻧﺪان : ﺧﺎﻧﺪاﻧﯽ ﺳﺎﺧﺖ ﻣﯿﮟ ﺗﺒﺪﯾﻠﯿﺎں؛  ﺧﺎﻧﺪان ﻣﯿﮟ ﻋﻮرﺗﻮں ﮐﺎ ﮐﺮدار  اور ﻣﻘﺎم؛ ﺷﺎدی ﮐﮯ ﺑﺎرے ﻣﯿﮟ  
ﺑﺪﻟﺘﮯ ﮨﻮﺋﮯ روﯾﮯ 
     ﭘﯿﺸﻮں ﻣﯿﮟ ﺗﺒﺪﯾﻠﯿﺎں؛ ﮐﺎم ﮐﯽ ﺟﮕہ ﭘﺮ ﻋﻮرﺗﯿﮟ؛ ﮐﺎرﮐﻨﻮں ﮐﮯ ﺣﻘﻮق  ﮐﺎم ؛   
ﺗﺤﻘﯿﻖ ﮐﮯ ﻟﺌﮯ ﻣﻮﺿﻮﻋﺎت 
ﮐﮯ ﻟﺌﮯﺑﮩﺘﺮ ﻣﻮاﻗﻊﺗﻌﻠﯿﻢ ﮐﮯ ﻣﺘﻮازی ﻧﻈﺎم ؛ ﻟﮍﮐﯿﻮں ،ﻟﮍﮐﻮں ﮐﮯ ﻟﯿﮯ ﯾﮑﺴﺎں ﻣﻮاﻗﻊ؛  ﻏﺮﺑﺎ  
ﻣﻮﺿﻮع 2: اردو ﺑﻮﻟﻨﮯ واﻟﯽ دُﻧﯿﺎ ﻣﯿﮟ ﺗﻤﺪن اورﻓﻨﻮنِ ﻟﻄﯿﻔہ  
Theme 2 is set in the context of the Urdu speaking world. This theme covers artistic culture 
past and present (folklore, popular culture) and political culture past and present (Media). If 
the research subject is chosen from this theme, it must focus on either Pakistan or on one 
area of India where Urdu is an official language. 
 
  ﻟﻮک رﺳﻮم و رواﯾﺖ: ﻟﻮک ﻣﻮﺳﯿﻘﯽ؛ ﻣﻐﺮب ﮐﺎ اُﺑﮭﺮﺗﺎ ﮨﻮا اﺛﺮ؛ﻗﻮﻣﯽ اور ﻣﺬﮨﺒﯽ ﺗﮩﻮار   
 ﻣﻘﺒﻮل ﮐﻠﭽﺮ:ﺳﯿﻨﻤﺎ   ﺳﮯ ﻣﺘﻌﻠﻖ ﮐﻠﯿﺪی ﺗﺤﺮﯾﮑﯿﮟ اور  اﺻﻨﺎف؛ ﺳﯿﻨﻤﺎ ﻣﯿﮟ آﻧﮯ واﻟﯽ ﺗﺒﺪﯾﻠﯿﺎں،ﮐﯿﺎ  ﮐﯿﺎدِﮐﮭﺎﯾﺎ ﺟﺎ 
ﺳﮑﺘﺎ ﮨﮯ۔  
ﮢﯿﻠﯿﻮﯾﮋن ﮐﻠﭽﺮ ﮐﮯ اﺛﺮات 
ﺗﺤﻘﯿﻖ ﮐﮯ ﻟﺌﮯ ﻣﻮﺿﻮﻋﺎت 
ﻣﯿﮉﯾﺎ: آزادیِ اظﮩﺎر؛ ﺳﯿﺎﺳﺖ ﭘﺮ ﭘﺮﻧﭧ ﻣﯿﮉﯾﺎ ﮐﮯ اﺛﺮات؛  ﺳﻮﺷﻞ ﻣﯿﮉﯾﺎ ﮐﮯ ﻧﺘﯿﺠﮯ ﻣﯿﮟ   ﺑﮍھﺘﺎ ﮨﻮاﺳﯿﺎﺳﯽ ﺷﻌﻮر  
 
ﻣﻮﺿﻮع 3)ﮨﺠﺮت   ﺗﺮکِ وطﻦ(اور ﮐﺜﯿﺮ اﻟﺜﻘﺎﻓﺘﯽ ﻣﻌﺎﺷﺮه  
Theme 3 is set in the context of Pakistan.  This theme covers Society Past and Present. If the 
research subject is chosen from this theme, it must focus on Pakistan only. 
 
 
 ﻠﻮاﯾﮏ ﻣﺘﻨﻮع  اور ﮔﻮﻧﺎﮔﻮں ﻣﻌﺎﺷﺮے ﮐﮯ ﻣﺜﺒﺖ ﭘﮩ: ﭘﺎﮐﺴﺘﺎن ﻣﯿﮟ ﮐﻤﯿﻮﻧﮣﯽ ﺳﮯ ﭘﯿﻮﺳﺘﮕﯽ؛  
  ﭽﺮ ﭘﺮاﺛﺮات؛  ﻣﻌﺎﺷﯽ ﺗﺮﻗﯽ ﻣﯿﮟ ﻣﮩﺎﺟﺮﯾﻦ ﮐﺎ  ﮐﺮدارﮐﻠاﯾﮏ ﻣﺘﻨﻮع ﻣﻌﺎﺷﺮے ﮐﮯ  
  
 : ﮨﺠﺮت  )ﺗﺮکِ وطﻦ( ﮐﯽ ﺟﺎﻧﺐ  رﺟﺤﺎﻧﺎت و طﺮزِ ﻓﮑﺮﻣﻌﺎﺷﺮے ﮐﻮ ﯾﮑﺠﺎ ﮐﺮﻧﮯ ﮐﮯ ﻟﺌﮯﮐﻤﯿﻮﻧﮣﯽ ﮐﯽ ﺳﺮﮔﺮﻣﯿﺎں؛   
ﻣﮩﺎﺟﺮﯾﻦ  ﮐﺎ ﻧﮑﺘہِ ﻧﻈﺮﮨﺠﺮت )ﺗﺮکِ وطﻦ ( ﮐﯽ ﺟﺎﻧﺐ ﻋﻮام   ﮐﺎ طﺮزِ ﻓﮑﺮ ؛  
ﺗﺤﻘﯿﻖ ﮐﮯ ﻟﺌﮯ ﻣﻮﺿﻮﻋﺎت 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
9 
ﭘﺎﮐﺴﺘﺎن ﺳﮯ ﮨﺠﺮت ﮨﺠﺮت ﮐﯽ ﺳﯿﺎﺳﯽ اور  ﻣﻌﺎﺷﯽ وﺟﻮﮨﺎت؛ اﻋﻠﯽٰ ﺗﻌﻠﯿﻢ ﯾﺎﻓﺘہ طﺒﻘﮯ ﮐﺎ ﺗﺮکِ وطﻦ؛ ﭘﺎﮐﺴﺘﺎﻧﯽ 
ﻣﻌﺎﺷﺮے ﭘﺮ   وطﻦ ﻟَﻮﮢﻨﮯ واﻟﻮں ﮐﮯ  ﻣﺜُﺒﺖ اﺛﺮات 
 
ﻣﻮﺿﻮع 4:  ﭘﺎﮐﺴﺘﺎﻧﯽ ﺳﯿﺎﺳﺖ ﮐﮯرُخ  
 
Theme 4 is set in the context of Pakistan. This theme covers political culture past and present. 
If the research subject is chosen from this theme, it must focus on Pakistan only. 
 
  ﻗﯿﺎمِ ﭘﺎﮐﺴﺘﺎن1947(  :ﭘﺎﮐﺴﺘﺎن ﭘﺮ ﺳﯿﺎﺳﯽ اﺛﺮات؛   ﭘﺎﮐﺴﺘﺎن ﮐﮯ ﻋﻮام ﭘﺮ ﺗﻘﺴﯿﻢ ِ ﭘﺎک وﮨﻨﺪ  
ﭘﺎﮐﺴﺘﺎن ﻣﯿﮟ ﺟﻤﮩﻮرﯾﺖ ﮐﺎ ارﺗﻘﺎﮐﮯ ﺳﻤﺎﺟﯽ اﺛﺮات ؛   
 ﺟﺎﮔﯿﺮداری ﻧﻈﺎم: ﭘﺎﮐﺴﺘﺎﻧﯽ دﯾﮩﺎﺗﯽ ﻣﻌﺎﺷﺮے ﻣﯿﮟ اِس ﮐﮯ ﺳﯿﺎﺳﯽ اﺛﺮات؛  دﯾﮩﺎﺗﯽ ﻋﻼﻗﻮں ﻣﯿﮟ اِس ﮐﮯ ﺳﻤﺎﺟﯽ 
اﺛﺮات؛ 
ﺷﮩﺮی  اور دﯾﮩﺎﺗﯽ ﻋﻼﻗﻮں ﮐﯽ ﺳﯿﺎﺳﺖ  ﻣﯿﮟ   ﺗﻔﺮق وﻣﻤﺎﺛﻠﺖ    
ﺗﺤﻘﯿﻖ ﮐﮯ ﻟﺌﮯ ﻣﻮﺿﻮﻋﺎت 
پ اﻗﺪاﻣﺎتﺳﮯ ﻣﺘﻌﻠّﻖ ﭘﺎﮐﺴﺘﺎن ﻣﯿﮟ ﻣﺎﺣﻮﻟﯿﺎﺗﯽ ﻣﺴﺎﺋﻞ  
ﻣﻮﺳﻤﯿﺎﺗﯽ ﺗﺒﺪﯾﻠﯿﻮں اور آﻟﻮُدﮔﯽ ﮐﮯ ﻣﺴﺎﺋﻞ ﮐﮯ ﺳﺪﱢﺑﺎب ﮐﮯ ﻟﺌﮯ ﺣﮑﻮﻣﺖ ﮐﯽ ﮐﺎررواﺋﯿﺎں؛  ﻗﺪرﺗﯽ آﻓﺎت  ﮐﮯ ﺳﺪﱢ 
ﺑﺎب ﮐﮯ  ﻟﺌﮯ ﺣﮑﻮﻣﺖ ﮐﮯ اﻗﺪام؛  ﭘﺎﮐﺴﺘﺎن ﻣﯿﮟ ﻏﯿﺮﻣﻠﮑﯽ اﻣﺪادی ادارے۔ 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) 
– Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
10 
Paper 1: Translation into English, reading 
comprehension and writing (research question)  
in Urdu 
Content 
Students will be assessed on their ability to translate accurately from Urdu into English, their 
understanding of written Urdu from a variety of types of authentic texts, and their knowledge 
and understanding of culture and society via research. 
Texts vary in length and include an extended passage. All written materials are culturally 
relevant to Pakistan and areas of India where Urdu is an official language (depending on 
where they are covered within the themes) and are drawn from the four themes (listed on 
pages 8–9). 
Students should be able to: 
● translate from Urdu into English 
● understand main points and detail from written material 
● infer meaning from complex written material 
● assimilate and use information from written sources 
● develop research skills, demonstrating the ability to initiate and conduct individual research 
using a range of authentic sources in Urdu 
● use information from research findings and an unseen text to put forward an argument, 
draw conclusions and demonstrate knowledge and understanding of the research subject. 
Although speaking skills are not directly assessed in the qualification, students should be 
encouraged to develop their speaking skills in Urdu during the course of study. 
Translation into English 
The content of the translation will be taken from any one of the sub-themes within the  
four themes. 
Reading 
The reading section will be made up of texts containing both factual and abstract content and 
will be authentic or adapted from authentic sources. The texts will include contemporary, 
historical, literary, fiction and non-fiction sources, written for different purposes and 
audiences. 
Writing (research question) 
This section comprises an unseen text based on the research subject and a question related to 
the text. Students must use their research findings, as well as information in the text, to 
answer the question. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
11 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2020. 
● The total assessment time is 2 hours and 30 minutes. Recommended timings for each 
section are given below. 
● The assessment is out of 80 marks. 
● There are three sections in the paper. They cover the assessment of translation, reading, 
and writing skills in Urdu, as well as knowledge and understanding of culture and society. 
● Students must answer all questions in each Sections A and B and one question on their 
chosen research subject in Section C. 
● Students are not permitted access to a dictionary during the examination or any 
documentation related to their research. 
● For Section A (translation into English), 20 minutes (recommended timing), 20 marks: 
o students are given one unseen text in Urdu and must translate it into English. 
● For Section B (reading), 45 minutes (recommended timing), 20 marks: 
o students respond to four questions based on the texts provided 
o questions are comprised of both multiple-choice questions and open-response questions. 
● For Section C (writing), 1 hour and 25 minutes (recommended timing), 40 marks: 
o students are required to select only one research subject prior to the examination and 
must base their research on only one country/area. Students must research Pakistan 
only, if they choose the research subject from Themes 1, 3 or 4. Students who choose 
the research subject from Theme 2 must base their research on either Pakistan or one 
area of India where Urdu is an official language. 
o in the examination, for each research subject, students read one unseen text in Urdu and 
then respond to a statement based on the research subject; they must use information 
from the unseen text and their research findings in their response (as students must only 
research one country/area, the unseen text for Theme 2 will be general in nature and 
equally relevant to Pakistan and any area of India where Urdu is an official language). 
o students are expected to critically analyse the statement and demonstrate knowledge 
and understanding of the research subject. They do this by presenting ideas, arguments 
and conclusions that are supported by relevant information, examples and references 
from their research findings and from the unseen text. Students must use a range of 
language accurately and focus on the question throughout their response 
o students should write approximately 320-370 words in their answer. 
● All questions in Sections B and C are set in Urdu and must be answered in Urdu. 
The recommended timings have been set to enable the student to complete each section in 
sufficient time. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) 
– Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
12 
Guidance on the independent research  
For the purposes of the assessment, independent research means research carried out without 
the help or instruction of others, including teachers. 
The independent research must relate to the Urdu-speaking cultural and/or social context. The 
student must base their research on all aspects of one of the prescribed research subjects 
listed on pages 8 and 9. Students must base their response on one country/area only (see 
pages 8 to 9). Students who choose Themes 1, 3 or 4 must base their response on Pakistan 
only. If students choose Theme 2, they must base their response on either Pakistan or one 
area of India where Urdu is an official language. Correspondingly, the student’s response in 
the examination must only refer to that country/area. If students do refer to more than one 
country/area, they are likely to disadvantage themselves as they will waste time writing 
content that will not gain them any marks. Students should therefore be discouraged from 
doing this (see the mark grid ‘Knowledge and understanding of society and culture). 
The independent research must not relate to or make reference to one of the literary works or 
films studied for Paper 2. The independent research must: 
● allow students to gather evidence independently from at least two authentic sources in the 
assessed language. Authentic sources could include newspaper and magazine articles, 
online written sources, journals, literary texts, films, television, radio, online audio-visual 
material and interviews. The types of evidence that show knowledge and understanding of 
society and culture (and research) are outlined in information relating to indicative content 
on page 16 
● enable the student to contextualise and evaluate their findings independently. 
The table below gives guidance on the process that could be followed. 
 
Stage Description 
1 Pre-independent 
research 
● Teacher instruction on how to conduct research, for example the 
teacher gives advice on suitable resources and how to analyse 
information. 
● Initial conversations with the teacher, explaining the content of the 
research subject as outlined in the specification. 
● The teacher should ensure that if students choose the research 
subject from Themes 1, 3 or 4 that they focus on Pakistan only. For 
Theme 2, students may focus on either Pakistan or one of the areas 
of India where Urdu is an official language. 
● The teacher should consider cultural sensitivities when giving 
guidance to students on selecting an appropriate research subject. 
2 Independent 
research 
● The student conducts research to find and select appropriate 
sources. 
● The teacher monitors the research by giving general feedback. 
● Students evaluate their findings and prepare for the assessment. 
 
It is recommended that students decide on which research subject they wish to research as 
early as possible in the academic year. However, learning hours for the independent research 
are not specified because the process of information collation and investigation are undertaken 
independently.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
13 
Teachers can: 
● give guidance on developing research skills (including methodology and analytical tools) 
● give guidance on the content of the research subjects as outlined in the specification 
● comment on the availability of resources and time constraints 
● advise and direct students to the Assessment Objectives. 
Teachers must: 
● explain what ‘independence’ means (see definition in Guidance on the independent research 
on page 12) 
● confirm that the student’s research meets all of the aspects of the research subject and has 
the potential to meet the requirements of the assessment criteria  
● ensure that students do not intend to use any of the literary works or films that they have 
studied for Paper 2 in their research 
● monitor the different research subjects being undertaken in a centre to ensure that 
independence is being maintained. If more than one student chooses the same research 
subject, the teacher must ensure that each student is working independently 
● ensure that if the research subject is chosen from Theme 2, students only focus their 
research on either Pakistan or one area of India where Urdu is an official language. 
Teachers must not: 
● teach the content of the research subjects to students and provide sources. 
Students must: 
● initiate and conduct their own research, and develop their research skills when investigating 
their research subject. 
If malpractice is found to have taken place, a penalty may be applied, dependent on the 
circumstances and severity of the malpractice. 
For full details on malpractice, please see the section entitled Malpractice and the JCQ 
document Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and Assessments 2016–17. 
Synoptic assessment  
Synoptic assessment requires students to work across different areas of a qualification and to 
show their accumulated knowledge and understanding of a topic or subject area. 
Synoptic assessment enables students to show their ability to combine their skills, knowledge 
and understanding with breadth and depth of the subject.  
This paper assesses synopticity. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and marking criteria (including guidance on how these criteria are applied) for 
this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, 
reading and writing) Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Marking guidance 
Marking guidance has been written to accompany the SAMs and is included with the SAMs 
booklet. Please note that this guidance is for the use of the Pearson-appointed external 
examiners. It is printed for reference in the specification to aid understanding of how the 
assessment criteria will be applied. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) 
– Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
14 
Marking guidance for Paper 1: Translation into English, reading 
comprehension and writing (research question) in Urdu 
This marking guidance is for the use of Pearson-appointed external examiners. The guidance 
has been included for teacher reference to aid understanding of how the assessment criteria 
will be applied. 
Section A – Question 1 (translation into English) 
This question is marked using a points-based mark scheme in which 1 mark is given for each 
correct individual section of language. Please see the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE 
in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document for an 
example of how the translation will be marked. 
Section B – Questions 2 to 5 (reading comprehension) 
A sample paper and mark scheme for this section can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 
Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) 
document. 
Section C – Writing (research question)  
There are three levels-based mark grids to be applied to this question. These are: 
● knowledge and understanding of society and culture (via research) (AO4)  
● understand and respond to written language in writing (AO2)  
● accuracy and range of language (AO3). 
General guidance on using levels-based mark schemes 
Step 1: Decide on a marking band 
● First of all, the examiner will consider the answer as a whole and then decide which 
descriptors most closely match the answer and place it in that band. The descriptors for 
each band indicate the different features that will be seen in the student’s answer for that 
band. 
● When assigning a level, the examiner will look at the overall quality of the answer and not 
focus disproportionately on small and specific areas of the answer where the student has 
not performed quite as well as the rest. If the answer covers different aspects of different 
bands of the mark scheme, the examiner will use a ‘best fit’ approach for defining the level. 
They will then use the variability of the response to help decide the mark within the level. 
For example, if the response is predominantly band 13–16 with a small amount of band 17–
20 material, it would be placed in band 13–16 but be awarded a mark near the top of the 
band because of the band 17–20 content. 
Step 2: Decide on a mark 
● Once the examiner has decided on a band they will need to decide on a mark within the 
band. 
● They will decide on the mark to award based on the quality of the answer; they will award a 
mark towards the top or bottom of that band, depending on how the student has evidenced 
each of the descriptor bullet points. 
● The examiner will modify the mark based on how securely the trait descriptors are met at 
that band. 
● They will need to go back through the answer as they apply the mark scheme to clarify 
points and assure themselves that the band and the mark are appropriate. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
15 
Knowledge and understanding of society and culture  
(AO4 – 20 marks) 
● This mark grid assesses the content of the student’s answer in relation to the knowledge 
and understanding of culture and society they have demonstrated, based on their research. 
It also assesses their ability to critically analyse by sustaining a line of argument and 
drawing conclusions about aspects of culture and society, based on the question related to 
the research subject. Students must base their response on one country/area only (see 
pages 8 to 9). Students who choose Themes 1, 3 or 4 must base their response on Pakistan 
only. However, if students choose Theme 2, they must base their response on either 
Pakistan or one area of India where Urdu is an official language.   
● If students refer to more than one country/area for Themes 1, 3 or 4, examiners will mark 
content based on Pakistan only.  
● If students refer to more than one country/area for Theme 2, examiners will mark positively 
by awarding marks for content based on the country/area that will gain the highest mark.  
● If students do refer to more than one country/area in their response, they are likely to 
disadvantage themselves as they will waste time writing content that will not gain them any 
marks.   
Understand and respond to written language (AO2 – 10 marks) 
● This grid assesses students’ understanding of the unseen text through their ability to use 
relevant information from it to contribute to the ideas, arguments and conclusions 
presented on society and culture.  
The two mark grids for AO4 and AO2 are presented side by side. This is because of the 
connection between the information that students are producing based on knowledge and 
understanding of society and culture, and the information that they are using from the unseen 
text to contribute to this.  
Indicative content 
● When deciding how to reward the answer for content, examiners will consult both of these 
mark grids as well as the indicative content associated with each question, this can be 
found in the document Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading 
and writing) Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs). Indicative content contains points that 
students are likely to use to construct their answer. It is possible for an answer to be 
constructed without mentioning some or all of these points, as long as students provide 
alternative responses that fulfil the requirements of the question. 
● The indicative content shows that students are expected to place more emphasis on 
knowledge and understanding of society and culture (AO4) than on the text (understand 
and respond in writing to written language – AO2). This emphasis is reflected in the greater 
number of marks available for AO4 (20 marks) than for AO2 (10 marks). 
● Students can demonstrate their knowledge and understanding of society and culture 
(research) by providing relevant ideas/information/references/examples related to aspects 
such as: 
o lifestyle/customs/events both current and historical  
o important figures both current and historical 
o public opinion, feelings, reactions and behaviour. 
This list is not exhaustive. Aspects are illustrated in the indicative content in the Pearson 
Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) Sample Assessment 
Materials (SAMs). 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) 
– Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
16 
Knowledge and understanding of 
society and culture (AO4) 
Understand and respond to written 
language (AO2) 
Marks Description Marks Description 
0 No rewardable material. 0 No rewardable material 
1–4 ● Limited, straightforward, 
predictable ideas expressed 
on culture and society; 
limited information/examples/  
references from the one 
country/area researched to 
support ideas; limited focus 
on the research subject. 
● Limited evidence of critical 
analysis of culture and 
society; points of view have 
little justification; 
limited/brief conclusions on 
the one country/area 
researched that are 
frequently contradictory; 
frequently relies on 
description rather than 
analysis.  
1–2 ● Limited use of relevant 
information/examples/references 
from the text to contribute to 
ideas, arguments and conclusions 
about society and culture from 
the one country/area researched; 
information used is frequently 
contradictory/irrelevant. 
5-8 ● Occasionally relevant, 
straightforward ideas 
expressed about culture and 
society, mostly generalised, 
occasionally supported by 
information/examples/  
references from the one 
country/area researched; 
some loss of focus on the 
research subject. 
● Occasional evidence of critical 
analysis of culture and 
society; points of view are 
given with occasional 
justification, arguments may 
be made but not developed, 
occasionally leading to 
straightforward conclusions 
from the one country/area 
researched that may include 
contradictions; some reliance 
on description rather than 
analysis.  
3-4 ● Occasionally uses relevant 
information/examples/references 
from the text to contribute to 
ideas, arguments and conclusions 
about society and culture from 
the one country/area researched; 
sometimes information used is 
contradictory/irrelevant. 
 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
17 
Knowledge and understanding of 
society and culture (AO4) 
Understand and respond to written 
language (AO2) 
Marks Description Marks Description 
9–12 ● Relevant, straightforward 
ideas expressed about culture 
and society, sometimes 
supported by 
information/examples/ 
references from the one 
country/area researched; 
occasional loss of focus on 
the research subject. 
● Some critical analysis of 
culture and society is evident, 
with straightforward 
arguments and points of view 
which are sometimes 
developed and justified, 
sometimes drawing 
straightforward conclusions 
from the one country/area 
researched; occasionally 
relies on description rather 
than analysis.  
5–6 ● Sometimes uses relevant 
information/examples/references 
from the text to contribute to 
ideas, arguments and conclusions 
about society and culture from 
the one country/area researched; 
occasionally information used is 
contradictory/irrelevant. 
13–16 ● Relevant, occasionally 
perceptive ideas expressed 
about culture and society, 
frequently supported by 
pertinent information/  
examples/reference from the 
one country/area researched; 
focus predominantly 
maintained on the research 
subject. 
● Critical analysis of culture and 
society demonstrated by 
frequently developed and 
justified arguments and 
viewpoints, often drawing 
convincing conclusions from 
the one country/area 
researched.  
7–8 ● Mostly uses relevant 
information/examples/references 
from the text to contribute to 
ideas, arguments and conclusions 
about society and culture from 
the one country/area researched. 
 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) 
– Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
18 
Knowledge and understanding of 
society and culture (AO4) 
Understand and respond to written 
language (AO2) 
Marks Description Marks Description 
17-20 ● Relevant, perceptive ideas 
expressed about culture and 
society, consistently 
supported by pertinent 
information/examples/ 
references from the one 
country/area researched; 
focused on the research 
subject throughout. 
● Critical analysis of culture and 
society demonstrated by 
consistently developed and 
justified arguments and 
viewpoints, drawing 
convincing conclusions from 
the one country/area 
researched. 
9-10 ● Consistently uses relevant 
information/examples/references 
from the text to contribute to 
ideas, arguments and conclusions 
about society and culture from 
the one country/area researched. 
 
Additional guidance 
Perceptive: demonstrates an in-depth understanding by making connections between ideas 
and information; goes beyond the standard, predictable response; shows insight/originality. 
Ideas include thoughts, feelings, impressions, opinions. 
Straightforward ideas, arguments, conclusions are deemed to be those that give the 
standard, predictable response. 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
19 
Accuracy and range of language mark grid (AO3) 
This mark grid assesses students’ ability to use a range of grammatical structures and 
vocabulary accurately to produce articulate communication with a range of expression.  
 
Marks Description 
0 No rewardable language 
1–2 ● Limited variation of straightforward grammatical structures and vocabulary, 
with much repetition; repetitive expression, writing is often restricted  
and stilted. 
● Limited sequences of accurate language, resulting in lapses in coherence; 
errors occur that often prevent meaning being conveyed. 
3–4 ● Occasional variation in the use of mostly straightforward grammatical 
structures and vocabulary, infrequent use of complex language; expression is 
frequently repetitive, writing is sometimes stilted. 
● Some accurate sequences of language, resulting in some coherent writing; 
errors occur that sometimes hinder clarity of communication and occasionally 
prevent meaning being conveyed 
5–6 ● Some variation in the use of grammatical structures and vocabulary, some 
recurrent examples of complex language; variation of expression but this is 
not sustained; sections of articulate writing with occasionally stilted phrasing. 
● Frequent sequences of accurate language, resulting in generally coherent 
writing; errors occur that occasionally hinder clarity of communication. 
7–8 ● Frequent variation in use of grammatical structures and vocabulary, including 
different types of complex language; regular variation of expression, writing is 
articulate throughout the majority of the response. 
● Accurate language throughout most of the response, resulting in mostly 
coherent writing; errors occur that rarely hinder clarity of communication. 
9–10 ● Consistent variation in use of grammatical structures and vocabulary, 
consistent variation in use of complex language; conveys ideas in a variety of 
ways, consistently articulate writing. 
● Accurate language throughout, resulting in consistently coherent writing; any 
errors do not hinder clarity of the communication 
 
Additional guidance 
Complex language is considered to include the following: 
● conceptually challenging tenses such as the pluperfect, future perfect 
● passive voice 
● subjunctive mood 
● use of subordination 
● using extended sentences to express abstract ideas/convey justified arguments that require 
a range of lexis and structures, for example conjunctions and pronouns 
● using synonyms and a variety of expressions to say things in different ways 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) 
– Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
20 
Variation in use of grammatical structures/varied use of vocabulary: the traits in the 
mark grid differentiate between the variation of grammatical structures and vocabulary used 
by students. Examiners should judge in which mark band to place students and which mark to 
award, based on the effect that the variety of grammatical structures and vocabulary has on 
the quality of the communication; the wider the variety, the more articulate the 
communication will become (see definition of articulate below).  
Examples of a variety of grammatical structures and vocabulary are: a selection of different 
verbs, tenses, adjectives, vocabulary (including to express literary and cinematic analysis – 
(see further detail below), complex language (see definition below) for a variety of purposes, 
including to present and justify points of view, develop arguments, draw conclusions based on 
understanding. 
Articulate: articulate communication is fluent, effective and coherent as students 
control/manipulate the language to express themselves with ease for a number of different 
purposes. The more articulate the writing, the easier and more quickly the reader can progress 
through the writing without having to re-read to understand the message. If students are 
restricted to what they can express, they may not be able to use languages for all purposes, 
for example to justify arguments. The writing will become more difficult to read quickly and 
with ease as the reader has to stop and re-read to understand the message.  
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band. The mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have  
on clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example some gender and adjectival agreements, as 
long as they do not include mismatch of cases e.g. ۔ﺗﮭﺎ ﻣﺠﻨﻮں ﻟﮍﮐﯽ ﺗﮭﯽﻟﯿﻠﯽ ﻟﮍﮐﺎ  
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, wrong case endings 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the writing. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message  
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, i.e. using the incorrect person or  
the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
 
NB: these are provided as examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
21 
Paper 2: Translation into Urdu and written response to 
works  
Content 
Students should be able to: 
● manipulate language accurately through translating an unseen passage from English  
into Urdu 
● develop a detailed understanding and appreciation of the works studied, by writing critical 
and analytical responses in the language of study to the works, taken from the prescribed 
list provided (see Appendix 1: Prescribed literary texts and films) 
● produce responses that relate to features such as the form and the technique of 
presentation; key themes concepts and issues; characterisation; structure of the plot; and 
the social and cultural setting 
● present viewpoints, develop arguments, persuade, analyse and evaluate. 
Although speaking skills are not directly assessed in the qualification, students should be 
encouraged to develop their speaking skills in Urdu during the course of study. 
Translation into Urdu 
The content of the translation will be taken from any one the sub-themes within the  
four themes. 
Written response to works 
Students must study two discrete Urdu works: either two literary texts, or one literary text 
and one film. The works must be taken from the list in Appendix 1: Prescribed literary texts 
and films. The literary texts listed include a novel, short essays and a play. All the films are 
feature length.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) 
– Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
22 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2020. 
● The total assessment time is 2 hours and 40 minutes. Recommended timings for each 
section are given below. 
● The assessment is out of 110 marks. 
● There are three sections to this paper, Section A (translation into Urdu) and Section B  
and Section C (written response to works). 
● For Section A (translation into Urdu), 30 minutes (recommended timing), 20 marks: 
o students are given one unseen text in English and must translate it into Urdu. 
● For Sections B and C (written response to works), 2 hours and 10 minutes, 90 marks: 
o students must write two essays selected from Section B (literary texts) or one selected 
from Section B (literary texts) and one from the Section C (films) 
o there will be a choice of two questions for each literary text and film. As a guide, we 
advise students to write approximately 320-370 words for each essay in order to give a 
detailed analysis of the works, although the whole essay will be marked regardless of 
length 
o students should justify points of view, arguments and conclusions with evidence from the 
work  
o students are expected to provide a critical and analytical response by selecting relevant 
material from the works, presenting and justifying points of view, developing arguments, 
drawing conclusions based on understanding, and evaluating different aspects of the 
works studied 
o no credit will be given for essays on literary texts that are based on film versions adapted 
from the literary texts. Evidence given in the essay to justify viewpoints and arguments 
must be based on the original literary text. 
● All questions will be set in Urdu and must be answered in Urdu. 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted. 
● Students must not take any documentation relating to the works into the examination. 
The recommended timings have been given to enable the student to complete each section in 
sufficient time. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and marking criteria (including guidance on how these criteria are applied) for 
this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, 
reading and writing) Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Marking guidance 
Marking guidance has been written to accompany the SAMs and is included with the SAMs 
booklet. Please note that this guidance is for the use of the Pearson-appointed external 
examiners. It is printed for reference in the specification to aid understanding of how the 
assessment criteria will be applied. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
23 
Marking guidance for Paper 2: Translation into Urdu and 
written response to works  
This marking guidance is for the use of Pearson-appointed external examiners. The guidance 
has been included for teacher reference to aid understanding of how the assessment criteria 
will be applied. 
Section A – Question 1 (translation into Urdu) 
This question is marked using a points-based mark scheme in which 1 mark is given for each 
correct individual section of language. Please see the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE 
in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document for an 
example of how the translation will be marked. 
Sections B and C – Questions 2 to 7 (written response to works) 
There are three levels-based mark grids to be applied to each individual essay included in 
Sections B and C, Written response to works. The mark grids are: 
● Critical and analytical response (AO4) 
● Range of grammatical structures and vocabulary (AO3) 
● Accuracy of language (AO3). 
General guidance on using levels-based mark schemes 
Step 1: Decide on a marking band 
● First of all, the examiner will consider the answer as a whole and then decide which 
descriptors most closely match the answer and place it in that band. The descriptors for 
each band indicate the different features that will be seen in the student’s answer for that 
band. 
● When assigning a level, the examiner will look at the overall quality of the answer and not 
focus disproportionately on small and specific areas of the answer where the student has 
not performed quite as well as the rest. If the answer covers different aspects of different 
bands of the mark scheme, the examiner will use a ‘best fit’ approach for defining the level. 
They will then use the variability of the response to help decide the mark within the level. 
For example, if the response is predominantly band 5–8 with a small amount of band 9–12 
material, it would be placed in band 5–8 but be awarded a mark near the top of the band 
because of the band 9–12 content. 
Step 2: Decide on a mark 
● Once the examiner has decided on a band they will need to decide on a mark within the 
band. 
● They will decide on the mark to award based on the quality of the answer; they will award a 
mark towards the top or bottom of that band, depending on how the student has evidenced 
each of the descriptor bullet points. 
● The examiner will modify the mark based on how securely the trait descriptors are met at 
that band. 
● They will need to go back through the answer as they apply the mark scheme to clarify 
points and assure themselves that the band and the mark are appropriate. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) 
– Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
24 
Sections B and C – Questions 2 to 7 (written response to works) 
Critical and analytical response (AO4) 
● This mark grid assesses students’ ability to respond critically and analytically to the aspect 
of the literary text or film outlined in the question. To provide a critical and analytical 
response, students should select relevant material, present and justify points of view, 
develop arguments, draw conclusions based on understanding and evaluate issues, themes 
and cultural and social contexts. 
● This grid should be applied twice, once for each essay individually. 
● When deciding how to reward an answer, examiners will consult this mark grid as well as 
the indicative content associated with each question, which can be found in the document 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) Sample 
Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. Indicative content contains points that students 
are likely to use to construct their answer. It is possible for an answer to be constructed 
without mentioning some or all of these points, as long as students provide alternative 
responses that fulfil the requirements of the question.  
● The recommended word count for each essay is 320-370 words but the whole essay will be 
marked regardless of length. 
Marks Description 
0 No rewardable material. 
1–4 ● Points of view relating to issues/themes/cultural or social contexts are presented 
with simplistic justification limited interpretation with frequent misunderstanding 
or confusion; any evidence from the work is descriptive. 
● Limited ability to form arguments or draw conclusions. 
● Response relates to the work but limited focus on the question. 
5–8 ● Response relates to the work but often loses focus on the question. 
● Points of view relating to issues/themes/cultural or social contexts are presented, 
with attempts made at interpretation, but they occasionally show 
misunderstanding or confusion; evidence selected from the work for justification 
is occasionally appropriate but often descriptive. 
● Arguments are made but with inconsistencies; conclusions are drawn but do not 
fully link to arguments. 
9–12 ● Critical analysis of issues/themes/cultural or social contexts is evident in relation 
to particular aspects of the question, with some appropriate interpretations and 
points of view, sometimes justified by appropriately selected evidence from the 
work. 
● Logical arguments are followed through on particular aspects of the question, 
occasionally detailed and with linked conclusions; some points are made without 
exploration. 
● Response is relevant to particular aspects of the question, occasional loss of 
focus. 
13–16 ● Critical analysis of issues/themes/cultural or social contexts is frequently 
demonstrated, with some convincing interpretations and points of view, 
predominantly justified with appropriately selected evidence from the work. 
● Generally detailed, logical arguments are made, with some persuasive 
conclusions that mostly link together. 
● Predominantly relevant response to the question. 
17–20 ● Critical analysis of issues/themes/cultural or social contexts is demonstrated 
through convincing interpretations and points of view, consistently justified with 
appropriately selected evidence from the work. 
● Detailed, logical arguments and conclusions are made that consistently link 
together. 
● Relevant response to the question throughout. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
25 
Range of grammatical structures and vocabulary (AO3) 
● This mark grid assesses students’ ability to use a range of grammatical structures and 
vocabulary in order to produce articulate written communication with a range of expression. 
● This grid will be applied twice, once for each essay individually. 
Marks Description 
0 No rewardable language. 
1–3 ● Limited variation of straightforward grammatical structures with much 
repetition, producing writing that is often restricted and stilted. 
● Limited variation of vocabulary resulting in repetitive expression. 
● Limited use of terminology appropriate to literary and cinematic analysis. 
4–6 ● Occasional variation in use of mostly straightforward grammatical structures, 
infrequent use of complex language, producing writing that is sometimes stilted. 
● Vocabulary is mostly high frequency with occasional variation, expression is 
frequently repetitive. 
● Occasional use of terminology appropriate for literary and cinematic analysis. 
7–9 ● Some variation in the use of grammatical structures, including some recurrent 
examples of complex language; sections of articulate writing with occasionally 
stilted phrasing. 
● Some variation in use of vocabulary, resulting in variation of expression but this 
is not sustained. 
● Some use of terminology appropriate for literary and cinematic analysis. 
10–12 ● Frequent variation in use of grammatical structures, including different types of 
complex language, producing writing that is articulate throughout the majority 
of the response. 
● Frequent variation in use of vocabulary, resulting in regular variation of 
expression. 
● Frequent use of terminology appropriate for literary and cinematic analysis. 
13–15 ● Consistent variation in use of grammatical structures, consistent variation in use 
of complex language, producing consistently articulate writing. 
● Consistent variation in use of vocabulary, allowing ideas to be conveyed in a 
variety of different ways. 
● Consistent use of terminology appropriate for literary and cinematic analysis. 
Additional guidance 
Variation of vocabulary and grammatical structures: the traits in the mark grid 
differentiate between the variation of grammatical structures and vocabulary used by 
students. Examiners will judge in which mark band to place students and which mark to 
award, based on the effect that the variety of grammatical structures and vocabulary has on 
the quality of the communication; the wider the variety, the more articulate the 
communication will become (see definition of ‘articulate’ below). 
Examples of a variety of grammatical structures and vocabulary are: a selection of different 
verbs, tenses, adjectives, vocabulary (including to express literary and cinematic analysis – 
(see further detail below), complex language (see definition below) for a variety of purposes, 
including to present and justify points of view, develop arguments, draw conclusions based on 
understanding. 
Articulate: articulate communication is fluent, effective and coherent as students 
control/manipulate the language to say what they want to say rather than what they can say, 
for a number of different purposes. If students are restricted to what they can say, they may 
not be able to express themselves for all purposes, for example to develop arguments. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) 
– Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
26 
Terminology for literary and cinematic analysis: vocabulary for critical analysis according 
to the work being studied, for example ‘plot’, ‘character’; figures of speech such as ‘metaphor’, 
‘similes’; to describe theme and style such as, ‘camera technique’, ‘hand-held camera’, ‘use of 
black and white’, ‘first person narrative’. 
Complex language is considered to include the following: 
● conceptually challenging tenses such as the pluperfect, future perfect 
● passive voice 
● subjunctive mood 
● use of subordination 
● using extended sentences to express abstract ideas/convey justified arguments that require 
a range of lexis and structures, for example conjunctions and pronouns 
● using synonyms and a variety of expressions to say things in different ways 
Straightforward language is considered to be: 
● simple sentences with limited linking of sentences and clauses 
● high-frequency grammatical structures and vocabulary. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
27 
Accuracy of language (AO3) 
● This mark grid assesses students’ ability to apply grammar and syntax accurately. 
● This grid will be applied twice, once for each essay individually. 
Marks Description 
0 No rewardable language. 
1–2 ● Limited sequences of accurate language, resulting in lapses in coherence. 
● Errors occur that often prevent meaning being conveyed. 
3–4 ● Some accurate sequences of language, resulting in some coherent writing. 
● Errors occur that sometimes hinder clarity of communication and occasionally 
prevent meaning being conveyed. 
5–6 ● Frequent sequences of accurate language, resulting in generally 
coherent writing. 
● Errors occur that occasionally hinder clarity of communication. 
7–8 ● Accurate language throughout most of the response, resulting in mostly 
coherent writing. 
● Errors occur that rarely hinder clarity of communication. 
9–10 ● Accurate language throughout, resulting in consistently coherent writing. 
● Any errors do not hinder clarity of communication. 
Additional guidance 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band. The mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on 
coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
• errors that do not affect meaning, for example some gender and adjectival agreements, as 
long as they do not include mismatch of cases e.g. ۔ﻟﯿﻠﯽ ﻟﮍﮐﺎ ﺗﮭﺎ ﻣﺠﻨﻮں ﻟﮍﮐﯽ ﺗﮭﯽ  
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, wrong case endings 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the writing. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message  
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, i.e. using the incorrect person or the 
verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
 
NB: these are provided as examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) 
– Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
28 
Paper 3: Listening, reading and writing in Urdu 
Content 
Students will be assessed on their understanding of spoken Urdu from a variety of authentic 
listening sources, as well as on their ability to summarise and evaluate viewpoints in spoken 
and written material. 
Recordings vary in length and include an extended passage. All spoken and written materials 
are culturally relevant to Pakistan and areas of India where Urdu is an official language and for 
Section A are drawn from across the four themes (listed on pages 8–9). Materials for 
Section B will be drawn from any one of the sub-themes from the four themes. 
Students should be able to: 
● listen, and respond in writing, to spoken passages, including an extended passage from a 
range of different contexts and sources, understand main points, gist and detail from 
spoken and written material 
● infer meaning from complex spoken material 
● assimilate and use information from spoken and written sources  
● summarise information from spoken and written sources, reporting key points and subject 
matter in writing 
● identify main ideas, and summarise different points of view, drawn from spoken and written 
sources 
● evaluate points of view and draw conclusions in writing 
● apply listening, reading and writing skills in combination. 
Although speaking skills are not directly assessed in the qualification, students should be 
encouraged to develop their speaking skills in Urdu during the course of study.  
Section A (listening comprehension) 
The listening section will be made up of spoken passages covering different registers and 
types, including authentic communication involving one or more male and female speakers. 
Sources will include material from online media. 
Section B (listening, reading and writing question) 
This section is comprised of a listening source and a reading text. Students must summarise 
the different points of view in each source. They must then answer a question, which requires 
the student to evaluate the viewpoints in both sources and draw conclusions. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
29 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2020. 
● The total assessment time is 2 hours and 15 minutes. Recommended timings for each 
section are given below. 
● The assessment is out of 60 marks. 
● There are two sections in the paper. They cover the assessment of listening, reading and 
writing skills in Urdu.  
● Students must answer all questions in both sections (A and B). 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted. 
● For Section A (listening), 45 minutes (recommended timing), 30 marks: 
o there are four questions in this section made up of multiple-choice and  
open-response questions, including questions testing summary skills  
o students will listen to a recording featuring Urdu-language speakers who will speak at a 
speed appropriate for the expected understanding at this level 
o recordings will be issued as a CD or in MP3 audio format. The MP3 sound files must be 
accessed via a secure download from the Pearson website. The listening audio files are 
also available on our website 
o students will have individual control of the recording and may stop, revisit and replay 
sections of the recording as they wish. 
● For Section B (listening, reading and writing question), 1 hour and 30 minutes 
(recommended timing), 30 marks: 
o students listen to a recording and read a written text 
o students summarise the different points of view in both sources 
o students answer a question in writing, which requires the student to evaluate the 
viewpoints in the recording and the text and draw conclusions 
o the question is an open-response question 
o Students should write approximately 220-270 words for their response to question 5(c). 
● All questions in Sections A and B are set in Urdu and must be answered in Urdu. 
Recommended timings have been given for each section to enable the student to complete 
each one in sufficient time to access the full range of assessment criteria. 
Synoptic assessment 
Synoptic assessment requires students to work across different areas of a qualification and to 
show their accumulated knowledge and understanding of a topic or subject area. 
Synoptic assessment enables students to show their ability to combine their skills, knowledge 
and understanding with breadth and depth of the subject.  
This paper assesses synopticity. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and marking criteria (including guidance on how these criteria are applied) for 
this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, 
reading and writing) Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) 
– Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
30 
Marking guidance for Paper 3: Listening, reading and writing in 
Urdu 
Marking guidance has been written to accompany the SAMs and is included with the SAMs 
booklet. Please note that this guidance is for the use of the Pearson-appointed external 
examiners. It is printed for reference in the specification to aid understanding of how the 
assessment criteria will be applied. 
Section A – Questions 1 to 4 
A points-based mark scheme for this section can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 
Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) 
document. 
Section B – Listening, reading and writing  
A points-based mark scheme for questions 5(a) and 5(b) can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) Sample Assessment Materials 
(SAMs) document. 
There are three levels-based mark grids applied to question 5(c). The mark grids are: 
● understand and respond to spoken language (AO1) 
● understand and respond to spoken/written language (AO2) 
● accuracy and range of language (AO3). 
General guidance on using levels-based mark schemes 
Step 1: Decide on a marking band 
● First of all, the examiner will consider the answer as a whole and then decide which 
descriptors most closely match the answer and place it in that band. The descriptors for 
each band indicate the different features that will be seen in the student’s answer for 
that band. 
● When assigning a band, the examiner will look at the overall quality of the answer and not 
focus disproportionately on small and specific areas of the answer where the student has 
not performed quite as well as the rest or indeed has performed temporarily better. If the 
answer covers different aspects of different bands of the mark scheme, they will use a ‘best 
fit’ approach for defining the band. They will then use the variability of the response to help 
decide the mark within the band. For example, if the response is predominantly band 3–4 
with a small amount of band 5–6 material, it would be placed in band 3–4 but be awarded a 
mark at the top of the band because of the band 5–6 content. 
Step 2: Decide on a mark 
● Once the examiner has decided on a band they will then need to decide on a mark within  
the band. 
● The examiner will decide the mark to award based on the quality of the answer; they will 
award a mark towards the top or bottom of that band depending on how the student has 
evidenced each of the descriptor bullet points. 
● The examiner will modify the mark based on how securely the trait descriptors are met at 
that band. 
● The examiner will need to go back through the answer as they apply the mark scheme to 
clarify points and to assure that the band and the mark are appropriate. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
31 
Understand and respond to spoken language (AO1 – 6 marks) 
This mark grid assesses students’ understanding of spoken language and how well they use 
information from it to evaluate and draw conclusions. 
Understand and respond to written language (AO2 – 6 marks) 
● This mark grid assesses students’ understanding of written language and how well they use 
information from it to evaluate and draw conclusions. 
● The two mark grids for AO1 and AO2 are presented side-by-side. This is because of the 
interconnection of the task in that students need to compare information that they hear to 
the information that they read. They need to do this in order to weigh up the views in both 
sources to be able to write their evaluation and come to cohesive conclusions. 
Indicative content 
● When deciding how to reward an answer, examiners will consult this mark grid as well as 
the indicative content associated with the question, which can be found in the document 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) Sample 
Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. Indicative content contains points that students 
are likely to use to construct their answer. It is possible for an answer to be constructed 
without mentioning some or all of these points, as long as students provide alternative 
responses that fulfil the requirements of the question.  
● The recommended word count for question 5(c) is 220-270 words, but the whole response 
will be marked regardless of length. 
 
Understand and respond to spoken 
language (AO1) 
Understand and respond to written 
language (AO2) 
Marks Description Marks Description 
0 No rewardable material 0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Occasionally relevant judgement 
expressed on the viewpoints in the 
spoken source; often strays into 
description of content without 
evaluation. 
● Limited conclusions drawn on 
spoken source, sometimes 
inconsistent with evaluation of 
viewpoints. 
1–2 ● Occasionally relevant judgement 
expressed on the viewpoints in the 
written source; often strays into 
description of content without 
evaluation.  
● Limited conclusions drawn on 
written source, sometimes 
inconsistent with evaluation of 
viewpoints.  
3–4 ● Expresses some relevant 
judgements on the viewpoints in 
the spoken source, some of which 
are substantiated; occasionally 
strays into description of content 
without evaluation. 
● Draws straightforward conclusions 
on spoken source, occasionally 
inconsistency with evaluation of 
viewpoints. 
3–4 ● Expresses some relevant 
judgements on the viewpoints in 
the written source, some of which 
are substantiated; occasionally 
strays into description of content 
without evaluation.  
● Draws straightforward conclusions 
on written source, occasionally 
inconsistency with evaluation of 
viewpoints. 
5–6 ● Expresses relevant and 
substantiated judgements on the 
viewpoints in the spoken source, 
showing clear evaluation. 
● Draws convincing conclusions on 
spoken source, consistent with 
evaluation of viewpoints.  
5–6 ● Expresses relevant and 
substantiated judgements on the 
viewpoints in the written source, 
showing clear evaluation.  
● Draws convincing conclusions on 
written source, consistent with 
evaluation of viewpoints. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) 
– Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
32 
Accuracy and range of language mark grid (AO3) 
This mark grid assesses students’ ability to use a range of grammatical structures and 
vocabulary accurately to produce articulate communication with a range of expression.  
 
Marks Description 
0 No rewardable language 
1–2 ● Limited variation of straightforward grammatical structures and vocabulary 
with much repetition; repetitive expression, writing is often restricted and 
stilted. 
● Limited sequences of accurate language, resulting in lapses in coherence; 
errors occur that often prevent meaning being conveyed. 
3–4 ● Occasional variation in the use of mostly straightforward grammatical 
structures and vocabulary, infrequent use of complex language; expression is 
frequently repetitive, writing is sometimes stilted. 
● Some accurate sequences of language, resulting in some coherent writing; 
errors occur that sometimes hinder clarity of communication and occasionally 
prevent meaning being conveyed 
5–6 ● Some variation in the use of grammatical structures and vocabulary, some 
recurrent examples of complex language; variation of expression but this is 
not sustained; sections of articulate writing with occasionally stilted phrasing. 
● Frequent sequences of accurate language, resulting in generally coherent 
writing; errors occur that occasionally hinder clarity of communication. 
7–8 ● Frequent variation in use of grammatical structures and vocabulary, including 
different types of complex language; regular variation of expression, writing is 
articulate throughout the majority of the response. 
● Accurate language throughout most of the response, resulting in mostly 
coherent writing; errors occur that rarely hinder clarity of communication. 
9–10 ● Consistent variation in use of grammatical structures and vocabulary, 
consistent variation in use of complex language; conveys ideas in a variety of 
ways, consistently articulate writing. 
● Accurate language throughout, resulting in consistently coherent writing; any 
errors do not hinder clarity of the communication 
Additional guidance 
Complex language is considered to include the following: 
● conceptually challenging tenses such as the pluperfect, future perfect 
● passive voice 
● subjunctive mood 
● use of subordination 
● using extended sentences to express abstract ideas/convey justified arguments that require 
a range of lexis and structures, for example conjunctions and pronouns 
● using synonyms and a variety of expressions to say things in different ways. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
33 
Variation in use of grammatical structures/varied use of vocabulary: the traits in the 
mark grid differentiate between the variation of grammatical structures and vocabulary used 
by students. Examiners should judge in which mark band to place students and which mark to 
award, based on the effect that the variety of grammatical structures and vocabulary has on 
the quality of the communication; the wider the variety, the more articulate the 
communication will become, (see definition of articulate below).  
Examples of a variety of grammatical structures and vocabulary are: a selection of different 
verbs, tenses, adjectives, vocabulary (including to express literary and cinematic analysis – 
(see further detail below), complex language (see definition below) for a variety of purposes, 
including to present and justify points of view, develop arguments, draw conclusions based on 
understanding and evaluating issues. 
Articulate: articulate communication is fluent, effective and coherent as students 
control/manipulate the language to express themselves with ease for a number of different 
purposes. The more articulate the writing, the easier the reader can progress through the 
writing without having to re-read to understand the message. If students are restricted to 
what they can express, they may not be able to use languages for all purposes, for example to 
justify arguments/interest the reader. The writing will become more difficult to read with ease 
as the reader has to stop and re-read to understand the message.  
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band. The mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on 
clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example some gender and adjectival agreements, as 
long as they do not include mismatch of cases e.g. ۔ﻟﯿﻠﯽ ﻟﮍﮐﺎ ﺗﮭﺎ ﻣﺠﻨﻮں ﻟﮍﮐﯽ ﺗﮭﯽ  
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, wrong case endings 
● frequent errors that hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of  
the writing. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message  
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, i.e. using the incorrect person or 
the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
 
NB: these are provided as examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) 
– Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
34 
Assessment Objectives 
 
Students must: 
% in GCE  
A Level 
AO1 Understand and respond in writing to spoken language drawn 
from a variety of sources 
20 
AO2 Understand and respond in writing to written language drawn 
from a variety of sources 
30 
AO3 Manipulate the language accurately, in written forms, using a 
range of lexis and structure 
30 
AO4 Show knowledge and understanding of, and respond critically and 
analytically to, different aspects of the culture and society of the 
countries where the language is spoken 
20 
Total 100% 
 
 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
Paper 
Assessment Objectives Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives AO1 % AO2 % AO3 % AO4 % 
Paper 1: Translation into 
English, reading 
comprehension and writing 
(research question) in Urdu 
__ 25 5 10 40% 
Paper 2: Translation into 
Urdu and written response to 
works  
__ __ 20 10 30% 
Paper 3: Listening, reading 
and writing in Urdu 
20 5 5 __ 30% 
Total for GCE A Level 20 30 30 20 100% 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
35 
3 Administration and general information 
Entries 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for this qualification can be found in our 
UK Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations officers and is available 
on our website. 
Discount code and performance tables 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more than one GCE qualification with the 
same discount code will have only one of the grades they achieve counted for the purpose of 
the school and college performance tables. 
Students should be advised that if they take two GCE qualifications with the same discount 
code, the colleges, universities and employers to which they wish to progress are likely to take 
the view that this achievement is equivalent to only one GCE. The same view may be taken if 
students take two GCE qualifications that have different discount codes but which have 
significant overlap of content. Before embarking on their programmes, students or their 
advisers who have any doubts about their subject combinations should check with the 
institution to which they wish to progress. 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, 
special consideration and malpractice 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our Equality Policy requires all students to have 
equal opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our qualifications to be 
awarded in a way that is fair to every student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the Equality Act 2010) are not, when 
they are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in comparison to students 
who do not share that characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification and that 
this achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their peers. 
Language of assessment 
The language of assessment for this qualification is Urdu. All student work must be in Urdu, 
except the translation in Paper 1 (Section A), which requires a response in English. 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with special 
educational needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to: 
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the assessment. 
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an individual 
student with a disability, without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding bodies comply with the duty under the 
Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) 
– Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
36 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students will then 
know what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for assessment. 
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable adjustments 
where a person with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in undertaking an 
assessment. The awarding organisation is required to take reasonable steps to overcome that 
disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be unique to that individual and, 
therefore, might not be in the list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of factors, 
including: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding 
organisation, or affects timeframes or the security or integrity of the assessment. This is 
because the adjustment is not ‘reasonable’. 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student's mark or grade to reflect 
temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the examination/assessment, 
which has had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a material effect on a student’s ability to 
take an assessment or demonstrate their level of attainment in an assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to apply for access arrangements 
and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special 
consideration, please refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk 
Malpractice 
Student malpractice 
Student malpractice refers to any act by a student that compromises or seeks to compromise 
the process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the qualifications or the 
validity of results/certificates. 
Student malpractice in examinations must be reported to Pearson using a JCQ Form M1 
(available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to Investigations Team, Pearson, 190 High Holborn, 
London, WC1V 7BH. Please provide as much information and supporting documentation as 
possible. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice constitutes staff or centre malpractice. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
37 
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and maladministration of our 
qualifications. As with student malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is any act that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the 
integrity of the qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported immediately, 
before any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson on a JCQ Form M2a (available 
at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form, supporting documentation and as 
much information as possible can be emailed to pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to 
Investigations Team, Pearson, 190 High Holborn, London, WC1V 7BH. Note that the final 
decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the document 
General and Vocational Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and Assessments 
Policies and Procedures, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice. 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to comply with the requirements of 
Ofqual's General Conditions of Recognition. 
The raw marks for all papers in this qualification will be scaled by Pearson to represent the 
relative weighting of 40% for Paper 1, and 30% for Papers 2 and 3. 
Paper Weighting Raw marks Scaling factor Scaling mark 
1 40% 80 1.850 148 
2 30% 110 1.009 110.99 
3 30% 60 1.850 111 
 
This A Level qualification will be graded and certificated on a six-grade scale from A* to E 
using the total subject mark. Individual papers are not graded. 
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum judged by Pearson to be of 
sufficient standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U result. 
The first certification opportunity for this qualification will be 2020. 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) 
– Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
38 
Student recruitment and progression 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this qualification. 
Students who would benefit most from studying this qualification are likely to have a  
Level 2 qualification such as a GCSE in Urdu. However, students do not need to have studied  
a GCSE in Urdu to follow this course. 
Progression 
This qualification offers a suitable progression route from GCSE, focusing on the development 
of three language skills: listening, reading and writing. Grammar and the mastering of 
linguistic features are key elements of this qualification, as is the inclusion of authentic written 
and spoken sources, responding through writing to literature and film, and independent 
research. 
Students are expected to be able to develop knowledge and understanding of society past and 
present, and of the political and artistic culture of Pakistan and areas of India where Urdu is an 
official language. They should be able to express and justify their own opinions, develop 
arguments and persuade in writing, building on the fluency developed at Key Stage 4.  
The skill of translation will be developed from those skills practised at Key Stages 3 and 4.  
The range of topics promotes a clear progression in grammar, vocabulary and cultural 
knowledge and understanding from Key Stage 4 and will increase linguistic and cognitive 
demand. The grammar list illustrates the level required for this qualification.  
This qualification offers a suitable progression route to further study at university level.  
In addition, the study of one language at GCE can facilitate and help promote the learning of 
other languages. The qualification may also add to an individual’s employability profile, 
particularly for UK organisations trading overseas as well as with international companies 
based in the UK and globally. Students can progress to a wide range of careers in areas such 
as journalism and media, education, science, medicine, the civil service, sales, marketing, 
retail, and charities. 
Students will be able to apply their knowledge, skills and understanding to authentic, real-life 
contexts. They will develop transferable skills that support the study of other GCE subjects, 
higher-education study and the transition to employment, together with an understanding and 
appreciation of Pakistan and areas of India where Urdu is an official language. 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
39 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Prescribed literary texts and films 41 
Appendix 2: Grammar list 42 
Appendix 3: The context for the development of this qualification 47 
Appendix 4: Transferable skills 49 
Appendix 5: Level 3 Extended Project qualification 50 
Appendix 6: Codes 52 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) 
– Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
40 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
41 
Appendix 1: Prescribed literary texts 
and films  
For Paper 2, students are required to study two works from the list below. The works can be 
either two literary texts or one literary text and one film. Teachers should select works that 
are appropriate for their students.  
Literary texts 
• ۔    آﻧﮕﻦ          ﺧﺪﯾﺠہ ﻣﺴﺘﻮر 1999) novel 
• ﭘﻄﺮس ﮐﮯ ﻦﯿﻣﻀﺎﻣ        ﭘﻄﺮاﺣﻤﺪﺷﺎه  س یﺑﺨﺎر-     2011) essays 
ا1۔ ﺳﻮﯾﺮے ﺟﻮ ﮐﻞ آﻧﮑﮭ ﻣﯿﺮی ﮐﮭُﻠﯽ  
2۔ اُردو ﮐﯽ آﺧﺮی ﮐﺘﺎب  
3۔ ﻣُﺮﯾﺪ ﭘُﻮر ﮐﺎ ﭘِﯿﺮ  
4۔ ﻣﺮﺣُﻮم ﮐﯽ ﯾﺎد ﻣﯿﮟ  
5۔ ﻻﮨﻮر ﮐﺎ ﺟﻐﺮاﻓﯿہ  
اﺣﻤﺪ ﺷﺎه ﺑُﺨﺎریﻣﺼﻨﻒ ﭘﻄﺮس ﮐﮯ ﻣﻀﺎﻣﯿﻦ  
•           -ﺑﺴﺎط       ﺑﺎﺻﺮ ﯽﮐﺎظﻤ    1987) play 
Films 
• ۔       ﺑﻦ روﺋﮯ        ﻣﻮﻣﻨہ دُرﯾﺪ 2015) 
• ۔            ﺑﺎﻏﺒﺎن      روی ﭼﻮﭘﮍه 2003) 
• ۔     ﺑﺠﺮﻧﮕﯽ ﺑﮭﺎﺋﯽ ﺟﺎن          ﮐﺒﯿﺮ ﺧﺎن   2015) 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) 
– Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
42 
Appendix 2: Grammar list 
Students at A Level are expected to have studied the grammatical system and structures of 
the language during their course. Knowledge of the grammar and structures specified for 
GCSE is assumed. 
In the examination, students will be required to use, actively and accurately, grammar and 
structures appropriate to the tasks set, drawn from the following lists. The mention of an 
item in the lists implies knowledge of both its forms and its functions at an appropriate level 
of accuracy and complexity. 
The examples in italics in parentheses are indicative, that is they serve to illustrate the part 
of speech or structure that students must know and hence do not represent an exhaustive 
specification of the required grammatical knowledge.  
Nouns 
●  Gender (masculine/feminine) 
    Animate    (ﺑﯿﮣﺎ،  ﻟﮍﮐﺎ،  ﮔﮭﻮڑا mﺑﯿﮣﯽ،        ﺑﻠﯽf)   
    Inanimate (m) اﻧﮉه ،   ڈﻧﮉا ،  ﮐﻤﺮهf) ﮐﺮﺳﯽ،   اﻟﻤﺎری 
●  Singular and plural forms (animate/inanimate) ،   ﮐﻤﺮے،ﺑﯿﮣﮯ  ﮐﮭﮍﮐﯿﺎں،  ﻣﺮﻏﯿﺎں     
●  Plural of male/female pairs  
    Non changing nominative plurals (inanimate) e.g. ﭘﺎﻧﯽ،  درﺧﺖ،  ﮐﮭﯿﺖ ﻣﻮﺗﯽ، 
Non changing nominative plurals (animates) e.g. دوﺳﺖ،   ﺑﮭﺎﺋﯽ ،   ﭼﭽﺎ ،   ﺗﺎﯾﺎ،    ﺑﺎدﺷﺎه ،      راﺟہ  
●  Affective suffixes (R)    ﺻﻨﺪوﻗﭽہ ،  ڈﺑﯿﺎ  ، ﺑﺘﻨﮕﮍ   
Articles 
●  Definite and indefinite 
    Particles giving the impact of the definite article e.g. ﯾﮩﯽ ،   وﮨﯽ  ،   ﯾہ ،  وه ،  ﺟﻮ  وه ﺑﺎت ﮐﮩﻮ ﺟﻮ  ﺳﭻ ﮨﮯ۔   
Adjectives 
●  Agreement    ﺑﮍا ﺑﯿﮣﺎ،   ﮢﮭﻨﮉا  ﮐﮭﺎﻧﺎ،   ﭼﮭﻮﮢﯽ ﮐﺮﺳﯽ 
●  Position  - adjectives always precedes the noun 
                 - non-changing adjectives (i.e. adjectives ending in a consonant) 
           ﮔﺮم ﭼﺎﺋﮯ،    ﻣﺸﮑﻞ ﺳﻮال،  آﺳﺎن ﺟﻮاب  
●  Apocopation e.g. زﻧﺪه   / زﻧﺪﮔﯽ ،         ﻟﮍﮐﺎ/ﻟﮍﮐﭙﻦ ،     ﺷﺮﻣﻨﺪه/ﺷﺮﻣﻨﺪﮔﯽ 
●  Comparative and superlative e.g. ﺑﮩﺘﺮ،        ﺑﮩﺘﺮﯾﻦ ،   آﺳﺎن ﺗﺮﯾﻦ ،       آزاد ﺗﺮ ،    ﮔﺮم ﺗﺮﯾﻦ،      ﺳﮯ زﯾﺎده ،     ﺳﺐ
ﺳﮯ ﻣﺸﮑﻞ       
●  Use of adjectives as nouns e.g. آزادی ﮐﮯ ﻣﺘﻮاﻟﮯ،    اﯾﺮاﻧﯽ ،     ﺳﻮﮔﻮار ، 
●  Demonstrative e.g. ﯾہ،       وه ،     اِس ،   اُس 
●  Indefinite e.g. ﺋﯽ،     ﮐﭽﮭ،   ﮐﺴﯽ،     دوﺳﺮی ﻗﻮﻣﯿﮟ     ﮐﻮ  
●  Partitive article and non-count nouns (mass) e.g. ﺑﮩﺖ،      ﺑﮩﺖ زﯾﺎده ،      ﺑﮯ ﺣﺪ،    ﺑﮯ اﻧﺘﮩﺎ،     ان ﮔﻨﺖ،  ﺑﮯ
ﺷﻤﺎر ،  ﮐﻢ ،  اﻧﺘﮩﺎﺋﯽ،    ﮐﺎﻓﯽ       
●  Possessive (weak and strong forms) e.g. ﻣﯿﺮا ،     ﻣﯿﺮی ،     اس ﮐﺎ،        اس ﮐﯽ ،   ﮨﻤﺎری ،   ﺗﻤﮩﺎری  
●  Interrogative and exclamatory e.g. ﮐﯿﺎ ﮐﯿﺎ ﻧﮩﯿﮟ ﮐﯿﺎ ﮔﯿﺎ ۔۔۔۔ اﯾﺴﮯ وﯾﺴﮯ ﮐﯿﺴﮯ ﮐﯿﺴﮯ ﮨﻮ ﮔﺌﮯ۔   ۔  
ﮐﯿﺴﮯ ﮐﯿﺴﮯ اﯾﺴﮯ وﯾﺴﮯ ﮨﻮ ﮔﺌﮯ      
●  Relative (R))  ﮐﺲ ﮐﺎ ،   ﺟﺲ  ﮐﺎ   
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
43 
Numerals 
●  Cardinal e.g.  اﯾﮏ،   دو،   ﺗﯿﻦ،  ﺳﻮ ﮨﺰار ،   ﻻﮐﮭ،   ﮐﺮوڑ ،    وٖﻏﯿﺮه  
●  Ordinal e.g.  ﭘﮩﻼ ،  دوﺳﺮا،   دﺳﻮاں،   ﮨﺰارواں  
●  Agreement e.g. دو ﺳﻮ ﻟﮍﮐﯿﺎں ،   اﯾﮏ درﺟﻦ اﻧﮉے  
●  Expression of time and date e.g.  ﺳﻮا  ﭼﺎر ﺑﺠﮯ  ﺟﻤﻌہ ﮐﻮ ،   ڈھﺎﺋﯽ ﺑﺠﮯ ،   ﺳﺘﺮه  دﺳﻤﺒﺮ ﮐﻮ،  ﺳﺎڑھﮯ ﭘﺎﻧﭻ ﺑﺠﮯ ﺷﺎم  
Adverbs 
●  Formation of adverbs   دھﯿﺮے ﺳﮯ دروازه ﮐﮭﻼ  
●  Comparative and superlative e.g.ﻧﻮر ﺟﮩﺎں ﺳﺐ ﺳﮯ اﭼﮭﺎ ﮔﺎﺗﯽ ﮨﯿﮟ۔  ﻣﯿﺮی زﻧﺪﮔﯽ ﮐﺎ ﺑﺪ ﺗﺮﯾﻦ ﻟﻤﺤہ،   
●  Use of adjectives as adverbs e.g. ﺻﺎف ﺻﺎف ﮐﮩﻮ ۔۔۔۔  ﺗﯿﺰ ﭼﻠﻮ۔ 
●  Adjectives as equivalents of English adverbs e.g. ۔ اس ﻧﮯ ﻣُﺴﮑﺮاﺗﮯﮨﻮﺋﮯ )ﻣُﺴﮑﺮا ﮐﮯ( ﮐﮩﺎ  
●  Interrogative e.g.   ﮐﺐ؟        ﮐﻮن؟      ﮐﯿﺴﮯ؟      ﮐﯿﻮں؟      ﮐﺘﻨﺎ    ؟    ﮐﯿﺎ؟ 
●  Compound adverbs – repetitive words e.g.  ﮐﺒﮭﯽ ﮐﺒﮭﯽ،        ﮔﮭﮍی ﮔﮭﮍی ،     اﯾﮏ اﯾﮏ ﮐﺮﮐﮯ،    ﮔﺮﻣﺎ ﮔﺮم،
ﻟﻤﺒﮯ ﻟﻤﺒﮯ،     ﮐﮭﺎ ﮐﮭﺎ ﮐﺮ ، ﺑﯿﮣﮭﮯ ﺑﯿﮣﮭﮯ  
 
Quantifiers/intensifiers/the partitive article e.g.  ۔۔۔۔۔ ﮐﭽﮭ،     ﺗﮭﻮڑا   ،      ﺗﮭﻮڑا ﺳﺎ ﮐﺎم ﮨﮯ۔    ﮐﭽﮭ 
ﮐﮩﯿﮯ۔       ذرا ﺳﺎ وﻗﺖ ﭼﺎﮨﺌﯿﮯ 
Pronouns 
●  Subject  ﯾہ ،     وه ،    ﻣﯿﮟ ،   ﮨﻢ ،     ﺗﻮ  ،  ﺗﻢ  ،  آپ    
●  Object: direct and indirect ۔۔۔ ﯾہ  ﭘﯿﺴﮯ ﻓﻘﯿﺮوں ﻣﯿﮟ ﺑﺎﻧﭧ دو  
●  Reflexive/declined reflexive، اﭘﻨﺎ       وه اﭘﻨﮯ ﺑﮭﺎﺋﯽ ﮐﮯ ﺳﺎﺗﮭ آﯾﺎ ﺗﮭﺎ ۔  
●  Unstressed/stressed forms e.g. اس ﮐﻮ   / اﺳﯽ ﮐﻮ    ﻣﺠﮭ ﮐﻮ /ﻣﺠﮭ ﮨﯽ ﮐﻮ 
ﺗﮭﮯﺟﻦ ﮐﮯ ﻟﺒﺎس ﭘﺮ ﺳﺮِ راه ﺳﯿﺎﮨﯽ ﻣﻠﯽ ﮔﺌﯽ ﮨﻤﯿﮟﯾہ  
داغ ﺗﮭﮯ ﺟﻮﺳﺠﺎﮐﮯ ﮨﻢ ﺳﺮِ ﮐﻮﺋﮯ ﯾﺎر ﭼﻠﮯ ﮔﺌﮯﯾﮩﯽ  
●  Position and order 
●  Relative  e.g.   ، ﺟﻮ،   ﮐﺲ ﮐﺎ؟  اس ﮐﺎ ،   ﺟﺴﮑﺎ  ،  ﮐﻦ ﮐﺎ؟  اﻧﮩﯿﮟ  ﮐﺎ ، ﺟﻦ ﮐﺎ    ﮐﺐ/اب/ﺟﺐ/ﺗﺐ   
●  Demonstrative (with and without declension) e.g.،  وه ،    ﯾہ  ،     اِس ،   اُس ،    اِن  ،   اُن  
●  Indefinite e.g.   ﮐﻮﺋﯽ ،   ﮐﭽﮭ  
Including declined form  ﮐﺴﯽ   ﺳﮯ ﻣﺖ ﮐﮩﻮ  ۔۔۔   ﮐﺲ ﮐﻮ دوں؟      ﮐﺲ ﮐﺲ ﮐﻮ ﺑﻼﯾﺎ ﮔﯿﺎ؟      
●  Possessive  ،  ﻣﯿﺮا،    اس ﮐﺎ ،   ﺗﻤﮩﺎرا،  ﮨﻤﺎرا ،  آپ ﮐﺎ  
o Expression of possession by the use of the indirect object pronoun must also be 
included using correct form of the pronoun اﭘﻨﺎ own)   اُس ﻧﮯ اِس ﮐﺎ ﮐﺎم ﮐﯿﺎ ﭘﮭﺮ اﭘﻨﺎ  ﮐﺎم ﺑﮭﯽ ﮐﯿﺎ    
●  Interrogativeﮐﻮن؟   ﮐﯿﺎ ؟   ﮐﯿﺴﺎ؟  ﮐﺘﻨﺎ ؟ 
Verbs 
●  Regular conjugations and orthographic-changing verbs, in all tenses and moods, finite and  
    non-finite forms 
●  Regular and Irregular verbs, in all tenses and moods, finite and non-finite forms 
●  Agreement of verb and subject ۔  ﻟﮍﮐﮯ ﮔﺎﺗﮯ ﮨﯿﮟ۔  ﻟﮍﮐﯽ ﭘﮍھﺘﯽ ﮨﮯ      
●  Use of ﭼﺎﮨﯿﮯshould) and ﺿﺮور must) in all tenses 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) 
– Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
44 
●  Use of tenses 
o Present    وه ﺑﻮﻟﺘﺎ ﮨﮯ  
o Preterite/The past absolute  ۔  وه ﺑﻮﻻ،   ﮨﻢ ﻧﮯ ﻓﻠﻢ دﯾﮑﮭﯽ  
o The present perfect   ۔  ﻣﯿﮟ ﻧﮯ ﯾہ ﮐﺘﺎب ﭘﮍھﯽ ﮨﮯ      
o The past perfect/pluperfect   ۔  وه  ﺑﮭﯽ ﯾﮩﺎں آﯾﺎﺗﮭﺎآپ ﻧﮯ اُﺳﮯ ﮐﯿﺎ ﮐﮩﺎ ﺗﮭﺎ؟    
o Conditional      اﮔﺮآپ ﻣﯿﺮی ﺟﮕہ ﮨﻮﺗﮯ ﺗﻮ ﮐﯿﺎ ﮐﺮﺗﮯ؟     
o Future simple    ۔   وه  ﺑﻮﻟﮯ ﮔﺎ  
o The future perfect        اس ﻧﮯ ﮐﮩﺎ ﮨﻮﮔﺎ۔  ﺟﺐ  ﮨﻢ  وﮨﺎں ﺟﺎﺋﯿﮟ ﮔﮯ ﮐﯿﺎ  وه  ﮨﻤﺎرا اﻧﺘﻈﺎر ﮐﺮرﮨﮯ ﮨﻮں  ﮔﮯ  ؟  
o Conditional perfect     اﮔﺮ وه ﺑﻮﻻ ﮨﻮﺗﺎ۔     
o Continuous tense including present/past/present perfect continuous/past perfect 
continuous 
وه ﺑﻮل رﮨﺎ ﮨﮯ/ وه ﺑﻮل رﮨﺎﺗﮭﺎ۔      وه ﺑﻮﻟﺘﺎ رﮨﺎ ﮨﮯ/ وه ﺑﻮﻟﺘﺎ رﮨﺎ ﺗﮭﺎ    ۔  وه ﺑﻮﻟﺘﮯ رﮨﺘﮯ ﮨﯿﮟ   /وه ﺑﻮﻟﺘﮯ رﮨﺘﮯ ﺗﮭﮯ  ۔            
  وه ﺑﻮﻟﺘﮯ رﮨﮯ ﮨﯿﮟ/وه ﺑﻮﻟﺘﮯ رﮨﮯﺗﮭﮯ  ۔            
 
Future perfect continuous    ۔   ﮨﻢ ﺗﻘﺮﯾﺒﺎً   ﺗﯿﻦ ﮔﮭﻨﮣﮯ وﮨﺎں اﻧﺘﻈﺎر ﮐﺮﺗﮯ رﮨﮯ ﮨﻮں ﮔﮯ۔  
o Compound verbs 
o Desideratives ﻏﺮﯾﺐ ﻋﻮام ﺑﮭﯽ ﺗﻌﻠﯿﻢ ﺣﺎﺻﻞ ﮐﺮﻧﺎ  اور ﺗﺮﻗﯽ ﮐﺮﻧﺎ ﭼﺎﮨﺘﮯ ﮨﯿﮟ۔   )ﭼﺎﮨﻨﺎ 
o Permissives   )دﯾﻨﺎ   ﺧﺎﻟہ ﻧﮯ ﻣﺠﮭﮯ ﮨﻮﮢﻞ ﻣﯿﮟ ﻧہ ﮢﮭﮩﺮﻧﮯ دﯾﺎ ۔   
o Inceptives     )ﻟﮕﻨﺎ(  دو ﺑﺠﮯ ﺑﺎرش  ﮨﻮﻧﮯ ﻟﮕﯽ۔  
o Intensives  دﯾﻨﺎ،       ﻟﯿﻨﺎ،      ﭘﮍﻧﺎ،      ﺟﺎﻧﺎ،     اﮢﮭﻨﺎ  
o ﻣﯿﮟ ﻧﮯ ﺗﻤﮩﺎرا ﮐﺎم ﮐﺮ دﯾﺎ۔     ﮐﯿﺎ ﺗﻢ ﻧﮯ وه ﮐﺘﺎب ﭘﮍھ ﻟﯽ ﮨﮯ؟  ﺑﻮڑھﺎ زﻣﯿﮟ ﭘﺮ ﮔﺮ ﭘﮍا،  ﺳﺐ ﺧﺎﻣﻮش  رﮨﮯ ﻣﮕﺮ اﺳﺪ ﺑﻮل اﮢﮭﺎ  
o ﻣﮕﺮ  وه ﺟﺲ  ﮐﮯ ﻟﯿﮯ ﯾہ ﺳﺐ ﮐﭽﮭ ﺗﮭﺎ         وه ﻣﯿﺮا ﻧﺎم درﺧﺘﻮں ﭘہ ﻟﮑﮭ ﮐﮯ ﭼﮭﻮڑ ﮔﯿﺎ  
o Potentials     )ﺳﮑﻨﺎ    وه ﯾہ ﮐﺎم ﻣﮑﻤﻞ ﻧﮩﯿﮟ ﮐﺮ ﺳﮑﺘﺎ۔  
o Completives     )ﭼﮑﻨﺎ     ﻣﯿﮟ ﮐﮭﺎﻧﺎ ﮐﮭﺎ ﭼﮑﺎ  ﮨﻮں۔ 
o Frequentatives     ﺑﺰرگ ﻓﺮﻣﺎﯾﺎ ﮐﺮﺗﮯ ﺗﮭﮯ۔   ﮐﺮﻧﺎ  
●  Causal/double causal verbs  /ﭘﮑﺎﻧﺎ  /ﭘﮑﻮاﻧﺎ ،     ﭘﮑﻨﺎ         ﺳﻨﻨﺎ/ﺳﻨﺎﻧﺎ /ﺳﻨﻮاﻧﺎ،      ﺑﻮﻟﻨﺎ/ﺑﻼﻧﺎ  / ﺑﻠﻮاﻧﺎ،   
●  Constructions with verbs 
o Verb with an infinitive (e.g. want, power)     ﭘﺴﻨﺪ ﮐﺮﻧﺎ،    ﭘﯿﭽﮭﺎ ﮐﺮﻧﺎ ،    ﻧﺎراض ﮨﻮﻧﺎ،      ﺧﻮش ﮨﻮﻧﺎ  
o Compound verb 
o Verbs preceded by a preposition plus an infinitive or noun phrase e.g.  ﭘﺮ اﺻﺮار ﮐﺮﻧﺎ ،     ﺳﮯ
اﻧﮑﺎر ﮐﺮﻧﺎ   
o Verbs preceded by a gerund e.g.    اﻧﮑﺎر ﮐﺮﻧﺎ اﭼﮭﺎ ﻧﮩﯿﮟ ﻟﮕﺎ   ﻣﯿﺮے اﺻﺮار ﮐﺮﻧﮯﭘﺮﻣﺎن ﮔﯿﺎ ۔     وه      
o Use of the infinitive, the gerund and the past participle  ﻣﯿﺮا ﺑﻮﻟﻨﺎ اس ﮐﻮ اﭼﮭﺎ ﻧﮩﯿﮟ ﻟﮕﺎ۔     اس ﮐﺎ ﺟﺎﻧﺎ 
ﺿﺮوری ﻧﮩﯿﮟ   
o Inflected infinitive   ﮐﮩﻨﮯ ﺳﮯ ﮐﭽﮭ ﻧﮩﯿﮟ ﮨﻮﺗﺎ۔        ﯾہ ﻣﯿﺮے ﮐﺮﻧﮯ ﮐﺎ ﮐﺎم ﻧﮩﯿﮟ۔  
o Present participle   ﺑﮩﺘﺎ ﮨﻮا درﯾﺎ،     ﺑﮭﺎﮔﺘﮯ ﭼﻮر ﮐﯽ ﻟﻨﮕﻮﮢﯽ ﮨﯽ ﮐﺎﻓﯽ ﮨﮯ۔  
o Past participle رﮨﺎ   طﻮﻓﺎن آﯾﺎ اور ﺳﺐ ﺑﮩﺎ ﻟﮯ ﮔﯿﺎوه ﺳﻮﯾﺎ ۔  
●  Verbal paraphrases and their uses. These include but are not limited to the following: 
o Verbal phrases as adverb or adjective     ﺑﭽہ روﺗﺎ ﮨﻮا ﺳﻮ ﮔﯿﺎ۔     ﺟﺐ وه آﺋﮯ ﮔﺎ ﭘﮭﺮ ﮨﻢ ﺑﺎﮨﺮ ﺟﺎﺋﯿﮟ ﮔﮯ۔       
o A variety of lead-ins ﺳﮑﺘﺎ ﮨﮯ ،           ﻣﯿﺮا ﺧﯿﺎل ﮨﮯ،     ﻣﻤﮑﻦ  ﺗﻮ ﮨﮯ،        دﮐﮭﺎﺋﯽ دﯾﺘﺎ ﮨﮯ،  ﻣﺤﺴﻮس ﮨﻮﺗﺎ ﮨﮯ،      ﮨﻮ
اﻧﺪازه ﺗﻮ ﯾہ ﮨﮯ،   ﺳﻨﺎﺗﻮ ﯾﻮں ﮨﮯ،    ﺑﻈﺎﮨﺮ ﺗﻮ اﯾﺴﺎﮨﯽ  ﻟﮕﺘﺎ ﮨﮯ۔ 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
45 
●  Use of the subjunctive  ﺑﻮﻟﮯ،    ﮐﮩﮯ ،  آﺋﮯ،    ﺟﺎﺋﮯ،   
o Commands  ﺑﻮﻟﯿﮟ،     ﮐﮩﯿﮟ،   آؤ،    ﺟﺎؤ،    اﻧﮩﯿﮟ،  ﮐﮩﻮ ﮐہ اﻧﺪر آﺋﯿﮟ۔     ﺑﭽﻮں ﮐﻮ ﺑﺘﺎؤ ﮐہ وه ﺳﮑﻮل ﺟﺎﺋﯿﮟ۔  
o Conditional sentencesاﮔﺮ وه ﺑﻮﻟﮯ،       ا  ﺗﻢ ﮐﮩﻮﺗﻮ،      اﮔﺮ آپ آﺋﯿﮟ،      اﮔﺮ ﮨﻢ ﺟﺎﺋﯿﮟ، 
o After conjunctions of timeر ﻧﻤﺎز ﭘﮍھﯽ۔    )وه ﮔﯿﺎ(  اس ﮐﮯ ﺟﺎﻧﮯ ﮐﮯ ﺑﻌﺪ ﻣﯿﮟ اﮢﮭﺎ او  
o After so, that, withoutﻧﮯ ﺟﺎل ﺑﭽﮭﺎﯾﺎ ﺗﺎﮐہ ﭘﺮﻧﺪے اس ﻣﯿﮟ ﭘﮭﻨﺴﯿﮟ۔   ﺷﮑﺎری  
دوﺳﺮوں ﻧﮯ درﺧﺖ ﻟﮕﺎﺋﮯ ﮐہ ﮨﻢ ﭘﮭﻞ ﮐﮭﺎﺋﯿﮟ اور ﮨﻢ ﻟﮕﺎﺗﮯ ﮨﯿﮟ ﮐہ دوﺳﺮے ﮐﮭﺎﺋﯿﮟ۔ 
o In relative clauses (R)  ﮨﻢ اﻧﺘﻈﺎر ﻣﯿﮟ ﺗﮭﮯ ﮐہ ﺟﺐ وه ﺑﺎت ﺧﺘﻢ ﮐﺮﯾﮟ ﺗﺐ ﮨﻢ ﺑﻮﻟﯿﮟ۔  
o After other subordinating conjunctions (R) 
o With verbs and verbal expressions of wishing, commanding, influencing, emotional 
reaction, doubt, denial, possibility, probability (R) 
ﺷﺎﯾﺪ وه آﺋﮯ اور ﺷﺎﯾﺪ ﻧہ ﮨﯽ آﺋﮯ۔        ﻣﻤﮑﻦ ﮨﮯ وه ﻧہ ﺟﺎﺋﯿﮟ۔     ﮐﻮﺷﺶ ﮐﺮو ﮐہ آج ﮐﺎم ﺧﺘﻢ  ﮨﻮ ۔ﺟﺎﺋﮯ            
  ﻣﯿﮟ ﭼﺎﮨﺘﯽ ﮨﻮں ﮐہ وه ﻣﺤﻨﺖ ﮐﺮﯾﮟ۔      واﻟﺪﯾﻦ  ﮐﺎ ﺣﮑﻢ ﺗﮭﺎ ﮐہ وه ڈاﮐﮣﺮ ﺑﻨﮯ۔      آج ﻟﮕﺘﺎ ﻧﮩﯿﮟ ﮐہ ﺑﺎرش ﮨﻮ ۔            
●  Voice 
o Use of the reflexive as a passive e.g.  ﻟﻮﮔﻮں ﮐﯽ ﺳﮩﻮﻟﺖ ﮐﮯ ﻟﯿﮯ ﻧﺌﯽ ﺑﺴﯿﮟ ﭼﻼﺋﯽ   ﮔﺌﯽ ﮨﯿﮟ۔  
o Use of the reflexive to express an impersonal subject e.g.اﺳﮣﯿﺸﻦ ﭘﺮ ﮐﯿﺴﮯ ﭘﮩﻨﭽﺎ ﺟﺎ ﺳﮑﺘﺎ ﮨﮯ ؟  
o Use of ﮔﯿﺎpast participle   ﻣﺠﮭﮯ ﺑﻼﯾﺎ ﮔﯿﺎ ﮨﮯ۔  
o Use of to be )ﮨﻮﻧﺎ for continuity 
o present participle  اﻧﺴﺎن دﻧﯿﺎ ﻣﯿﮟ روﺗﺎ ﮨﻮا آﺗﺎ ﮨﮯ۔      past participle    ﺑﮭﻮﻟﯽ ﮨﻮﺋﯽ ﯾﺎدو  ﻣﺠﮭﮯ اﺗﻨﺎ ﻧہ ﺳﺘﺎؤ  
o Modes of address ﺟﻨﺎب،      ﺻﺎﺣﺐ،    ﺻﺎﺣﺒہ ،     ﺣﻀﺮت،     ﻣﺤﺘﺮم،     ﻣﺤﺘﺮﻣہ آپ ﺑﻮﻟﯿﮟ،     ﺗﺸﺮﯾﻒ رﮐﮭﯿﮯ    
Prepositions 
●  All prepositions, both simple e.g.   ﮐﻮ،    ﮐﺎ،    ﮐﮯ،   ﮐﯽ،  وﻏﯿﺮه اوﭘﺮ،     ﻧﯿﭽﮯ ،    ﻣﯿﮟ،    ﭘﺮ ،    ﺳﮯ ،   
and complex with enclitic izafat (from Persian) e.g.رﮐﮭ دﯾﺎ۔ ﺑﺎﻻﺋﮯ طﺎقﻗﺮاﻧﯽ ﺗﻌﻠﯿﻤﺎت ﮐﻮ     
  ﮨﮯ ﺳﺎﻗﯽ   ﻣﺎوراﺋﮯ ﻓﮑﺮِ ﻧﻨﮓ و ﻧﺎمﻣﺤﺒﺖ   ۔ﻣﻌﺪﻧﯿﺎت ﮐﮯ ﺧﺰاﻧﮯ دﻓﻦ ﮨﯿﮟ زﯾﺮِزﻣﯿﻦ 
●  ‘Personal’    use of  ﮐﻮ  with animate  ﺑﺎزار ﻣﯿﮟ ﻋﻠﯽ ﮐﻮ دﯾﮑﮭﺎ۔      ﺑﺎزار ﻣﯿﮟ ﺳﺎﻣﺎن دﯾﮑﮭﺎ ۔  
     and with inanimate nouns             ﺑﮭﯽ دﯾﮑﮭﻮ۔ﯾﺮ ﮐﻮ اس ﺗﺼﻮ 
●  Ergative 
    Use of    ﻧﮯ   for by (transitive verbs only) ﮐﺲ ﻧﮯ دﯾﮑﮭﺎ ﮨﮯ؟     وه آﯾﺎ    ،     اس ﻧﮯ دﯾﮑﮭﺎ  اور ﻓﺘﺢ ﮐﺮﻟﯿﺎ۔  
Conjunctions 
●  Coordinating conjunctions 
●  Subordinating conjunctions. These include but are not limited to the following: 
●  Cause ﭼﻮﻧﮑہ،     ﮐﯿﻮﻧﮑہ ، 
o Purpose ﺗﺎ ﮐہ 
o Proviso  ﺗﺎﮐہ 
o Supposition اﮔﺮ       
o Time ﺟﺐ 
o Concession  اﮔﺮﭼہ 
●  Use of else to introduce a clause e.g. ﺧﺒﺮدار! اﯾﺴﺎ  ﻧہ ﮨﻮ ﮐہ ﮔﺮ  ﺟﺎؤ  
Negation 
Questions     ﻧﮩﯿﮟ   اﯾﺴﺎ ﺗﻮﻧﮩﯿﮟ؟   ﮐﯿﺎ ﺗﻢ ﺑﺎﮨﺮ ﻧﮩﯿﮟ ﺟﺎﺗﮯ؟  
Commands  ﻣﺖ   ﻧہ      With infinitive ،     ﺟﮭﻮٹ ﮨﺮﮔﺰ ﻧہ ﺑﻮﻟﻨﺎ  ،            زﻣﯿﮟ ﭘﺮ  ﺟﺎ ﮐﺮ ﻓﺴﺎد ﻧہ ﭘﮭﯿﻼﻧﺎ     ﻧہ  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) 
– Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
46 
Word order 
Subject + Adverbial expression of time, place & manner + object + verb   
Negation is just before the verb    ﺟﺎﺋﮯ ﮔﺎ۔ ﮐﺮ ﺳﮑﺘﺎ۔   وه آج ﺳﮑﻮل ﻧﮩﯿﮟ ﻣﯿﮟ ﯾہ ﮐﺎم ﻧﮩﯿﮟ   
Interrogative pronouns also just before the verb ﮐﺘﻨﮯ  ﮐﯽ ﮨﮯ؟    ﻗﻠﻢ آﯾﺎ؟        ﮐﺘﺎب ﮨﯿﮟ؟        وه ﮐﺐ ﮐﯿﺴﮯ آپ
ﮐﮩﺎں ﮨﯿﮟ؟ 
Interrogative pronoun and negation within a sentence 
Dropping auxiliary verb      وه ﮐﯿﺎ ﮐﺮﺗﺎ ﮨﮯ؟         وه ﮐﯿﺎ ﻧﮩﯿﮟ ﮐﺮﺗﺎ؟ ﮨﻢ ﮨﺮ روز ﮐﯿﺎ ﺳﻨﺘﮯ ﮨﯿﮟ؟       ﮨﻢ ﮨﺮ روز ﮐﯿﺎ ﻧﮩﯿﮟ ﺳﻨﺘﮯ؟  
Other constructions 
●  Time expressions e.g.   ﺳﮯ ﭘﮩﻠﮯ،    ﮐﮯ ﺑﻌﺪ،     دو ﺳﺎل ﺳﮯ ،   ﺗﯿﻦ ﻣﺎه ﺗﮏ،    اﯾﮏ دِن ﻣﯿﮟ  
●  Cleft sentences (use of correlative) ﺟﯿﮑﺐ آﺑﺎد  ﮨﯽ ﺗﻮﮨﮯ ﺟﮩﺎں ﺳﺐ ﺳﮯ زﯾﺎده  ۔ﯾہ ﺳﻌﺪ ﺗﮭﺎ ﺟﺲ ﻧﮯ ﯾہ ﺧﺒﺮ ﭘﮭﯿﻼﺋﯽ ﺗﮭﯽ۔   
     ﮔﺮﻣﯽ ﭘﮍﺗﯽ ﮨﮯ 
●  Comparative constructions – these include but are not limited to the following: 
   ﺟﯿﺴﺎ ﮐہ ،     ﺟﯿﺴﺎ ﺳﻮﭼﺎ ﺗﮭﺎ وﯾﺴﺎ ﮨﯽ ﭘﺎﯾﺎo ﺳﮯ ﺑﮍھ ﮐﺮ ،  o  وه ﺳﺮزﻣﯿﮟ ﮨﻤﺎرے ﺗﺼﻮرات ﺳﮯ ﮐﮩﯿﮟ زﯾﺎده ﺧﻮﺑﺼﻮرت ﺗﮭﯽ    
●  Indirect speech 
Discourse markers   
e.g.ﻣﺜﻼً،     اب ﺟﺒﮑہ ،  اﭼﮭﺎ؟     اﻣﯿﺪ ﺗﻮ ﮨﮯ  
Fillers   e.g.   اﭼﮭﺎ ،   ﮢﮭﯿﮏ ﮨﮯ،     ﯾﻌﻨﯽ ﮐہ،   ﻣﯿﺮا ﻣﻄﻠﺐ ﮨﮯ،    درﺳﺖ ﮨﮯ 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
47 
Appendix 3: The context for the 
development of this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] and our 
ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
● reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with those 
taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
● consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including higher-education 
academics and teachers to ensure this qualification is suitable for a UK context 
● reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in their 
documents GCE Qualification Level Conditions and Requirements and GCSE/GCE Subject 
Level Conditions and Requirements for Modern Foreign Languages, published in April 2016. 
  
                                                
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification Principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
● demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning and 
measuring higher-order skills 
● rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and valid 
assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in end users of the knowledge, skills 
and competencies of certified students 
● inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students develop at 
different rates and have different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
● empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills, see Appendix 4. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) 
– Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
48 
 
 
 
 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
May 2014 
“The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important change to the 
education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications will assist them in 
helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an ‘Expert 
Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or because of 
our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the world as diverse as 
Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification development 
process that has included: 
● establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-specific 
expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
● subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future oriented. The 
design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, meaning learner outcomes 
have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a learner’s 
success in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident that we have 
supported the development of qualifications that are outstanding for their coherence, 
thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as representing world-class best 
practice.”    
  
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Lee Sing Kong 
Director, National Institute of Education, 
Singapore 
  
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
  
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
All titles correct as at May 2014. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
49 
Appendix 4: Transferable skills 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher-education institutions and employers have consistently flagged the 
need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable them to respond with 
confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines skills, or 
competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that can be learned and 
that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform an activity or task and can be 
built upon and extended through learning.’[1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected and 
evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this process, we 
identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the most evidence-based and 
robust skills framework. We adapted the framework slightly to include the Program for 
International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT Literacy and Collaborative Problem Solving 
(CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves the following[2]. 
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve general 
cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and communicate[3]. 
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, speaking communication, written communication, 
assertive communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, service 
orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared understanding, 
taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team organisation. 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work stress, 
adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, and physical 
adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual teams, 
work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and able to acquire 
new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher education, 
as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the teaching and learning of 
this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning materials, developed with 
stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
  
                                                
[1]  OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012) 
[2]  Koenig J A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop  
(National Academies Press, 2011) 
[3]  PISA – The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy (2011) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) 
– Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
50 
Appendix 5: Level 3 Extended Project 
qualification 
What is the Extended Project? 
The Extended Project is a standalone qualification that can be taken alongside GCEs. It 
supports the development of independent learning skills and helps to prepare students for 
their next step – whether that be higher education or employment. The qualification: 
● is recognised by higher education for the skills it develops 
● is worth half of an Advanced GCE qualification at grades A*–E 
● carries UCAS points for university entry. 
The Extended Project encourages students to develop skills in the following areas: research, 
critical thinking, extended writing and project management. Students identify and agree a 
topic area of their choice for in-depth study (which may or may not be related to a GCE 
subject they are already studying), guided by their teacher. 
Students can choose from one of four approaches to produce: 
● a dissertation (for example an investigation based on predominantly secondary research) 
● an investigation/field study (for example a practical experiment) 
● a performance (for example in music, drama or sport) 
● an artefact (for example creating a sculpture in response to a client brief or solving an 
engineering problem). 
The qualification is coursework based and students are assessed, in English, on the skills of 
managing, planning and evaluating their project. Students will research their topic, develop 
skills to review and evaluate the information, and then present the final outcome of their 
project. 
The Extended Project has 120 guided learning hours (GLH) consisting of a 40-GLH taught 
element that includes teaching the technical skills (for example research skills) and an  
80-GLH guided element that includes mentoring students through the project work. The 
qualification is 100% internally assessed and externally moderated. 
How to link the Extended Project with languages 
The Extended Project creates the opportunity to develop transferable skills for progression to 
higher education and to the workplace, through the exploration of either an area of personal 
interest or a topic of interest from within the language qualification content. The project 
must be written in English. 
Through the Extended Project, students will develop skills that support their study of Urdu, 
including: 
● conducting, organising and using research 
● independent reading in the subject area 
● planning, project management and time management 
● defining a hypothesis to be tested in investigations or developing a design brief 
● collecting, handling and interpreting data and evidence 
● evaluating arguments and processes, including arguments in favour of alternative 
interpretations of data and evaluation of experimental methodology 
● critical thinking. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
51 
In the context of the Extended Project, critical thinking refers to the ability to identify and 
develop arguments for a point of view or hypothesis and to consider and respond to 
alternative arguments. This supports the development of evaluative skills, through 
evaluating different arguments, and using qualitative and quantitative evidence to support 
informed judgements and propose evidence-based solutions to issues.  
Types of Extended Project related to languages 
Students may produce a dissertation on any topic that can be researched and debated, for 
example a controversial issue such as ‘equal rights for all’, ‘the role of the church’ or 
‘hooliganism in sport ’. 
A dissertation might involve an investigation such as: 
● the impact of English language on the Urdu music industry 
● the success of English-medium schools in Pakistan 
The dissertation uses secondary research sources to provide a reasoned defence or a point of 
view, with consideration of counter-arguments. 
An alternative might be an investigative project or field study involving the collection of data 
from primary research, for example: 
● the impact of Afghan refugees on Pakistani society 
● a statistical survey of changing attitudes towards technology among young people in 
Pakistan. 
A field study might consider an issue that lends itself to primary research, for example an 
investigation into the partnership of the media and producers in the production of films in the 
Urdu film industry. 
Using the Extended Project to support breadth and depth 
In the Extended Project, students are assessed on the quality of the work they produce and 
the skills they develop and demonstrate through completing this work. Students should 
demonstrate that they have extended themselves in some significant way beyond what they 
have been studying in Urdu. Students can demonstrate extension in one or more 
dimensions: 
● deepening understanding – where a student explores a topic in greater depth than in 
the specification content. This could be an in-depth exploration of one aspect of the 
themes 
● broadening skills – where a student learns a new skill. This might be learning how to 
design a website or learning a new statistical technique that can be used in the analysis of 
either primary or secondary data collected by the student 
● widening perspectives – where the student’s project spans different subjects. A student 
studying Urdu with business may wish to research the impact of tourism on a particular 
region or locality. A student studying Urdu with history may wish to analyse the impact of 
military rule or the creation of Bangladesh on today’s society. 
Information to support the delivery and assessment of the Extended Project, including the 
specification, can be found on our website. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Urdu (listening, reading and writing) 
– Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
52 
Appendix 6: Codes 
 
Type of code Use of code Code 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for 
performance tables is assigned a 
discount code that indicates the subject 
area to which it belongs. 
Discount codes are published by the DfE. 
Please see the GOV.UK 
website* 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an 
Ofqual Regulated Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) code. 
The RQF code is known as a Qualification 
Number (QN). This is the code that 
features in the DfE Section 96 and on the 
LARA as being eligible for 16–18 and 
19+ funding, and is to be used for all 
qualification funding purposes. The QN 
will appear on students’ final certification 
documentation. 
The QN for this 
qualification is: 
603/3184/7 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to 
enter students for a qualification. 
Centres will need to use the entry codes 
only when claiming students’ 
qualifications. 
A Level – 9UR0 
Paper codes These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be 
entered for individual papers. 
Paper 1: 9UR0/01 
Paper 2: 9UR0/02 
Paper 3: 9UR0/03 
 
*www.gov.uk/government/publications/2018-performance-tables-discount-code 
 
 
 
Sb040618Z:\LT\PD\GCE 2017\9781446947173_GCE2017_AL_URDU_ISS1.DOCX.1–56/2 
 
 
Edexcel, BTEC and LCCI qualifications 
Edexcel, BTEC and LCCI qualifications are awarded by Pearson, the UK’s largest awarding 
body offering academic and vocational qualifications that are globally recognised and 
benchmarked. For further information, please visit our qualification website at 
qualifications.pearson.com. Alternatively, you can get in touch with us using the details on 
our contact us page at qualifications.pearson.com/contactus 
About Pearson 
Pearson is the world's leading learning company, with 35,000 employees in more than  
70 countries working to help people of all ages to make measurable progress in their lives 
through learning. We put the learner at the centre of everything we do, because wherever 
learning flourishes, so do people. Find out more about how we can help you and your 
learners at qualifications.pearson.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References to third party material made in this specification are made in good faith. Pearson 
does not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may 
be subject to change, or any opinions expressed therein. (Material may include literary texts, 
journals, magazines and other publications and websites.) 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
 
ISBN 978 1 446 94717 3 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2018 
 
For information about Edexcel, BTEC or LCCI qualifications  
visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel is a registered trademark of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office: 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL 
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121
