Specification
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre (9DR0)
First teaching from September 2016
First certification from 2018 Issue 6
A level 
Drama and  
Theatre
 
About Pearson 
We are the world’s leading learning company operating in countries all around the world. We provide 
content, assessment and digital services to learners, educational institutions, employers, governments and 
other partners globally. We are committed to helping equip learners with the skills they need to enhance 
their employability prospects and to succeed in the changing world of work. We believe that wherever 
learning flourishes so do people. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References to third party materials made in this specification are made in good faith. Pearson does not 
endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may be subject to change, or 
any opinions expressed therein. (Materials may include textbooks, journals, magazines and other 
publications and websites.) 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
 
ISBN 978 1 446 94803 3 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2025 
Summary of changes for Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced 
GCE in Drama and Theatre (9DR0) specification Issue 6 
changes 
 
Summary of changes made between the previous issue and this current 
issue 
Page 
number 
Link to ‘subject page’ has been updated with a link to the A Level  7 
The following sentence has changed from:  
Centres are free to make these live theatre arrangements at any time during the 
delivery of the qualification by 15th May or by the date of the Component 3 
examination.  
To: 
Centres are free to make these live theatre arrangements at any time during the 
delivery of the qualification before submission of the live performance statement. 
7 
The following sentence has changed from: 
To ensure that this requirement is met, centres are required to submit a live 
performance statement. This must be submitted to Pearson by 15th May or by the 
date of the Component 3 examination. 
To: 
To ensure that this requirement is met, centres are required to submit a live 
performance statement. From September 2025 and onwards, for the lifetime of the 
qualification, this must be submitted to Pearson by 1st May. 
7 
We have updated Component 1 to include the option of performing as part of a 
duologue. As a result, all references to a "group" performance (within component 1 
only) have been revised to "group/duologue" performance. Full details of this addition 
can be found on pages 9-11 of the specification. 
9, 10 and 11 
 
The statement below is an amendment which correctly verifies that Component 2 is 
externally assessed. 
The proportional time penalty will be applied, by Pearson Edexcel, after the work has 
been marked by the examiner, using the conversion tables in Appendix 5. 
36 
The following sentence has been removed: 
(the option is for UK centres only. International centres do not have visiting examiner 
options) 
40 
The following sentence has been added in: 
Permission must be sought from Pearson in advance for the inclusion of non-assessed 
individuals. Please email your requests to drama.assessment@pearson.com and 
upload a copy of the confirmation approval email to Learner Work Transfer when 
submitting assessment materials. 
41 
The sentence “watching a recorded live performance or live stream of a 
performance.” has been removed and the clearer definition of live theatre has been 
updated with: 
For the purposes of this qualification, live theatre means being a member of the 
audience in the same performance space as the performers.  
54 
Summary of changes made between the previous issue and this current 
issue 
Page 
number 
The following statement has been added: 
Centres are reminded that they must submit a live performance statement to Pearson 
(please see page 8 for details).  
If there are extreme extenuating circumstances regarding the access to live theatre 
for this component, then centres are required to contact 
drama.assessment@pearson.com.  
55 
The sentence below has changed from:  
Students must answer one extended response question on the performance they 
have seen either in person or via recorded or streamed live theatre in Section A.  
To: 
Students must answer one extended response question on the performance they 
have seen in Section A. 
61 
 
Contents 
Introduction 1 
Why choose Edexcel A level Drama and Theatre? 1 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this qualification 2 
Qualification at a glance 3 
Prescribed texts at a glance 5 
2 Subject content and assessment information 8 
Component 1: Devising 9 
Component 2: Text in Performance 34 
Component 3: Theatre Makers in Practice 54 
Assessment Objectives 63 
3 Administration and general information 64 
Entries 64 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special consideration 
and malpractice 64 
Student recruitment and progression 68 
Appendix 1: Non-examination (NEA) assessment authentication 
sheet (Component 1) 70 
Appendix 2: Live theatre evaluation notes form (Component 3) 71 
Appendix 3: Design roles minimum resource guidance for centres 72 
Appendix 4: Best practice when recording performance 74 
Appendix 5: Mark penalty tables for performances/design 
realisations not meeting the minimum assessment time – 
Component 2 76 
Appendix 6: The context for the development of this qualification 78 
Appendix 7: Transferable skills 80 
Appendix 8: Level 3 Extended Project qualification 81 
Appendix 9: Codes 83 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
1 
 
 
 Introduction 
Why choose Edexcel A level Drama and Theatre? 
We have listened to feedback from all parts of the drama community, including higher 
education, teachers and subject groups.  
We have used this opportunity of curriculum change to redesign a qualification that will 
engage students through encouraging creativity, focusing on practical work which reflects 
21st-century theatre practice and developing skills that will support progression to further 
study of drama and a wide range of other subjects. 
Clear and coherent structure – our qualification has a straightforward structure with three 
components, one that focuses on devising, one that focuses on performing or designing skills 
and one that focuses on practical exploration of texts to interpret them for performance. 
Practical focus – the new specification focuses on the practical exploration of performance 
texts, including exploring them in light of the work of theatre practitioners. The performance 
texts that will be studied for the exam will require students to articulate how they would 
perform in certain roles, design for certain scenes and interpret a text for performance, 
putting practical work at the heart of the specification. 
Engaging performance texts – we have picked a list of texts that will engage students and 
inspire teachers and students. We have avoided the most popular performance texts to 
ensure that students can still perform them in the non-examination assessment components.  
Free choice of performance texts – the new specification will continue to allow you the 
freedom to choose performance texts that will best suit your students, their ability to access 
the work, their interests and their performance skills.  
Clear and straightforward question papers – we have focused on ensuring that our 
question papers are clear and accessible for students and that mark schemes are 
straightforward in making the requirements clear.  
Performance and design skills – we will continue to assess student’s performance and 
design skills through visiting examiners ensuring students skills are assessed in a live 
context. 
Supports progression from Key Stage 4 – we have developed this A level qualification at 
the same time as our GCSE. This ensures sensible progression of knowledge, understanding 
and skills from GCSE to A level and similar approaches to assessment, so that students will 
have a coherent experience of drama if they take Edexcel GCSE in Drama and A level in 
Drama and Theatre. 
Develops transferable skills for progression from A level – students will develop a 
multitude of skills, including collaboration, communication and an understanding of how to 
amend and refine work in order to make a smooth transition to their next level of study or 
employment.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
2 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this 
qualification 
Planning  
● Our Getting Started Guide gives you an overview of the new GCE qualification to help 
you to get to grips with the changes to content and assessment and to help you 
understand what these changes mean for you and your students. 
● We will give you an editable course planner and scheme of work that you can adapt to 
suit your department.  
● Our mapping documents highlight key differences between the new and 2009 
qualifications.  
Teaching and learning  
There will be lots of free teaching and learning support to help you deliver the new 
qualifications, including: 
● a guide to devising work for performance 
● a guide to interpreting texts for performance. 
Preparing for exams  
We will also provide a range of resources to help you prepare your students for the 
assessments, including: 
● additional assessment materials to support formative assessments and mock exams  
● marked exemplars of student work with examiner commentaries.  
Results Plus 
Results Plus provides the most detailed analysis available of your students’ exam 
performance. It can help you identify the topics and skills where further learning would 
benefit your students.  
Get help and support 
Our subject advisor service and our online community will ensure you receive help and 
guidance from us and that you can share ideas and information with other teachers. You can 
sign up to receive e-newsletters by emailing TeachingPerformingArts@pearson.com for 
qualification updates, product and service news.  
Learn more at qualifications.pearson.com 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
3 
Qualification at a glance 
Content and assessment overview 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre consists of two  
non-examination assessment components and one externally examined paper. Students 
must complete all assessment by May/June in any single year.  
Details of the Assessment Objectives (AO) are on page 56.  
Component 1: Devising (*Component Code: 9DR0/01)  
Non-examination assessment 
40% of the qualification  
80 marks 
Content overview 
● Devise an original performance piece. 
● Use one key extract from a performance text and a theatre practitioner as stimuli. 
● Centre choice of text and practitioner. 
● Performer or designer routes available.  
Assessment overview 
● AO1, AO2 and AO4 are assessed. 
● Internally assessed and externally moderated.  
● There are two parts to the assessment: 
1) a portfolio (60 marks, 40 marks assessing AO1 and 20 marks assessing AO4) 
O the portfolio submission recommendations are: 
-  can be handwritten/typed evidence between 2500–3000 words or recorded/verbal 
evidence between 12–14 minutes or 
-  can be a combination of handwritten/typed evidence (between 1250–1500 words) 
and recorded/verbal evidence (between 6–7 minutes).  
2) the devised performance/design realisation (20 marks, assessing AO2). 
 
Component 2: Text in Performance (*Component Code: 9DR0/02)  
Non-examination assessment 
20% of the qualification  
60 marks 
Content overview 
● A group performance/design realisation of one key extract from a performance text. 
● A monologue or duologue performance/design realisation from one key extract from a 
different performance text. 
● Centre choice of performance texts. 
Assessment overview 
● AO2 is assessed. 
● Externally assessed either by visiting examiner or by examiner assessing the recorded 
live performance. 
● Group performance/design realisation: worth 36 marks. 
● Monologue or duologue/design realisation: worth 24 marks. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
4 
 
Component 3: Theatre Makers in Practice (*Paper Code: 9DR0/03) 
Written examination: 2 hours 30 minutes 
40% of the qualification 
80 marks 
Content overview 
● Live theatre evaluation – choice of performance. 
● Practical exploration and study of a complete performance text – focusing on how 
this can be realised for performance. 
● Practical exploration and interpretation of another complete performance text, in 
light of a chosen theatre practitioner – focusing on how this text could be reimagined 
for a contemporary audience. 
● Centre choice of 15 performance texts from two lists on the next page. 
● Choice of eight practitioners. 
Assessment overview 
Section A: Live Theatre Evaluation  
● 20 marks, assessing AO4. 
● Students answer one extended response question from a choice of two requiring them 
to analyse and evaluate a live theatre performance they have seen in light of a given 
statement. 
● Students are allowed to bring in theatre evaluation notes of up to a maximum of 
500 words. 
Section B: Page to Stage: Realising a Performance Text 
● 36 marks, assessing AO3.  
● Students answer two extended response questions based on an unseen extract from 
the performance text they have studied. 
● Students will demonstrate how they, as theatre makers, intend to realise the extract in 
performance.  
● Students answer from the perspective of a performer and a designer.  
● Performance texts for this section are not allowed in the examination as the extracts will 
be provided.  
Section C: Interpreting a Performance Text 
● 24 marks, assessing AO3.  
● Students will answer one extended response question from a choice of two based on an 
unseen named section from their chosen performance text.  
● Students will demonstrate how their re-imagined production concept will communicate 
ideas to a contemporary audience.  
● Students will also need to outline how the work of their chosen theatre practitioner has 
influenced their overall production concept and demonstrate an awareness of the 
performance text in its original performance conditions.  
● Students must take in clean copies of their performance texts for this section, but no 
other printed materials. 
*See Appendix 9: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to this 
qualification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
5 
Prescribed texts at a glance 
This qualification requires students to study two complete and substantial performance texts 
(Components 3) and a minimum of three key extracts from three different texts placed in 
the context of the whole text (Components 1 and 2).  
All texts must have been professionally commissioned or professionally produced. 
For Components 1 and 2, centres have a free choice regarding the texts they use for 
performance. In Component 3, both performance texts must be chosen from the lists below. 
List A – one from: 
Performance text 
Accidental Death Of An Anarchist, Dario Fo (adapted by Gavin Richards) 
Colder Than Here, Laura Wade 
Equus, Peter Shaffer 
Fences, August Wilson 
Machinal, Sophie Treadwell 
That Face, Polly Stenham  
AND 
List B – one from: 
Performance text 
Antigone, Sophocles (adapted by Don Taylor) 
Doctor Faustus, Christopher Marlowe* 
Hedda Gabler, Henrik Ibsen (adapted by Richard Eyre) 
Lysistrata, Aristophanes (translated by Alan H. Sommerstein)  
The Maids, Jean Genet (translated by Bernard Frechtman) 
The School for Scandal, Richard Brinsley Sheridan 
The Tempest, William Shakespeare 
Waiting for Godot, Samuel Beckett 
Woyzeck, Georg Bűchner (translated by John Mackendrick ) 
* This edition has two versions of the text and centres should use Text A only 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
6 
Texts will be reviewed regularly throughout the lifetime of the qualification to ensure that all 
prescribed texts remain fit for purpose. Therefore texts may be subject to change and the list 
revised. In the event that a change is required, centres will be notified and, if required, a list 
of the appropriate alternative(s) will be posted on our website a year in advance 
(qualifications.pearson.com). 
Please note that while resources are checked at the time of publication, materials may be 
withdrawn from circulation at any time. A list of appropriate alternative(s) will be provided 
on our website in the event that a named edition goes out of print. 
Editions  
Students must take in clean copies of list B texts and for the purposes of this qualification a 
clean copy is one that contains no additional marks, notes, annotations, or any other 
alteration or inclusion. 
Different text and practitioner requirements 
In addition to requiring the study of different texts, the qualification also requires the  
study of two different influential theatre practitioners (individuals or companies) in 
Components 1 and 3. 
In order to ensure that all the text and practitioner requirements are met centres are 
required to submit their choices via an online form. This form must be submitted to 
Pearson at the beginning of the year of certification. Details are on our  
website: qualifications.pearson.com  
Centres are reminded that if they do not submit their text and practitioner choices then this 
may result in malpractice/maladministration. 
Centres have a free choice regarding the practitioner they use in Component 1 (see page 11 
for details). For Component 3, the practitioner must be chosen from the list below. 
 
Antonin Artaud Kneehigh 
Bertolt Brecht Joan Littlewood 
Steven Berkoff Punchdrunk 
Complicite Constantin Stanislavski 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
7 
Below is a summary of the text and practitioner requirements for this qualification.  
 
 Component 1 Component 2 Component 3 
One complete and 
substantial text  
   
(Section B) 
Second complete and 
substantial text 
   
(Section C) 
One key extract from 
one performance text 
 
(stimulus) 
  
Second key extract 
from different 
performance text 
  
(group 
performance) 
 
Third key extract from 
different performance 
text 
  
(monologue or 
duologue) 
 
One influential theatre 
practitioner 
 
(stimulus) 
  
Second different 
influential theatre 
practitioner 
   
(Section C) 
 
Live performance statement 
It is a requirement of this qualification for students to experience live theatre in person as a 
member of the audience in the same performance space as the performers. Centres must 
make every effort possible for students to see live performance in this manner and confirm 
that they have done so to Pearson. Centres are free to make these live theatre arrangements 
at any time during the delivery of the qualification before submission of the live performance 
statement. 
To ensure that this requirement is met, centres are required to submit a live performance 
statement. From September 2025 onwards, and for the lifetime of the qualification, this must 
be submitted to Pearson by 1st May. 
If there are extreme extenuating circumstances regarding the access to live theatre, centres 
need to contact 
drama.assessment@pearson.com. 
For more details on all of the above please go to the subject page of our website – and click 
on the ‘Performance text choices and live performance statement’ section. 
Centres should be aware that if they do not submit a statement then it may result in 
malpractice/maladministration (see page 67). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
8 
2 Subject content and assessment 
information 
Qualification aims and objectives 
The aims and objectives of this qualification are to enable students to:  
● develop and apply an informed, analytical framework for making, performing, interpreting 
and understanding drama and theatre  
● understand the place of relevant theoretical research in informing the processes and 
practices involved in creating theatre and the place of practical exploration in informing 
theoretical knowledge of drama and theatre  
● develop an understanding and appreciation of how the social, cultural and historical 
contexts of performance texts have influenced the development of drama and theatre  
● understand the practices used in 21st-century theatre making  
● experience a range of opportunities to create theatre, both published text-based and 
devised work  
● participate as a theatre maker and as an audience member in live theatre  
● understand and experience the collaborative relationship between various roles within 
theatre  
● develop and demonstrate a range of theatre-making skills  
● develop the creativity and independence to become effective theatre makers  
● adopt safe working practices as a theatre maker  
● analyse and evaluate their own work and the work of others. 
Core skills 
The core skills being developed in this qualification are: 
● the ability to recognise and understand the interrelationship between performer, designer 
and director 
● the understanding that texts and extracts studied may represent a range of social, 
historical and cultural contexts 
● the ability to analyse and evaluate their work and the work of others 
● the ability to understand how performance texts can be interpreted and performed. 
Performer and designer routes 
Students may complete Component 1 and Component 2 as a performer or designer or 
combine these roles. 
 
Component 1 Component 2 
Student completes as a performer or 
designer  
 
Student completes group performance as a 
performer or designer  
Student completes monologue or duologue as 
a performer or designer  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
9 
Component 1: Devising 
Overview 
In this component students will develop their creative and exploratory skills to devise an 
original performance. The starting point for this devising process will be an extract from a 
performance text and an influential theatre practitioner.  
In their creative explorations, students will learn how text can be manipulated to 
communicate meaning to audiences and they will begin the process of interpretation. They 
will gain an understanding of how a new performance could be developed through the 
practical exploration of the theatrical style and use of conventions of the chosen practitioner.  
Content 
There are three main areas of focus. 
1) Interpreting, creating and developing a devised piece from one key extract from a 
performance text and applying the methods of one practitioner.  
2) A performance/design realisation of the devised piece.  
3) Analysing and evaluating the creative process for a devised performance. 
Students may complete this component as part of a duologue performance (2 performers) or 
a group performance (3 – 6 performers).NB: The duologue performance option will be for 
first teaching September 2025, first assessment 2027. 
Students may complete this component either as a performer or as a designer.  
The design roles are: 
● costume design 
● lighting design 
● set design 
● sound design.  
Centres wanting to offer design roles to students should refer to Appendix 3: Design roles 
minimum resource guidance requirements for centres. 
Choice of text  
Centres have a free choice when selecting the one key extract from a performance text. 
However they must take the following into consideration when choosing the text. 
● Be professionally published and substantial, and have a running time of 60 minutes 
minimum.  
● Offer students the opportunity to demonstrate exploratory range and depth that is 
appropriate to the level of demand for A level study. 
● Offer students the opportunity to access the demands of this component as a performer 
and/or designer. 
● Have the degree of challenge, in terms of appropriateness of content, language, 
complexity of themes, and access to deeper social, historical and cultural contexts to 
enable students to achieve at A level and meet the Assessment Objectives. 
● Cannot be any prescribed text from the Component 3 list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
10 
● Must be different from the text studied in Component 3 so that students study a range of 
performance texts. This means it must differ in at least one of the following ways: 
O time period 
O theatrical convention 
O thematic content, form or structure 
O playwright  
O social, historical and cultural contexts.  
For the purposes of this qualification, a key extract is defined as a scene or a moment that 
is significant to the text as a whole and at least 10 minutes in length when performed. 
Centres should consider the skills, experience and prior learning of students in choosing text 
that will engage their interest throughout the considerable preparation and rehearsal time 
needed for this component. 
Choice of practitioner  
Centres have a free choice when selecting a practitioner. For the purposes of this 
qualification, a practitioner is an individual or a company that has an established and defined 
approach to the creation of performance, and which creates both theatrical performances 
and theory that informs this practical work. As with the text choice, the choice of practitioner 
must:  
● be chosen so it offers students the opportunity to demonstrate exploratory range and 
depth to is appropriate to the level of demand for A level study 
● offer students the opportunity to access the demands of this component as a performer 
and/or designer 
● have the degree of challenge, in terms of appropriateness of content, language, 
complexity of themes, access to deeper social, historical and cultural contexts to enable 
students to achieve at A level and meet the Assessment Objectives. 
The choice of practitioner must not be the same as the one chosen in Component 3. 
However, centres are free to use any of the other practitioners in the Component 3 list for 
use in Component 1, or centres can choose a different practitioner, for example Katie 
Mitchell, Frantic Assembly, Grotowski or Forced Entertainment. 
Centres are reminded that they must complete the online form regarding text and 
practitioner choices, please refer to page 7 for details.  
Duologue / Group Requirements  
Duologue time limits  
A duologue must contain 2 performance students. In addition, there can be up to one 
designer per role, per duologue.   
All students must be assessed as individuals.  
The regulatory requirements are that duologues must complete a minimum performance 
time of 5 minutes for this component.  
The recommended minimum performance times have been provided to ensure that each 
student within the duologue has sufficient time to access all levels of the assessment criteria.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
11 
Group sizes and time limits 
Students must work in a group. Groups must have between three and six performance 
students. In addition, there can be up to one designer per role, per group.  
All students must be assessed as individuals. 
The regulatory requirements are that groups must complete a minimum performance time of 
6 minutes for this component.  
The recommended minimum performance times have been provided to ensure that each 
student within the group has sufficient time to evidence their skills for this component. 
Group size  Recommended minimum 
performance times 
Maximum performance 
times 
2 performance students 
(duologue) 
10 minutes 12 minutes 
3–4 performance students 15 minutes 20 minutes 
5−6 performance students 20 minutes 30 minutes 
Centres should be aware that performance times that are between the regulatory minimum 
(6 minutes) and the recommended minimums (15 or 20 minutes) may not allow students to 
evidence their skills fully in order to access all levels of the assessment criteria. 
Meeting the performance timings 
Students (performance and design) who do not meet the regulatory minimum performance 
requirement of 6 minutes will be assessed by teachers against the assessment criteria on 
pages 27, 29, 31 and 32; however students will not be able to achieve beyond Level 2. 
Teachers will be required to stop marking after the maximum performance time has passed.  
Failure to accurately record the performance times on the authentication sheet (see 
Appendix 1) may result in staff/centre malpractice. For further information about this, please 
see the Administration and general information section in this specification. 
1) Devising: interpreting, creating and developing from a 
complete text and applying the methods of a practitioner 
Devising from text is not a re-interpretation of the original text performed in a different 
style, genre or time period/setting. It must be completely original work which uses the one 
key extract as a source for ideas only. 
Students should undertake exploration of one key extract from a performance text where 
they interpret, create and develop ideas with the aim of devising an original piece for 
performance. This exploration should involve placing the key extract in the context of the 
whole text and also an investigation of one practitioner, in order to apply their methods to 
the devised piece. There are no limits to the scope of the interpretation. However, students 
must be given opportunities to know and understand how a specific interpretative process 
can be developed from given sources and how key elements of a performance text and 
practitioner methodology can remain a part of the creative process of devising. They must 
also explore the theatrical practices and processes involved in interpreting a text. 
Students should be given the opportunity to devise in a collaborative context, so that they 
establish an ensemble where ideas and methods are shared and developed. Although the 
starting point for this work is given, students can build in other stimuli and other 
practitioners as appropriate. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
12 
Before starting their own process of interpreting and devising, students should take part in 
teacher-led workshops and classes that define the elements of interpretive work on text and 
practice, including: 
● deconstruction of text: analysis of themes, content, structure 
● key scenes or turning points in the narrative  
● relationship with audience; the nature of the communication 
● style of the text and how it fits into a wider genre 
● character and characterisation. 
Students must develop a range of practical techniques and skills needed to develop and 
realise the devised performance. The devised performance could incorporate one or more of 
the following elements of the key extract: 
● form 
● structure 
● character(s) 
● dialogue 
● themes/issues and ideas. 
The influence of the chosen practitioner must be evident in the devised performance and 
this can be shown through application of their methodologies, approaches, theatrical style 
and/or use of conventions. These could incorporate one or more of the following elements: 
● imitate or emulate the performance style and/or use of theatrical conventions of the 
practitioner 
● implement the working methodology/methodologies (evidenced through the portfolio and 
the performance) 
● adapting the text to match the philosophy of the practitioner’s performance style and/or 
use of theatrical conventions 
● show some key moments from a practitioner’s oeuvre in the performance. 
Workshops and classes need to give students the opportunity to build these skills and 
techniques. These workshops could explore the work of companies, practitioners and 
individual artists who specialise in devising new work and then apply these ways of working 
to the stimulus.  
Knowledge and understanding 
Students must acquire, develop and apply knowledge and understanding to be able to:  
● apply research to inform practical work by organising and researching topics, presenting 
findings, finding narratives and stories, photographs and films that illustrate the themes 
and ideas 
● select key aspects of their research to be put into their original piece 
● deconstruct the dramatic elements that make up a performance text 
● explore how meaning in performance texts can be informed by social, historical and 
cultural contexts 
● isolate specific themes and ideas, deciding what themes are to be emphasised 
● connect their own experiences of live theatre to their own practice and decisions, applying 
relevant depth of research, independent thought and analysis 
● select an appropriate style and genre, possibly connected to the chosen practitioner  
● understand the impact they want to have on an audience by the form and style they are 
using 
● shape the drama giving considerations to pace, tempo, order of scenes, finished scripts, 
desired impact on audience, alternative theatre spaces. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
13 
Also students must know how performance texts are constructed to conveying meaning 
through:  
● style, structure, language and stage directions  
● character construction and interpretation 
● use of performance space and spatial relationships on stage  
● relationships between performers and audience  
● use of design elements.  
In addition to this for the practitioner, students must acquire, develop and apply knowledge 
and understanding to be able to:  
● know how a practice developed in a different social, historical and cultural context can be 
understood and adapted to a contemporary age and audience  
● make detailed connections between theory and practice in a range of periods, theatrical 
styles, social, historical and cultural contexts 
● recognise and apply the practitioner methodology to their own work. 
They must acquire knowledge and understanding of how their chosen practitioner has 
used the following to convey meaning through: 
● the social and historical contexts that shaped the theatre practice  
● the ideas, theatrical purpose, practice and working methodologies underpinning their work  
● the realisation of their artistic intention 
● the use of theatrical style and use of conventions 
● collaboration with and influence on other practitioners 
● how the relationship with audiences is defined in theory and then carried out in practice. 
Devising skills 
The processes outlined above will equip students with appropriate devising skills. These skills 
can be summarised as being able to help realise artistic intention through:  
● deconstructing ideas, themes and narratives that make up the stimuli 
● developing methods that interpret the stimuli, being able to reposition it and see it 
differently 
● carrying out in-depth research to inform and develop ideas and creativity 
● giving and responding to ideas in a collaborative context. 
Students can develop their exploratory skills through: 
● workshops 
● rehearsal 
● taught classes 
● individual research 
● watching live theatre. 
2) The group / duologue devised performance/design realisation 
At the culmination of their interpreting, creating and developing process, students must 
perform their devised piece or realise a design during the performance (please see the 
design roles section below for more information relating to designers). The rehearsal process 
should be teacher-led and the performance should take place in front of an appropriate 
audience.  
Centres are free to identify the audience and venue for the performance, this could include: 
● performance to the rest of the class or another class within the centre 
● performance to an invited external audience. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
14 
Performers must acquire, develop and apply the following skills: 
● refining and amending work in progress with the aim to realising their artistic intentions 
● rehearsing and learning lines  
● characterisation through: 
O vocal expression: use of clarity, pace, inflection, pitch and projection  
O physicality: use of space, gesture, stillness and stance 
● contact, relationships and communication with other performers on stage (proxemics) 
● communication and engagement with the audience.  
Students must be supervised when developing these processes. Teachers should adopt a 
facilitating role for the devised performance(s) but they are not allowed to direct 
performance(s). They can give guidance during the practical work and the preparation for 
the performance(s) but not during the performance(s).  
When in a facilitating role, teachers are allowed to: 
● help students with interpreting assessment information, e.g. explaining the assessment 
criteria and the requirements of the component  
● intervene if a health and safety issue arises 
● intervene if a risk to security of evidence arises 
● undertake a management role in relation to managing time, space, resources 
● ask questions to stimulate independent thought without leading students.  
When in a facilitating role, teachers are not allowed to: 
● offer coaching 
● direct students 
● undertake an artistic/creative role 
● give solutions to artistic/creative problems 
● make artistic/creative decisions. 
Students should take into consideration any health and safety implications as appropriate.  
3) Analysis and evaluation the creative process and devised 
performance 
All students must acquire and apply the ability to analyse and evaluate the process of 
creating and developing their own live theatrical work and the effectiveness of the outcome. 
Students must analyse and evaluate: 
● ideas explored and research undertaken 
● decisions made and the rationale behind them  
● their collaborative involvement 
● content, genre, structure, character, form, style, and language  
● the final performance and the effectiveness of their contribution to it 
● the realisation of their intentions.  
All students must also know and understand, and be able to use appropriate subject-specific 
terminology in their analysis and evaluation. 
Design roles 
Designers are expected to work collaboratively with performers within their chosen area of 
design.  
Where a student is assessed in the role of a designer, it is their design skill that is the focus 
of the assessment, rather than their technical competence in the operation or use of 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
15 
equipment. Designs elements should be suitably theatrical and work in sympathy with other 
design features (if appropriate). Designs should also take into consideration actor/audience 
relationships and health and safety implications as appropriate. 
Designers will be expected to produce evidence for the portfolio of their design skills that 
reflect the context of the selected elements of the text and the methods of the influential 
theatre practitioner; these skills will be applied in the devised performance. 
There is a maximum of one designer per role, per group/duologue.  
Designers must also acquire, develop and apply the following skills: 
● work collaboratively within the devising ensemble  
● make appropriate judgements during the devising process  
● develop and articulate a design concept 
● make appropriate design choices within the context of a performance to an audience 
● use and apply design skills to contribute to the performance as a whole 
● demonstrate the ability to apply design skills and materials effectively in the context of a 
performance to an audience. 
A list of the requirements for each design skill for this component is given on the next page.  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
16 
 
Component 1 – requirements for design skills 
Requirements Costume design Lighting design Set design Sound design 
Design skills Final costume designs for three 
different characters, 
incorporating hair, makeup and 
mask considerations as 
appropriate. 
All sourcing must be based 
wholly on the student’s 
design(s).  
Final lighting design 
incorporating grid plans and a 
lantern schedule that indicates 
the use of five different lighting 
states.  
A 1:25 scale model of the 
final design to be realised in the 
performance space and any 
props as appropriate.  
A source sheet showing five 
sound effects − original, live 
or found sound effects as 
appropriate. 
Additional 
documentation  
A costume plot or list of 
costumes/accessories worn by 
each actor indicating any 
changes as appropriate. 
A lighting plot or cue sheet 
incorporating a range of 
transitional devices as 
appropriate. 
A ground plan of the 
performance space to scale, 
including entrances and exits, 
audience positioning and stage 
furniture (as appropriate). 
A cue sheet showing the 
source, order, length and 
output level of each cue.  
Supervision The student must supervise the 
construction, purchasing, 
dyeing altering, hiring and/or 
finding of the designed 
costumes as appropriate. 
The student must supervise the 
rigging, focusing, programming 
(if applicable) and operating of 
the design as appropriate. 
The student must supervise the 
construction, painting, hiring 
and /or finding of scenic 
elements required to meet the 
requirements of their design as 
appropriate. 
The student must supervise 
the operation of the sound 
as appropriate but need not 
operate the sound 
themselves.   
Performance A realisation of the costume 
design in the performance. 
A realisation of the lighting 
design in the performance. 
A realisation of the set design 
in the performance. 
A realisation of the sound 
design in the performance. 
 
NB: Centres are reminded that any appropriate evidence produced in line with the requirements above should also be sent to the moderator as part of the 
design students’ portfolio. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
17 
Assessment information 
This component is internally assessed and externally moderated. It is worth 80 marks and 
AO1, AO2 and AO4 are assessed. 
First assessment: 2018 
There are two parts to the assessment. 
1) A portfolio containing evidence of: 
O interpreting, creating and developing a devised piece from one key extract from a 
performance text and applying the methods of a practitioner (AO1) 
O analysing and evaluating the creative process and the devised performance (AO4). 
2)  A recording of the group/duologue devised performance (AO2). 
The portfolio 
All students must produce a portfolio documenting and reflecting on their exploratory 
process and the skills and techniques that they have developed in response to the text, and 
the influence of their chosen theatre practitioner.  
The portfolio is worth 60 marks. AO1 and AO4 are assessed − AO1 is worth 40 marks and 
AO4 is worth 20 marks.  
The portfolio is marked by the teacher and sent to the moderator if requested as part of the 
sample, along with the accompanying performance recording. 
The portfolio must be the student’s own work.  
Each portfolio must cover the following: 
● an exploration of the chosen text and practitioner 
● an analysis and evaluation of the student’s contribution to the devising process through 
their ability to create and develop ideas as theatre makers  
● an analysis and evaluation of the student’s ability to make connections between the 
chosen text/practitioner and their intended aims and objectives 
● an understanding of social, historical and cultural contexts. 
Each student must include responses to the following statements: 
● outline your initial response to the key extract and practitioner and track how it was 
developed throughout the devising process 
● connect your research material/s to key stages in the development process and to 
performance outcomes 
● evaluate how your chosen role/s emerged and developed from initial ideas through to the 
final performance 
● analyse how your contribution was influenced by the selected theatre practitioner and/or 
theatre makers, and the impact live theatre has had on your own practical work 
● discuss how social, historical and cultural context has impacted on your work 
● evaluate the creative choices you made and whether or not they were successful in 
performance. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
18 
Portfolios may include any of the following elements:  
● annotations and notes 
● audio and/or video evidence 
● annotated drawings and sketches 
● annotated photographs 
● extended written responses. 
It is recommended that the portfolio be submitted as: 
● handwritten/typed evidence between 2500 and 3000 words 
or  
● recorded/verbal evidence between 12 and 14 minutes 
or 
● a combination of handwritten/typed evidence (between 1250 and 1500 words) and 
recorded/verbal evidence (between 6 and 7 minutes).  
It is strongly advised that the upper word/time limits are adhered to by students to enable 
them to satisfy the requirement to produce a concise and coherently structured portfolio. 
When students are working on producing their portfolio teachers must follow these rules: 
● students must be directly supervised for a sufficient portion of the creation of the portfolio 
to allow teachers to confidently authenticate each student’s work 
● teachers should not write any part of a student’s portfolio 
● teachers may help students to understand the assessment requirements and the 
assessment criteria  
● teachers can provide feedback once on one draft version for the portfolio before it is 
handed in to be marked 
● the focus of this feedback must only be on the requirements of the portfolio and the 
Assessment Objectives 
● any additional feedback must be recorded on the Non-examination assessment 
authentication sheet (please see Appendix 1). 
The devised performance/realisation of design 
The devised performance is marked by the teacher and this performance must be recorded 
unedited. Please refer to Appendix 4: Best practice when recording performance. This 
recorded evidence must be sent to the moderator if requested as part of the sample along 
with the accompanying portfolios. 
The performance/design realisation is worth 20 marks. AO2 is assessed. 
A realisation of each design candidate’s work must be seen and assessed in the performance.  
Teachers must not give support and guidance during the performance.  
Performers will be assessed on their ability to realise artistic intentions through their: 
● use of vocal and physical skills 
● use of characterisation and communication. 
Designers will be assessed on their ability to realise artistic intentions through their: 
● use of design skills 
● understanding of communication and context. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
19 
Non-assessed individuals 
Non-assessed individuals should be used only when: 
● the total number of students in the cohort does not meet the minimum size requirement  
● a student has withdrawn from the performance near to the assessment date 
● a student is absent on the day of the assessment. 
Non-assessed individuals may be used to read out the lines of the absent student(s) to 
support the performance group/duologue. Please note that a non-assessed individual may be 
a class peer, student from a different year group or a member of staff. Assessed and non-
assessed individuals must be clearly identified at the start of the recorded evidence to aid 
moderation. 
Permission must be sought from Pearson in advance for the inclusion of non-assessed 
individuals. Please email your requests to drama.assessment@pearson.com. A copy of the 
email from Drama Assessment must be included with the work sent to the moderator. 
Resources  
Students must have equal access to IT resources and other equipment, as appropriate. 
Students should have access to a range of resources to enable them to make choices as 
required for their tasks. 
Authenticity  
Students and teachers must sign the Non-examination assessment authentication sheet 
(please see Appendix 1). All sources must be acknowledged. 
Marking, standardisation and moderation 
Teachers should mark this component using the assessment criteria on the following pages. 
Teachers may annotate students’ work but should also include any comments on the 
Appendix 1: Non-examination assessment authentication sheet to justify the marks awarded. 
Any annotations made by the teacher are to be left on the portfolio. 
Where marking has been carried out by more than one teacher in a centre, there must be a 
process of internal standardisation carried out to ensure that there is a consistent application 
of the assessment criteria. 
Marks awarded by the centre will be subject to external moderation by Pearson. Moderation 
will ensure consistency with national standards and will include a review of assignments to 
ensure that the assignment-setting rules have been correctly applied by centres. Pearson will 
notify centres of the students whose work has been selected for moderation. This sample will 
take cohort size into account. Detailed instructions will be made available for teacher-
assessed non-examination assessment and this will include instructions regarding:  
● internal standardisation 
● materials required for submission (such as timesheets and authentication forms, or 
additional design skills documentation submitted as part of the design students’ portfolio) 
● the required sample of candidates (the highest and lowest scoring candidates and a range 
in between). 
In addition to this, centre marking training will be organised by Pearson and will include 
training on the administrative requirements and best practice. 
Moderators of non-examination assessment components will be trained in the administrative 
arrangements that are required of centres and will be instructed to inform Pearson of any 
maladministration or malpractice concerns during the process of moderation.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
20 
If the moderation indicates that centre assessment does not reflect national standards, an 
adjustment will be made to students’ final marks to compensate.  
For further information refer to the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ) document 
Instructions for conducting non-examination assessments (new GCE and GCSE 
specifications) on the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk. The assessment of this qualification 
must comply with these instructions. 
Consortium arrangements 
If you are a centre that will be part of a consortium, your students will be treated as a single 
group for the purposes of non-examination assessment moderation. 
You need to identify a consortium co-ordinator who must ensure that internal standardisation 
is carried out by all the teachers involved in each component. 
We will allocate the same moderator to every centre within the consortium for a particular 
component, with confirmation or adjustment of marks being applied to all centres within the 
consortium. 
Centres must register their consortium arrangements using the JCQ centre consortium form 
available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/forms/centre- consortium-arrangements-form 
which then must be sent to Pearson. 
Non-examination Assessment criteria 
Teachers must mark students’ work using the assessment criteria on the following pages. 
Marking guidance 
● All students must receive the same treatment. Teachers must mark the last student in 
exactly the same way as they mark the first. 
● The assessment criteria should be applied positively. Students must be rewarded for what 
they have shown they can do rather than be penalised for omissions. 
● All the marks on the assessment criteria are designed to be awarded. Teachers should 
always award full marks if deserved, i.e. if the work matches the assessment criteria. 
Teachers should be prepared to award zero marks if the student’s work is not worthy of 
credit according to the assessment criteria. 
Placing a mark within a level 
● Teachers should first decide which descriptor most closely matches the work and place it 
in that level. The mark awarded within the level will be decided based on the quality of the 
work and will be modified according to how securely all bullet points are displayed at that 
level. 
● In cases of uneven performance, the points above will still apply. Students will be placed 
in the level that best describes their work according to the descriptors in that level.  
● If work meets the requirements fully, markers should be prepared to award full marks 
within the level. The top mark in the level is used for work that is as good as can 
realistically be expected within that level. 
● If work only barely meets the requirements of the level, markers should consider awarding 
marks at the bottom of the level. The bottom mark in the level is used for work that is the 
weakest that can be expected within that level. 
● The middle marks of the level are used for work that is a reasonable match to the 
descriptor. This might represent a balance between some characteristics of the level that 
are fully met and others that are only barely met. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
21 
Assessment criteria for portfolio 
 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO1): Creating and developing ideas to 
communicate meaning as part of theatre-making process 
(portfolio) 
 0  No rewardable material  
Level 1 1–4 Limited 
● Limited reference to relevant research, contexts and live theatre, 
resulting in superficial decision making. 
● Basic depth and range of research undertaken and contexts 
explored. 
● Superficial understanding of how aims and intentions are created 
through the devising process, demonstrated through limited 
development of independent ideas. Basic understanding of the 
key extract placed in the context of the whole performance text. 
Level 2 5–8 General 
● Generally sound reference to relevant research, contexts and live 
theatre used to inform appropriate decision making. 
● Adequate depth and range of research undertaken and contexts 
explored. 
● Generally sound understanding of how aims and intentions are 
created through the devising process, demonstrated through 
emerging development of independent ideas. Adequate 
understanding of the key extract placed in the context of the 
whole performance text. 
Level 3 9–12 Competent 
● Secure reference to relevant research, contexts and live theatre 
used to inform competent decision making. 
● Consistent depth and range of research undertaken and contexts 
explored. 
● Competent understanding of how aims and intentions are created 
through the devising process, demonstrated through consistent 
development of independent ideas. Secure understanding of the 
key extract placed in the context of the whole performance text. 
Level 4 13−16 Assured 
● Assured reference to relevant research, contexts and live theatre 
used to inform effective decision making. 
● Comprehensive depth and range of research undertaken and 
contexts explored. 
● Confident understanding of how aims and intentions are created 
through the devising process, demonstrated through assured 
development of independent ideas. Assured understanding of the 
key extract placed in the context of the whole performance text. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
22 
 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO1): Creating and developing ideas to 
communicate meaning as part of theatre-making process 
(portfolio) 
Level 5 17−20 Sophisticated 
● Accomplished reference to relevant research, contexts and live 
theatre used to inform perceptive decision making. 
● Sophisticated depth and range of research undertaken and 
contexts explored. 
● Perceptive understanding of how aims and intentions are created 
through the devising process, demonstrated through 
sophisticated development of independent ideas. Perceptive 
understanding of the key extract placed in the context of the 
whole performance text. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
23 
 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO1): Making connections between dramatic 
theory and practice (portfolio) 
 0 No rewardable material 
Level 1 1–4 Limited 
● Superficial knowledge and understanding of the work and 
methodologies of the chosen practitioner. Makes superficial 
connections when applying practitioner’s methodologies to own 
practice. 
● Basic ability to refine and amend work through the development 
process in order to realise creative intentions. 
● Use of subject terminology is limited and/or inaccurate. 
Level 2 5–8 General 
● Reasonably sound knowledge and understanding of the work and 
methodologies of the chosen practitioner. Makes generally 
appropriate connections when applying practitioner’s 
methodologies to own practice. 
● Emerging ability to refine and amend work through the 
development process in order to realise creative intentions. 
● Use of subject terminology is generally accurate. 
Level 3 9–12 Competent 
● Secure knowledge and understanding of the work and 
methodologies of the chosen practitioner. Competent connections 
made when applying practitioner’s methodologies to own practice. 
● Consistent ability to refine and amend work through the 
development process in order to realise creative intentions. 
● Use of subject terminology is competent and accurate. 
Level 4 13−16 Assured 
● Confident knowledge and understanding of the work and 
methodologies of the chosen practitioner. Makes assured 
connections when applying practitioner’s methodologies to own 
practice. 
● Comprehensive ability to refine and amend work through the 
development process in order to realise creative intentions. 
● Use of subject terminology is assured. 
Level 5  17−20 Sophisticated 
● Sophisticated knowledge and understanding of the work and 
methodologies of the chosen practitioner. Makes perceptive 
connections when applying practitioner’s methodologies to own 
practice. 
● Perceptive ability to refine and amend work through the 
development process in order to realise creative intentions. 
● Use of subject terminology is accomplished. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
24 
 
Marking instructions 
In AO4, analysis is required in order to reach evaluative judgements and conclusions in the 
context of student’s own work.  
Evidence presented should show a balanced consideration between analysis and evaluation, 
and marks are equally distributed across these two elements. 
Responses that demonstrate isolated analysis without leading to evaluation can 
only achieve a maximum of 4 marks. 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO4): Analysing and evaluating their own work 
(portfolio) 
 0 No rewardable material 
Level 1 1–4 Limited 
● Superficial analysis of their personal contribution to the process of 
exploring and realising artistic intentions, application of 
performance/design skills to create impact on an audience and 
collaboration with other theatre makers. 
● Struggles to offer evaluation demonstrating limited ability to 
formulate and justify personal judgements of how ideas, meaning 
and impact are created through application of skills and 
collaboration. 
● Uneven treatment of analysis and evaluation resulting in a limited 
overall response.  
Level 2 5–8 General 
● Clear analysis of their personal contribution to the process of 
exploring and realising artistic intentions, application of 
performance/design skills to create impact on an audience and 
collaboration with other theatre makers. 
● Offers partial evaluation demonstrating emerging ability to 
formulate and justify personal judgements of how ideas, meaning 
and impact are created through application of skills and 
collaboration. 
● Partially balanced treatment of analysis and evaluation resulting in 
a clear overall response. 
Level 3 9−12 Competent 
● Competent analysis of their personal contribution to the process of 
exploring and realising artistic intentions, application of 
performance/design skills to create impact on an audience and 
collaboration with other theatre makers. 
● Offers consistent evaluation demonstrating competent ability to 
formulate and justify personal judgements of how ideas, meaning 
and impact are created through application of skills and 
collaboration. 
● Mostly balanced treatment of analysis and evaluation resulting in 
a competent overall response. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
25 
 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO4): Analysing and evaluating their own work 
(portfolio) 
Level 4 13−16 Assured 
● Assured analysis of their personal contribution to the process of 
exploring and realising artistic intentions, application of 
performance/design skills to create impact on an audience and 
collaboration with other theatre makers. 
● Comprehensive evaluation demonstrating assured ability to 
formulate and justify personal judgements of how ideas, meaning 
and impact are created through application of skills and 
collaboration. 
● Balanced treatment of analysis and evaluation resulting in an 
effective overall response. 
Level 5 17−20 Sophisticated 
● Accomplished analysis of their personal contribution to the 
process of exploring and realising artistic intentions, application of 
performance/design skills to create impact on an audience and 
collaboration with other theatre makers. 
● Perceptive evaluation demonstrating sophisticated ability to 
formulate and justify personal judgements of how ideas, meaning 
and impact are created through application of skills and 
collaboration 
● Fully balanced treatment of analysis and evaluation resulting in a 
secure overall response. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
26 
Assessment criteria for devised performance: performers 
 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO2): Group/duologue performance − vocal and 
physical skills (performers) 
 0 No rewardable material 
Level 1 1–2 Limited 
● Performance is often inappropriate or inconsistent, showing a lack 
of variety, range and control, with superficial understanding of 
how creative choices communicate meaning to the audience. 
● Basic technical control in the use of vocal techniques (clarity, 
pace, inflection, pitch, projection). 
● Limited technical control in the use of physical techniques and 
proxemics (gesture, stillness, stance, contact, use of space and 
spatial relationships). 
Level 2 3−4 General 
● Performance is generally appropriate and consistent, showing 
emerging variety, range and control, with generally appropriate 
understanding of how creative choices communicate meaning to 
the audience. 
● Generally sound technical control in the use of vocal techniques 
(clarity, pace, inflection, pitch, projection). 
● Generally sound technical control in the use of physical 
techniques and proxemics (gesture, stillness, stance, contact, use 
of space and spatial relationships). 
Any performance under the regulatory minimum performance 
time cannot progress beyond the top of Level 2. 
Level 3 5−6 Competent 
● Performance is appropriate and consistent, showing clear variety, 
range and control, with competent understanding of how creative 
choices communicate meaning to the audience. 
● Competent technical control in the use of vocal techniques 
(clarity, pace, inflection, pitch, projection). 
● Competent technical control in the use of physical techniques and 
proxemics (gesture, stillness, stance, contact, use of space and 
spatial relationships). 
Level 4 7–8 Assured 
● Performance is pertinent and comprehensive, showing effective 
variety, range and control throughout, with secure understanding 
of how creative choices communicate meaning to the audience. 
● Assured technical control in the use of vocal techniques 
(clarity, pace, inflection, pitch, projection). 
● Assured technical control in the use of physical techniques and 
proxemics (gesture, stillness, stance, contact, use of space and 
spatial relationships). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
27 
 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO2): Group/duologue performance − vocal and 
physical skills (performers) 
Level 5 9–10 Sophisticated 
● Performance is perceptively integrated, sophisticated and 
dynamic, showing skilful variety, range and control throughout, 
with an accomplished understanding of how creative choices 
communicate meaning to the audience. 
● Accomplished technical control in the use of vocal techniques 
(clarity, pace, inflection, pitch, projection). 
● Sophisticated technical control in the use of physical techniques 
and proxemics (gesture, stillness, stance, contact, use of space 
and spatial relationships). 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
28 
 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO2): Group/duologue performance − use of 
characterisation and communication to realise artistic 
intentions (performers) 
 0 No rewardable material 
Level 1 1–2 Limited 
● Characterisation demonstrates a basic understanding of the 
role(s) and practitioner methodologies. Performance has limited 
credibility and consistency. 
● Superficial rapport and inconsistent communication with 
audience/other performers, shown through lack of ease and 
awareness. 
● Basic contribution to the performance as a whole and realisation 
of the group/duologue artistic intentions. Performance overall has 
limited impact and lacks energy and commitment. 
Level 2 3−4 General 
● Characterisation demonstrates a generally sound understanding 
of the role(s) and practitioner methodologies. Performance has 
some credibility and consistency. 
● Generally sound rapport and communication with audience/other 
performers, shown through emerging ease and awareness. 
● Generally sound contribution to the performance as a whole and 
realisation of the group/duologue artistic intention. Performance 
overall has emerging impact through some sound energy and 
commitment. 
Any performance under the regulatory minimum performance 
time cannot progress beyond the top of Level 2. 
Level 3 5−6 Competent 
● Characterisation demonstrates a competent understanding of the 
role(s) and practitioner methodologies. Performance has clear 
credibility and consistency. 
● Clear rapport and communication with audience/other 
performers, shown through secure ease and awareness. 
● Competent contribution to the performance as a whole and 
realisation of the group/duologue artistic. Performance overall has 
clear impact through consistent energy and commitment. 
Level 4 7–8 Assured 
● Characterisation demonstrates an assured understanding of the 
role(s) and practitioner methodologies. Performance has secure 
credibility and consistency. 
● Effective rapport and assured communication with audience/other 
performers, shown through assured ease and awareness 
throughout. 
● Assured contribution to the performance as a whole and 
realisation of the group/duologue artistic intention. Performance 
overall has effective impact through comprehensive energy and 
commitment. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
29 
 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO2): Group performance − use of 
characterisation and communication to realise artistic 
intentions (performers) 
Level 5 9–10 Sophisticated 
● Characterisation demonstrates a perceptive understanding of the 
role(s) and practitioner methodologies. Performance has 
accomplished credibility and consistency. 
● Accomplished rapport and sophisticated communication with 
audience/other performers, shown through highly-effective ease 
and awareness. 
● Accomplished contribution to the realisation of the performance 
as a whole and group/duologue artistic intention. Performance 
overall is dynamic and skilfully creates impact through highly-
engaging energy and commitment. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
30 
Assessment criteria for devised performance: designers 
 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO2): Group/duologue performance − design 
skills (designers) 
 0 No rewardable material  
Level 1 1–2 Limited 
● Creates a basic design, demonstrating limited ability to apply 
design skills. Design is inappropriate and/or unsympathetic to the 
devised work. 
● Design shows basic consideration of the practical application of 
materials and production elements in performance. 
● Superficial ability to design effectively within time and resource 
constraints. 
Level 2 3−4 General 
● Creates a generally appropriate design, demonstrating emerging 
ability to apply design skills. Design is generally appropriate 
and/or sympathetic to the devised work. 
● Design shows generally sound consideration of the practical 
application of materials and production elements in performance. 
● Emerging ability to design effectively within time and resource 
constraints. 
Any design realisation under the regulatory minimum 
performance time cannot progress beyond the top of Level 2. 
Level 3 5−6 Competent 
● Creates a clear design, demonstrating secure ability to apply 
design skills. Design is clearly appropriate and/or sympathetic to 
the devised work. 
● Design shows consistent consideration of the practical application 
of materials and production elements in performance. 
● Competent ability to design effectively within time and resource 
constraints. 
Level 4 7–8 Assured 
● Creates an effective design, demonstrating secure ability to apply 
design skills. Design is pertinent and fully sympathetic to the 
devised work. 
● Design shows assured consideration of the practical application of 
materials and production elements in performance. 
● Comprehensive ability to design effectively within time and 
resource constraints. 
Level 5 9–10 Sophisticated 
● Creates an engaging design demonstrating accomplished ability to 
apply design skills. Design perceptively integrates with the 
devised work in an innovative way. 
● Design shows perceptive consideration of the practical application 
of materials and production elements in performance. 
● Accomplished ability to design effectively within time and 
resource constraints. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
31 
 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO2): Group/duologue performance − 
communication, context and realisation of artistic intention 
(designers) 
 0 No rewardable material 
Level 1 1–2 Limited 
● Design shows a limited understanding of how creative choices 
create impact and communicate meaning to the audience. 
● Design shows a superficial understanding of its function and 
purpose within the performance. 
● Limited ability to develop a design that supports the creative 
intent of the performance as a whole. Design overall has limited 
impact, showing a lack of engagement and commitment to the 
performance. 
Level 2 3−4 General 
● Design shows an emerging understanding of how creative choices 
create impact and communicate meaning to the audience. 
● Design shows a generally sound understanding of its function and 
purpose within the performance. 
● Generally sound ability to develop a design that supports the 
creative intent of the performance as a whole. Design overall has 
emerging impact, showing some sound engagement and 
commitment to the performance. 
Any design realisation under the regulatory minimum 
performance time cannot progress beyond the top of Level 2. 
Level 3 5−6 Competent 
● Design shows a secure understanding of how creative choices 
create impact and communicate meaning to the audience. 
● Design shows competent understanding of its function and 
purpose within the performance. 
● Consistent ability to develop a design that supports the creative 
intent of the performance as a whole. Design overall has clear 
impact, showing consistent engagement and commitment to the 
performance. 
Level 4 7–8 Assured 
● Design shows an effective understanding of how creative choices 
create impact and communicate meaning to the audience. 
● Design shows an assured understanding of its function and 
purpose within the performance.  
● Comprehensive ability to develop a design that supports the 
creative intent of the performance as a whole. Design overall has 
effective impact, showing comprehensive engagement and 
commitment to the performance. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
32 
 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO2): Group/duologue performance − 
communication, context and realisation of artistic intention 
(designers) 
Level 5 9–10 Sophisticated 
● Design shows a sophisticated understanding of how creative 
choices create impact and communicate meaning to the audience. 
● Design shows a perceptive understanding of its function and 
purpose within the performance. 
● Accomplished ability to develop a design that supports the 
creative intent of the performance as a whole. Design overall is 
dynamic and skilfully creates impact, showing full engagement 
and commitment to the performance. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
33 
Security and backups 
It is the centre’s responsibility to keep the work that students have submitted for 
assessment secure. 
Secure storage is defined as a securely-locked cabinet or cupboard. Where students are 
producing artefacts, secure storage is defined as a classroom studio or workshop that is 
locked or supervised from the end of one session to the start of the next.  
The rules on storage also apply to electronic data. For example, centres should collect 
memory sticks for secure storage between sessions or restrict student access to specific 
areas of the centre’s IT network. 
For materials stored electronically, centres are strongly advised to utilise firewall protection 
and virus-checking software, and to employ an effective backup strategy, so that an  
up-to-date archive of students’ evidence is maintained. 
Further information 
For up-to-date advice on teacher involvement and administration of non-examination 
assessment, please refer to the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ) document Instructions 
for conducting non-examination assessments (new GCE and GCSE specifications) available 
on the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
34 
Component 2: Text in Performance 
Overview 
Students will develop and demonstrate theatre-making skills, appropriate to their role as a 
performer or designer. They will explore how they realise artistic intentions in performance.  
The knowledge and understanding acquired though the study of one key extract from a 
performance text in Component 1 can be applied to assist in the interpretation, development 
and realisation of key extracts from performance texts.  
Teaching and wider reading should address the significance and influence of social, historical 
and cultural contexts on the chosen texts and extracts. 
Content 
There are two areas of focus. 
1) A monologue or a duologue performance/design realisation from one key extract from 
one performance text.  
2) A group performance/design realisation of one key extract from a different 
performance text. 
Students may complete this component either as a performer or as a designer or combine 
these roles.  
The design roles are: 
● costume design 
● lighting design 
● set design 
● sound design. 
Centres wanting to offer design roles to students should refer to Appendix 3: Design roles 
minimum resource guidance for centres. 
Text and extract choice 
Centres have a choice when selecting texts. However, the two key extracts must be from 
two different performance texts, these texts must meet the following criteria.  
● Be professionally published, substantial and have a running time of at least 60 minutes.  
● Be chosen so it offers students the opportunity to demonstrate exploratory range and 
depth. 
● Offer students the opportunity to access the demands of this component as a performer 
and/or designer. 
● Have the degree of challenge, in terms of appropriateness of content, complexity of 
themes, deeper social, historical and cultural contexts to enable students to achieve at 
A level and meet the Assessment Objective. 
● Be different from the texts studied in Component 1 and Component 3, so students study a 
range of performance texts. 
● Cannot be any prescribed text from the Component 3 lists. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
35 
The performance texts chosen could be different in terms of their: 
● time period 
● theatrical convention/genre 
● thematic content, form/structure and style  
● playwright 
● social, historical and cultural contexts.  
Centres may select performance texts by a playwright already studied in Components 1 and 
3 provided there is a difference between these texts. They should consider the skills, 
experience and prior learning of students in choosing texts that will engage students’ interest 
throughout the considerable preparation and rehearsal time needed for this Component. 
Students must study two key extracts from two different performance texts. For the 
purposes of this qualification, a key extract is defined as a scene or a moment that is 
significant to the text as a whole and at least 10 minutes in length when performed.
 This can 
take the form of a continuous dialogue/scene, or edited extracts, for example abridging the 
extract to match the number of performers in a group. For the monologue/duologue, the 
extract chosen may be edited to provide the required amount of material, but must provide a 
coherent monologue or duologue. 
Students are required to perform/realise a design for all or part of these key extracts, 
following the time limit requirements below. Centres can choose different performance texts, 
all students are not required to study the same texts.  
Centres should consider the skills, experience and prior learning of students in choosing texts 
that will engage their interest throughout the considerable preparation and rehearsal time 
needed for this component. 
Centres are reminded that they must complete a form regarding text choice, please refer to 
page 7 for details.   
Group sizes and time limits 
All students must be assessed as individuals. 
Monologue and duologue  
The regulatory requirements are that students must meet the minimum performance times 
below.  
 
Number of performers Minimum performance 
times 
Maximum performance 
times 
Monologue (1 performer) 2 minutes 3 minutes 
Duologue (2 performers) 5 minutes 6 minutes 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
36 
Group performance 
A group must have between a minimum of three and maximum of six performance 
students. In addition there can be up to one designer per role, per group.  
The regulatory requirements are that groups must complete a minimum performance time of 
6 minutes for this component.  
The recommended minimum performance times have been provided to ensure that each 
student within the group has sufficient time to evidence their skills for this component. 
 
Group size  Recommended 
minimum performance 
times 
Maximum 
performance times 
3–4 performance students 20 minutes 30 minutes 
5–6 performance students 35 minutes 45 minutes 
 
Centres should be aware that performance times that are between the regulatory minimum 
(6 minutes) and the recommended minimums (20 or 35 minutes) may not allow students to 
evidence their skills fully in order to access all levels of the assessment criteria. 
Meeting the performance timings 
For students (performance and design) who do not meet the regulatory minimum 
performance requirement of 2, 5 and/or 6 minutes the examiner will use their professional 
judgement against the AO2 assessment criteria based on what the student has achieved and 
then the total mark will be reduced proportionally according to how many seconds the work 
is under length. 
The proportional time penalty will be applied, by Pearson Edexcel, after the work has been 
marked by the examiner, using the conversion tables in Appendix 5. 
Examiners will be instructed to stop marking after the maximum performance time has passed.  
The performances/design realisations 
Students must draw on their experiences of the exploration and rehearsal process in order to 
present coherent, well considered interpretations of the two key extracts in their 
performances. These interpretations must include placing the key extracts in the context  
of the whole performance texts. 
Knowledge and understanding 
Students (as performers or designers) are required to: 
● read and research their chosen extracts  
● understand social, historical and cultural contexts, style and genres, thematic content, 
contemporary practice and theatre makers 
● develop textual understanding to communicate well-considered and coherent 
interpretations of text in performance. 
Also students must know how performance texts are constructed to convey meaning through:  
● style, structure, language and stage directions  
● character construction and interpretation 
● use of performance space and spatial relationships on stage  
● relationships between performers and audience  
● use of design elements.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
37 
Skills 
Students (as performers or designers) must acquire, develop and apply skills in: 
● working independently or collaboratively as performers or designers to interpret text, in 
rehearsal and in performance 
● making appropriate judgements about the interpretation of texts in performance 
● researching and developing ideas 
● demonstrating the ability to apply acting/design skills effectively in the context of a 
performance to an audience.   
Performers must also acquire, develop and apply the following skills: 
● refining and amending work in progress with the aim to realising their artistic intentions 
● rehearsing and learning lines  
● characterisation through: 
O vocal expression: use of clarity, pace, inflection, pitch and projection  
O physicality: use of space, gesture, stillness and stance 
● contact, relationships and communication with other performers on stage (proxemics) 
● communication and engagement with the audience.  
Requirements for performances/design realisations 
All performances/design realisations should take place in front of an appropriate audience 
and must be recorded. Centres are free to identify their own suitable audience and venue for 
the performance, this could include: 
● performance to the rest of the class or another class within the centre 
● performance to an invited external audience. 
Monologue and duologue performances/design realisations  
Teachers should adopt a facilitating role but they are not allowed to direct performance(s). 
They can give guidance during the practical work and the preparation for the performance(s) 
but not during the performance(s) itself.  
When in a facilitating role, teachers are allowed to: 
● help students with interpreting assessment information, e.g. explaining the assessment 
criteria and the requirements of the component 
● intervene if a health and safety issue arises 
● intervene if a risk to security of evidence arises 
● undertake a management role in relation to managing time, space, resources 
● ask questions to stimulate independent thought without leading students.  
When in a facilitating role, teachers are not allowed to: 
● offer coaching 
● direct students 
● undertake an artistic/creative role 
● give solutions to artistic/creative problems 
● make artistic/creative decisions. 
Group performances/design realisations  
Teachers should adopt a facilitating role and may direct. They may direct and give guidance 
during the practical work and the preparation for performance(s) but not during the 
performance(s). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
38 
When directing, teachers are allowed to: 
● interpret and structure the text as written to meet the demands of the examination (time 
limits etc.) 
● suggest solutions to artistic and creative problems referring to the assessment criteria if 
appropriate 
● make artistic and creative decisions referring to the assessment criteria if appropriate 
(however, they should not make direct judgements about the assessment criteria or 
allocate marks). 
Students should also take into consideration any health and safety implications as 
appropriate. 
Design roles 
Designers are expected to work collaboratively with a group of performers (and other 
designers, if appropriate) within their chosen area of design.  
Where a student is assessed in the role of a designer, it is their design skill that is the focus 
of the assessment, rather than their technical competence in the operation or use of 
equipment. 
The performance texts should provide sufficient challenges for design students to enable 
them to meet the demands of this component. Design elements should be suitably theatrical 
and work in sympathy with other design features. All designs should also take into 
consideration actor/audience relationships and health and safety implications as appropriate. 
There is a maximum of one designer per role, per group.  
Designers must also acquire, develop and apply the following skills: 
● make appropriate judgements during the development process  
● develop and articulate a design concept 
● make appropriate design choices within the context of a performance to an audience 
● use design skills to contribute to the performance as a whole 
● demonstrate the ability to apply design skills and materials effectively within the context 
of a performance to an audience. 
A list of the requirements for each design skill for this component is given on the next page.  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
39 
Component 2 − requirements for design skills 
Requirements Costume design Lighting design Set design Sound design 
Design skills Mono or duo: Final costume 
designs for one character, 
incorporating hair, makeup and 
mask considerations as 
appropriate. 
All sourcing must be based wholly 
on the student’s design(s).  
Mono or duo: Final lighting 
design incorporating grid 
plans and a lantern schedule 
that indicates the use of two 
different lighting states. 
Mono or duo: Drawings of the 
final design to be realised in 
the performance space and any 
relevant props.  
Mono or duo: Source sheet 
showing two sound cues − 
original, live or found sound 
effects as appropriate. 
Group: Final costume designs for 
two different characters, 
incorporating hair, makeup and 
mask considerations as 
appropriate. 
All sourcing must be based wholly 
on the student’s design(s).  
Group: Final lighting design 
incorporating grid plans and a 
lantern schedule that indicates 
the use of three different 
lighting states.  
Group: 1:25 scale model of 
the final design to be realised in 
the performance space and any 
props as appropriate.  
Group: Source sheet showing 
three sound effects − original, 
live or found sound effects as 
appropriate. 
Additional 
documentation  
For both performances: a 
costume plot or list of 
costumes/accessories worn by 
each actor indicating any changes 
as appropriate. 
For both performances: a 
lighting plot or cue sheet 
incorporating a range of 
transitional devices as 
appropriate. 
For both performances: a 
ground plan of the performance 
space to scale, including 
entrances and exits, audience 
positioning and stage furniture 
(as appropriate). 
For both performances: a cue 
sheet showing the source, 
order, length and output level of 
each cue.  
Supervision The student must supervise the 
construction, buying, dyeing 
altering, hiring and/or finding of 
the designed costumes as 
appropriate. 
The student must supervise 
the rigging, focusing, 
programming (if applicable) 
and operating of the design as 
appropriate. 
The student must supervise the 
construction, painting, hiring 
and/or finding of scenic 
elements required to meet the 
requirements of their design as 
appropriate. 
The student must supervise the 
operation of the sound as 
appropriate but need not 
operate the sound themselves. 
Performance A realisation of the costume 
design in both performances. 
A realisation of the lighting 
design in both performances. 
A realisation of the set design in 
both performances. 
A realisation of the sound 
design in both performances. 
NB: Centres are reminded that any appropriate evidence produced in line with the requirements above should also be made available to the visiting 
examiner when they make their visit.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
40 
Assessment information 
This component is externally assessed by a visiting examiner or by an examiner assessing 
the recorded live performance. It is worth 60 marks and AO2 is assessed. 
First assessment: 2018 
The performances must be recorded by the centre and unedited. Please refer to Appendix 4: 
Best practice when recording performance. This recorded evidence is to be sent to the 
examiner. 
The monologue or duologue performance/design realisation is worth 24 marks. AO2 is 
assessed. 
The group performance/design realisation is worth 36 marks. AO2 is assessed. 
A realisation of each design candidate’s work must be seen and assessed in both 
performances.  
Teachers cannot give support and guidance during the performances.  
All centres must provide the following information to their examiner before their 
examination: 
● a declaration that all key extracts studied by students meet the requirements to be from a 
scene or a moment that is significant to the text as a whole and at least 10 minutes in 
length when performed. 
● indication of group numbers and performance lengths 
● character/design role information for each student to be assessed 
● the performance texts chosen for Component 1 and 3 (in order for the different text 
requirement to be checked) 
● a brief explanation by each student of the intention for each performance or design  
(150–250 words per key extract studied).  
The explanation must include the following: 
● for performance students (150–250 words per character played) 
O what role(s) are you playing? 
O what is happening to your character(s) in the key extract? 
O how does the key extract relate to the context of the whole play? 
O what are your character’s objectives/motivations/feelings? 
O how are you interpreting this character(s) in performance? (i.e. vocal, physical, 
communication of intent) 
● for design students (150–250 words per extract designed for) 
O what design role are you fulfilling? 
O what is your central design concept in the key extract? 
O how does the key extract relate to the context of the whole play? 
O how have you interpreted this key extract through your design?  
O what are you hoping to communicate to the audience? 
Performers will be assessed on their ability to realise artistic intentions through the: 
● use of vocal and physical skills 
● use of characterisation and communication 
● interpretation of text.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
41 
Designers will be assessed on their ability to realise artistic intentions through the: 
● use of design skills 
● understanding of context and communication 
● interpretation of text.  
Non-assessed individuals 
Non-assessed individuals should be used only when: 
● the total number of students in the cohort does not meet the minimum group size 
requirement  
● a student has withdrawn from the performance near to the assessment date 
● a student is absent on the day of the assessment. 
Non-assessed individuals may be used to read out the lines of the absent student(s) to 
support the performance group. Please note that a non-assessed individual may be a class 
peer, student from a different year group or a member of staff. Assessed and non-assessed 
individuals must be clearly identified at the start of the recorded evidence to aid assessment. 
Permission must be sought from Pearson in advance for the inclusion of non-assessed 
individuals. Please email your requests to drama.assessment@pearson.com and upload a 
copy of the confirmation approval email to Learner Work Transfer when submitting 
assessment materials. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
42 
Non-examination Assessment criteria 
Examiners will use the following assessment criteria to mark students’ work. Each mark grid 
identifies which Assessment Objective is being targeted.  
Assessment criteria for group performance: performers 
 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO2): Group performance − vocal and physical 
skills (performers) 
 0 No rewardable material 
Level 1 1–2 Limited 
● Performance is often inappropriate or inconsistent, showing a lack 
of variety, range and control, with superficial understanding of 
how creative choices communicate meaning to the audience. 
● Basic technical control in the use of vocal techniques (clarity, 
pace, inflection, pitch, projection). 
● Limited technical control in the use of physical techniques and 
proxemics (gesture, stillness, stance, contact, use of space and 
spatial relationships). 
Level 2 3−4 General 
● Performance is generally appropriate and consistent, showing 
emerging variety, range and control, with generally appropriate 
understanding of how creative choices communicate meaning to 
the audience. 
● Generally sound technical control in the use of vocal techniques 
(clarity, pace, inflection, pitch, projection). 
● Generally sound technical control in the use of physical 
techniques and proxemics (gesture, stillness, stance, contact, use 
of space and spatial relationships). 
Level 3 5−7 Competent 
● Performance is appropriate and consistent, showing clear variety, 
range and control, with competent understanding of how creative 
choices communicate meaning to the audience. 
● Competent technical control in the use of vocal techniques 
(clarity, pace, inflection, pitch, projection).  
● Competent technical control in the use of physical techniques and 
proxemics (gesture, stillness, stance, contact, use of space and 
spatial relationships).  
Level 4 8−10 Assured 
● Performance is pertinent and comprehensive, showing effective 
variety, range and control throughout, with confident 
understanding of how creative choices communicate meaning to 
the audience. 
● Assured technical control in the use of vocal techniques 
(clarity, pace, inflection, pitch, projection). 
● Assured technical control in the use of physical techniques and 
proxemics (gesture, stillness, stance, contact, use of space and 
spatial relationships). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
43 
 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO2): Group performance − vocal and physical 
skills (performers) 
Level 5 11−12 Sophisticated 
● Performance is perceptively integrated, sophisticated and 
dynamic, showing skilful variety, range and control throughout, 
with an accomplished understanding of how creative choices 
communicate meaning to the audience. 
● Accomplished technical control in the use of vocal techniques 
(clarity, pace, inflection, pitch, projection). 
● Sophisticated technical control in the use of physical techniques 
and proxemics (gesture, stillness, stance, contact, use of space 
and spatial relationships). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
44 
 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO2): Group performance − characterisation and 
communication (performers) 
 0 No rewardable material  
Level 1 1–2 Limited 
● Characterisation demonstrates a basic understanding of the role 
and its context within the performance, showing limited credibility 
and consistency. 
● Characterisation lacks clarity, with obvious lapses in focus and 
confidence. 
● Superficial rapport and inconsistent communication with 
audience/other performers shown through lack of ease and 
awareness. 
Level 2 3−4 General 
● Characterisation demonstrates a generally sound understanding 
of the role and its context within the performance, showing 
emerging credibility and consistency. 
● Characterisation is generally clear, showing emerging focus and 
confidence. 
● Generally sound rapport and communication with audience/other 
performers, shown through emerging ease and awareness. 
Level 3 5−7 Competent 
● Characterisation demonstrates a competent understanding of the 
role and its context within the performance, shown by clear 
credibility and consistency. 
● Characterisation is sustained, showing clear focus and confidence. 
● Clear rapport and communication with audience/other 
performers, shown through secure ease and awareness. 
Level 4  8−10 Assured 
● Characterisation demonstrates an assured understanding of the 
role and its context within the performance, showing secure 
credibility and consistency. 
● Characterisation is effective, showing secure focus and 
confidence. 
● Effective rapport and assured communication with audience/other 
performers, shown through assured ease and awareness 
throughout. 
Level 5  11−12 Sophisticated 
● Characterisation demonstrates a perceptive understanding of the 
role and its context within the performance, shown by 
accomplished credibility and consistency. 
● Characterisation is skilful and highly engaging, showing 
accomplished focus and confidence.  
● Accomplished rapport and sophisticated communication with 
audience/other performers, shown through highly-effective ease 
and awareness. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
45 
 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO2): Group performance − interpretation and 
realisation of artistic intentions (performers) 
 0 No rewardable material 
Level 1 1–2 Limited 
● Demonstrates a superficial interpretation of the text in 
performance, showing a limited understanding of playwright’s 
intentions. 
● Performance demonstrates inconsistent understanding of 
language, style, genre and theatrical conventions. 
● Basic contribution to the performance as a whole and realisation 
of the group’s artistic intentions. Performance overall has limited 
impact and lacks energy and commitment. 
Level 2 3−4 General 
● Demonstrates an emerging interpretation of the text in 
performance, showing generally sound understanding of 
playwright’s intentions. 
● Performance demonstrates generally sound understanding of 
language, style, genre and theatrical conventions. 
● Generally sound contribution to the performance as a whole and 
realisation of the group artistic intention. Performance overall has 
emerging impact through clear energy and commitment. 
Level 3 5−7 Competent 
● Demonstrates a clear interpretation of the text in performance, 
showing competent understanding of playwright’s intentions. 
● Performance demonstrates competent understanding of language, 
style, genre and theatrical conventions. 
● Clear contribution to the performance as a whole and realisation 
of the group artistic intention. Performance overall has clear 
impact through consistent energy and commitment. 
Level 4 8−10 Assured 
● Demonstrates an effective interpretation of the text in 
performance, showing an assured understanding of playwright’s 
intentions. 
● Performance demonstrates a comprehensive understanding of 
language, style, genre and theatrical conventions.  
● Assured contribution to the performance as a whole and 
realisation of the group artistic intention. Performance overall has 
effective impact through comprehensive energy and commitment. 
Level 5 11−12 Sophisticated 
● Demonstrates a sophisticated interpretation of the text in 
performance, showing a perceptive understanding of playwright’s 
intentions. 
● Performance demonstrates perceptive understanding of language, 
style, genre and theatrical conventions. 
● Accomplished contribution to the performance as a whole and 
realisation of the group artistic intention. Performance overall is 
dynamic and skilfully creates impact through highly-engaging 
energy and commitment. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
46 
Assessment criteria for group performance: designers 
 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO2): Group performance − design skills 
(designers) 
 0 No rewardable material 
Level 1 1–2 Limited 
● Creates a basic and uneven design, demonstrating limited ability 
to apply design skills. 
● Design shows basic consideration of the practical application of 
materials and production elements in performance. 
● Superficial ability to design effectively within time and resource 
constraints. 
Level 2 3−4 General 
● Creates a generally cohesive design, demonstrating emerging 
ability to apply design skills. 
● Design shows generally sound consideration of the practical 
application of materials and production elements in performance. 
● Emerging ability to design effectively within time and resource 
constraints. 
Level 3 5−7 Competent 
● Creates a cohesive design, demonstrating secure ability apply 
design skills. 
● Design shows consistent consideration of the practical application 
of materials and production elements in performance. 
● Competent ability to design effectively within time and resource 
constraints. 
Level 4 8−10 Assured 
● Creates an effective design, demonstrating secure ability to apply 
design skills.  
● Design shows assured consideration of the practical application of 
materials and production elements in performance. 
● Comprehensive ability to design effectively within time and 
resource constraints. 
Level 5 11−12 Sophisticated 
● Creates an engaging design, demonstrating accomplished ability 
to apply design skills. 
● Design shows perceptive consideration of the practical application 
of materials and production elements in performance. 
● Accomplished ability to design effectively within time and 
resource constraints. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
47 
 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO2): Group performance − design in context and 
communication (designers) 
 0 No rewardable material 
Level 1 1–2 Limited 
● Design shows a superficial understanding of its function and 
purpose within the performance. 
● Design is inappropriate and/or unsympathetic to the text. 
● Design shows a limited understanding of how creative choices 
create impact and communicate meaning to the audience.  
Level 2 3−4 General 
● Design shows a generally sound understanding of its function and 
purpose within the performance.  
● Design is generally appropriate and/or sympathetic to the text. 
● Design shows an emerging understanding of how creative choices 
create impact and communicate meaning to the audience. 
Level 3 5−7 Competent 
● Design shows competent understanding of its function and 
purpose within the performance. 
● Design is clearly appropriate and/or sympathetic to the text. 
● Design shows a secure understanding of how creative choices 
create impact and communicate meaning to the audience. 
Level 4 8−10 Assured 
● Design shows an assured understanding of its function and 
purpose within the performance.  
● Design is pertinent and fully sympathetic to the text. 
● Design shows an effective understanding of how creative choices 
create impact and communicate meaning to the audience. 
Level 5 11−12 Sophisticated 
● Design shows a perceptive understanding of its function and 
purpose within the performance.  
● Design perceptively integrates with text in an innovative way. 
● Design shows a sophisticated understanding of how creative 
choices create impact and communicate meaning to the audience. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
48 
 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO2): Group performance − interpretation and 
realisation of artistic intentions (designers) 
 0 No rewardable material  
Level 1 1–2 Limited 
● Demonstrates a superficial interpretation of the text in 
performance, showing a limited understanding of playwright’s 
intentions. 
● Design demonstrates inconsistent understanding of structure, 
style, genre and theatrical conventions. 
● Limited ability to develop a design that supports the creative 
intent of the performance as a whole. Design overall has limited 
impact, showing a lack of engagement and commitment to the 
performance. 
Level 2 3−4 General 
● Demonstrates an emerging interpretation of the text in 
performance, showing generally sound understanding of 
playwright’s intentions. 
● Design demonstrates generally sound understanding of structure, 
style, genre and theatrical conventions. 
● Generally sound ability to develop a design that supports the 
creative intent of the performance as a whole. Design overall has 
emerging impact, showing some sound engagement and 
commitment to the performance. 
Level 3 5−7 Competent 
● Demonstrates a clear interpretation of the text in performance, 
showing competent understanding of playwright’s intentions. 
● Design demonstrates competent understanding of structure, 
style, genre and theatrical conventions. 
● Consistent ability to develop a design that supports the creative 
intent of the performance as a whole. Design overall has clear 
impact, showing consistent engagement and commitment to the 
performance. 
Level 4 8−10 Assured 
● Demonstrates a secure interpretation of the text in performance, 
shown by secure understanding of playwright’s intentions. 
● Design demonstrates comprehensive understanding of structure, 
style, genre and theatrical conventions. 
● Assured ability to develop a design that supports the creative 
intent of the performance as a whole. Design overall has effective 
impact, showing comprehensive engagement and commitment to 
the performance. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
49 
 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO2): Group performance − interpretation and 
realisation of artistic intentions (designers) 
Level 5 11−12 Sophisticated 
● Demonstrates a sophisticated interpretation of the text in 
performance, showing a perceptive understanding of playwright’s 
intentions. 
● Design demonstrates perceptive understanding of structure, style, 
genre and theatrical conventions. 
● Accomplished ability to develop a design that supports the 
creative intent of the performance as a whole. Design overall is 
dynamic and skilfully creates impact, showing full engagement 
and commitment to the performance. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
50 
Assessment criteria for monologue or duologue performance 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO2): Mono/duo performance (performers) 
 0 No rewardable material 
Level 1 1–4 Limited 
● Basic technical control in the use of vocal and physical techniques 
(clarity, pace, inflection, pitch, projection/gesture, stillness, 
stance, contact, use of space and spatial relationships). 
Performance is often inappropriate or inconsistent, showing a lack 
of variety, range and control. 
● Characterisation demonstrates a superficial understanding of the 
role and its context within the performance. 
● Superficial rapport and inconsistent communication with 
audience/other performer, shown through lack of ease and 
awareness. 
● Demonstrates a superficial interpretation of the text in 
performance, showing a limited understanding of playwright’s 
intentions. 
● Basic realisation of artistic intentions in performance. 
Performance overall has limited impact and lacks energy and 
commitment. 
Level 2 5−9 General 
● Emerging technical control in the use of vocal and physical 
techniques (clarity, pace, inflection, pitch, projection/gesture, 
stillness, stance, contact, use of space and spatial relationships). 
Performance is generally appropriate or consistent, showing 
emerging variety, range and control. 
● Characterisation demonstrates an emerging understanding of the 
role and its context within the performance. 
● Generally sound rapport and communication with audience/other 
performer, shown through emerging ease and awareness. 
● Demonstrates an emerging interpretation of the text in 
performance, showing a generally sound understanding of 
playwright’s intentions. 
● Generally sound realisation of artistic intention in performance. 
Performance overall has emerging impact through some sound 
energy and commitment. 
Level 3 10−14 Competent 
● Consistent technical control in the use of vocal and physical 
techniques (clarity, pace, inflection, pitch, projection/gesture, 
stillness, stance, contact, use of space and spatial relationships). 
Performance is appropriate and consistent, showing clear variety 
range and control. 
● Characterisation demonstrates a secure understanding of the role 
and its context within the performance. 
● Clear rapport and communication with audience/other performer, 
shown through secure ease and awareness. 
● Demonstrates a clear interpretation of the text in performance, 
showing a competent understanding of playwright’s intentions.  
● Clear realisation of artistic intention in performance. Performance 
overall has clear impact through consistent energy and 
commitment. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
51 
 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO2): Mono/duo performance (performers) 
Level 4 15−19 Assured 
● Assured technical control in the use of vocal and physical 
techniques (clarity, pace, inflection, pitch, projection/gesture, 
stillness, stance, contact, use of space and spatial relationships). 
Performance is pertinent and comprehensive, showing effective 
variety, range and control throughout. 
● Characterisation demonstrates an assured understanding of the 
role and its context within the performance. 
● Effective rapport and assured communication with audience/other 
performer, shown through assured ease and awareness 
throughout. 
● Demonstrates an effective interpretation of the text in 
performance, showing an assured understanding of playwright’s 
intentions. 
● Assured realisation of artistic intention in performance. 
Performance overall has effective impact through comprehensive 
energy and commitment. 
Level 5 20−24 Sophisticated 
● Accomplished technical control in the use vocal and physical 
techniques (clarity, pace, inflection, pitch, projection/gesture, 
stillness, stance, contact, use of space and spatial relationships). 
Performance is perceptively integrated, sophisticated and 
dynamic, showing skilful variety, range and control throughout. 
● Characterisation demonstrates a perceptive understanding of the 
role and its context within the performance. 
● Accomplished rapport and sophisticated communication with 
audience/other performer, shown through highly-effective ease 
and awareness. 
● Demonstrates a sophisticated interpretation of the text in 
performance, showing a perceptive understanding of playwright’s 
intentions. 
● Accomplished realisation of artistic intentions in performance. 
Performance overall is dynamic and skilfully creates impact 
through highly-engaging energy and commitment. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
52 
 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO2): Mono/duo performance − designers 
 0 No rewardable material 
Level 1 1–4 Limited 
● Creates a basic design, demonstrating limited ability to apply 
design skills. Design is inappropriate and/or unsympathetic to the 
text. 
● Design shows basic consideration of the practical application of 
materials and production elements in performance. 
● Design shows a limited understanding of how creative choices 
create impact and communicate meaning to the audience. 
● Design shows a superficial understanding of its function and 
purpose within the production. 
● Limited ability to develop a design that supports the creative 
intent of the performance as a whole. Design overall has limited 
impact, showing a lack of engagement and commitment to the 
performance. 
Level 2 5−9 General 
● Creates a generally appropriate design, demonstrating emerging 
ability to apply design skills. Design is generally appropriate 
and/or sympathetic to the text. 
● Design shows generally sound consideration of the practical 
application of materials and production elements in performance. 
● Design shows an emerging understanding of how creative choices 
create impact and communicate meaning to the audience. 
● Design shows a generally sound understanding of its function and 
purpose within the production. 
● Generally sound ability to develop a design that supports the 
creative intent of the performance as a whole. Design overall has 
emerging impact, showing some sound engagement and 
commitment to the performance. 
Level 3 10−14 Competent 
● Creates a clear design, demonstrating secure ability to apply 
design skills. Design is clearly appropriate and/or sympathetic to 
the text. 
● Design shows consistent consideration of the practical application 
of materials and production elements in performance. 
● Design shows a secure understanding of how creative choices 
create impact and communicate meaning to the audience. 
● Design shows competent understanding of its function and 
purpose within the performance. 
● Consistent ability to develop a design that supports the creative 
intent of the production as a whole. Design overall has clear 
impact, showing consistent engagement and commitment to the 
performance. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
53 
 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO2): Mono/duo performance − 
designers 
Level 4 15−19 Assured 
● Creates an effective design, demonstrating secure ability 
to apply design skills. Design is pertinent and fully 
sympathetic to the text. 
● Design shows assured consideration of the practical 
application of materials and production elements in 
performance. 
● Design shows an effective understanding of how creative 
choices create impact and communicate meaning to the 
audience. 
● Design shows an assured understanding of its function 
and purpose within the performance. 
● Assured ability to develop a design that supports the 
creative intent of the performance as a whole. Design 
overall has effective impact, showing comprehensive 
engagement and commitment to the performance. 
Level 5 20−24 Sophisticated 
● Creates an engaging design, demonstrating 
accomplished ability to apply design skills. Design 
perceptively integrates with text in an innovative way. 
● Design shows perceptive consideration of the practical 
application of materials and production elements in 
performance. 
● Design shows a sophisticated understanding of how 
creative choices create impact and communicate 
meaning to the audience. 
● Design shows a perceptive understanding of its function 
and purpose within the performance. 
● Accomplished ability to develop a design that supports 
the creative intent of the performance as a whole. 
Design overall is dynamic and skilfully creates impact, 
showing full engagement and commitment to the 
performance. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
54 
Component 3: Theatre Makers in Practice 
Overview 
Theatre is a collaborative art form and it is important that students have a clear 
understanding of how different creative ideas are put into practice. This component requires 
students to consider, analyse and evaluate how different theatre makers create impact. 
Throughout this component, students will consider how production ideas and dramatic 
elements are communicated to an audience from the perspective of a director, a performer 
and a designer.   
Students will critically analyse and evaluate their experience of live performance. As an 
informed member of the audience they will deconstruct theatrical elements which will help 
inform their own production choices and develop their own ideas as potential theatre makers.  
Students will practically explore texts in order to demonstrate how ideas for performance and 
production might be realised from page to stage. They will also consider the methodologies 
of practitioners and interpret texts in order to justify their own ideas for a production 
concept. Students will research the original performance conditions and gain an 
understanding of how social, historical and cultural contexts have informed their decisions as 
theatre makers.  
Content 
There are three areas to be covered. 
1) A live theatre evaluation. 
2) Page to stage: realisation of a complete performance text. 
3) Interpreting one complete performance text, in light of one practitioner for a 
contemporary audience. 
1) Live Theatre Evaluation 
Students will reflect on their experience as an informed member of an audience watching a 
theatre performance, enabling them to demonstrate knowledge and understanding of 
performance through analysis and evaluation. When choosing a performance the following 
criteria should be taken into consideration. 
● While both amateur and professional productions are acceptable, it is not acceptable to 
evaluate the work of other students for this assessment. 
● The live theatre performance cannot be a performance text that is on the prescribed list of 
this specification. 
● It should ideally demonstrate a range of production elements e.g. costume, set, sound, 
and lighting. 
● The production should present opportunities for students to discuss the work of key 
theatre makers, for example directors, performers and designers. 
● The production must provide opportunities for students to use a subject-specific 
vocabulary. 
For the purposes of this qualification, live theatre means being a member of the audience in 
the same performance space as the performers. It does not include any performance that is 
sung-through in its entirety. The performance can be an amateur or professional production 
as long as the choice enables students to access the demands of this component. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
55 
It is desirable for students to see as much live theatre as possible throughout the course, 
although only one performance will be written about in the examination.  
Centres are reminded that they must submit a live performance statement to Pearson 
(please see page 8 for details). If there are extreme extenuating circumstances regarding 
the access to live theatre for this component, then centres are required to contact 
drama.assessment@pearson.com. 
Notes 
Students are allowed to bring in theatre evaluation notes of up to a maximum of 500 words. 
These notes must be focused on one performance only and include the details of the title, 
venue and date seen. These notes should help them to demonstrate knowledge and 
understanding as an informed member of the audience. 
These notes may include reference to: 
● performers, including performers in specific roles 
● design considerations, including the use of costume, set, lighting and sound  
● the director’s concept/interpretation and the chosen performance style 
● impact on the audience, including, specifically, on the student, and how this was achieved 
● the use of the theatre space 
● how ideas were communicated during the performance. 
Sketches, drawings and diagrams may also be included in the notes and used to support the 
response to the question if required. 
No pre-published material, including programmes and photographs, may be taken into the 
examination or form part of the notes.  
Notes may be handwritten or word processed but the total word limit must not be exceeded.  
Notes must not be submitted with the examination paper, but retained by the centre and 
kept until after post-results services deadline. 
The notes must be attached to the form provided in Appendix 2. 
Knowledge and understanding 
Students are required to: 
● understand the processes and practices used in 21st-century theatre making 
● participate as an informed member of the audience while watching live theatre  
● understand and experience the collaborative relationship between various roles in theatre 
● understand how choices made by directors, performers and designers influence how 
meaning and ideas are communicated to an audience 
● make critical and evaluative judgements that show understanding of how the meaning of a 
text might be interpreted and communicated to an audience 
● how meaning is conveyed through: 
O the use of performance space and spatial relationships on stage  
O the relationships between performers and audience  
O the performer’s vocal and physical interpretation of character  
● know, understand and use relevant subject-specific terminology. 
Skills 
Students must acquire, develop and apply skills in: 
● interpreting, analysing and evaluating the work of various theatre makers 
● forming critical judgements about live theatre, based on their understanding of drama and 
theatre 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
56 
● analysing the ways in which different performance and production elements are brought 
together to create theatre 
● using of subject-specific terminology in a range of contexts. 
2) Page to Stage: realisation of one key extract from a performance 
text  
Students must practically explore a performance text (from list A below) to consider how 
theatrical ideas might be realised in performance and communicated to an audience. They 
will need to consider how performers and designers use theatrical conventions and dramatic 
elements to realise ideas from the page to the stage.  
Students will respond to an unseen extract from their chosen performance text in the 
examination. They will be asked to consider a possible staging of the selected unseen extract 
and the intended impact their creative ideas will have on an audience.  
The unseen extract will be from a scene or moment that is significant to the text as a whole. 
Extracts will normally be between 80–110 lines long (this includes spoken dialogue and stage 
directions). Please note performance texts are not permitted in the examination.  
Centres must choose one of the following performance texts.  
 
Performance text (List A) Prescribed edition* 
Accidental Death Of An Anarchist, Dario Fo 
(adapted by Gavin Richards) 
Methuen Drama 
ISBN 9780413156105 
Colder Than Here, Laura Wade Oberon Modern Plays 
ISBN 9781840024715 
Equus, Peter Shaffer Penguin Classics 
ISBN 9780141188904 
Fences, August Wilson Penguin Books Ltd (reissue edition 1991) 
ISBN 9780452264014 
Machinal, Sophie Treadwell Nick Hern Books 
ISBN 9781854592118 
That Face, Polly Stenham  Faber & Faber 
ISBN 9780571244218 
*The prescribed editions will be used to reproduce extracts for examination purposes. 
Centres are free to choose a different edition for teaching purposes. 
Centres are reminded that they must complete a form regarding text choice, please refer to 
page 7 for details.   
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
57 
Practical work should include, as appropriate, the exploration of: 
● characterisation of key roles including the use of physicality and voice 
● staging, levels and proxemics  
● stage space  
● entrances and exits 
● visual and non-verbal forms of communication 
● design elements 
● relationship between actor and audience 
● ways in which the playwright has structured the text and uses elements such as plot, 
language, form, genre, structure, characterisation and stage directions to communicate 
ideas  
● mood and atmosphere 
● performance style and use of theatrical devices 
● relevant subject-specific vocabulary. 
Knowledge and understanding 
Students are required to: 
● make creative decisions and theatrical choices as theatre makers 
● explore in depth the ways in which theatre makers collaborate to create theatre by 
understanding how performers and designers use dramatic elements to communicate 
meaning and ideas to an audience 
● have a knowledge of production values and be able to make clear choices about how a 
performance text might be realised in performance 
● consider how language, genre, form and characterisation might be explored in 
performance  
● consider how elements such as theatrical space, set, staging, lighting, sound, multimedia, 
masks, costume, puppets and props might be used in performance to communicate 
meaning to an audience  
● know and understand appropriate subject-specific terminology. 
Skills 
Students must acquire, develop and apply skills in: 
● forming critical judgements about the practice of theatre makers based on their 
understanding of drama and theatre 
● responding to texts imaginatively conveying ideas clearly and coherently 
● practically exploring the use of voice, movement, staging and characterisation 
● practically exploring ways in which the ideas of key theatre makers are realised in 
performance  
● the use of an appropriate subject-specific terminology  
● analysing the ways in which different performance and production elements are brought 
together to create theatre. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
58 
3) Interpreting one performance text, in the light of one 
practitioner for a contemporary audience 
Students must practically explore a complete performance text (from list B on the next 
page) in the light of a chosen practitioner (from the list on the next page) in order to outline 
and justify their ideas for a production concept. They will need to develop an integral 
understanding of the text as a whole in order to interpret it for a contemporary audience. 
Students will assume the role of a director and will need to outline and justify how different 
theatre makers and theatrical elements work alongside the methodologies of a recognised 
theatre practitioner. The practitioner chosen for this component needs to be different from 
the one studied in Component 1 (see pages 6 and 7).  
Students must also research the original performance conditions and gain knowledge and 
understanding of the social, historical and cultural factors that are central to the context of 
the original text.  
Interpreting a performance text may or may not include changes to performance style, 
historical period or setting. However, whilst changes and edits to the structure of the text are 
allowed, it is not an opportunity to cut the language or alter the meaning of the original text.  
It is also important that students have an appreciation of the original aims and intentions of 
the playwright. In whatever way the production is interpreted by the student, the audience 
will always be contemporary (a 21st-century audience).  
Students may prepare a director’s script that will help them consider how their chosen text 
might be interpreted as a complete performance.  
When considering how their chosen performance text might be interpreted and staged in the 
light of a practitioner students should consider: 
● their intended audience and an appropriate theatrical venue/space 
● staging and visual impact 
● how the use of design elements such as set, lighting, sound, costume, multimedia, masks, 
props and puppets might help to communicate ideas to an audience 
● the acting style of key roles including the use of characterisation, vocal expression and 
movement 
● the original performance conditions and the historical, social and cultural context of the 
text. 
Practical work should, as appropriate, include exploration of: 
● characterisation of key roles 
● staging and space 
● visual communication 
● design elements 
● relationship between actor and audience 
● ways in which the playwright has structured the text and uses elements such as plot, 
language, form, structure, characterisation and stage directions to communicate ideas to 
an audience 
● mood and atmosphere 
● performance style and theatrical devices 
● practitioner methodology  
● historical, social and cultural context and its relevance to themselves and a contemporary 
audience 
● relevant subject-specific vocabulary. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
59 
Centres must choose one of the following performance texts to study.  
 
Performance text (List B) Recommended edition 
Antigone, Sophocles (adapted by Don Taylor) Methuen 
ISBN 9780413776044 
Doctor Faustus, Christopher Marlowe*† Norton & Company 
ISBN 9780393977547 
Hedda Gabler, Henrik Ibsen (adapted by Richard Eyre) Nick Hern Books 
ISBN 9781854598424 
Lysistrata, Aristophanes (translated by Alan H. Sommerstein)† Penguin Classics 
ISBN 9780140448146 
The Maids, Jean Genet (translated by Bernard Frechtman) Faber & Faber   
ISBN: 9780571251148 
The School for Scandal, Richard Brinsley Sheridan Dover Thrift 
ISBN 9780486266879 
The Tempest, William Shakespeare Oxford School 
Shakespeare  
ISBN: 9780198325000 
Waiting for Godot, Samuel Beckett Faber & Faber 
ISBN 9780571229116 
Woyzeck, Georg Bűchner (translated by John Mackendrick )† Berg Publishing 
ISBN 9780413388209 
* This edition has two versions of the text and centres should use Text A only 
† These texts are available as PDF downloads from the Pearson website. 
 
In the examination the page numbers from both the recommended editions and the PDF 
versions will be given.  
Students must take clean copies of list B texts into the examination. Students will respond 
to an unseen named section from their chosen performance text in the examination. 
The unseen named section will normally be between 90-110 lines long. 
It is strongly recommended that the editions above are used by centres as these will be used 
to specify page references for each unseen named section in the examination.  
The centre must ensure that only clean copies are used in the examination. Clean copies of 
prescribed texts must be checked prior to entering the examination and if texts are found to 
not be clean, then the copy must be taken from the student. Any infringements of this 
requirement found during the examination must be reported to Pearson and will be treated 
as a malpractice issue. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
60 
Practitioners  
The practitioner chosen from the list below should be different to the one studied in 
Component 1. 
Antonin Artaud Kneehigh 
Bertolt Brecht Joan Littlewood 
Steven Berkoff Punchdrunk 
Complicite   Constantin Stanislavski 
 
Centres are reminded that they must complete a form regarding text and practitioner 
choices, please refer to page 7 for details.   
Knowledge and understanding 
Students are required to: 
● explore a complete and substantial set text from the viewpoint of a theatre director 
● make creative decisions and theatrical choices as a theatre director 
● demonstrate an understanding of production methods used to communicate a directorial 
concept and interpretation to an audience  
● explore and develop ideas that will shape a complete production concept and 
interpretation 
● understand how directors communicate ideas to an audience and how the meaning of a 
text might be interpreted and communicated to an audience 
● participate in practical exploration that considers the ways in which the playwright has 
structured the text and uses plot, language, form, structure, characterisation and 
stagecraft to communicate ideas to an audience 
● consider how the application of dramatic elements (for example, physicality, vocal 
expression, set, sound, light, costume, masks, puppets, props and space) contribute to 
the development and shaping of ideas in performance 
● develop an understanding and appreciation of how practitioner theory and practice has 
influenced the development of drama and theatre 
● consider how the work of a chosen theatre practitioner might inform or influence a 
production concept of their chosen text 
● explore the potential for staging texts, taking into consideration any relevant stage 
directions 
● develop an understanding of historical, social and cultural contexts including the original 
performance conditions 
● know and understanding appropriate subject-specific terminology. 
Students must acquire knowledge and understanding of how their chosen practitioner has 
used the following to convey meaning through: 
● the social and historical contexts that shaped the theatre practice  
● the ideas, theatrical purpose, practice and working methodologies underpinning their work  
● the realisation of their artistic intention 
● the use of theatrical style and conventions 
● collaboration with and influence on other practitioners 
● how the relationship with audiences is defined in theory and then carried out in practice. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
61 
Skills 
Students must acquire, develop and apply skills in: 
● forming critical judgements about the practice of theatre makers based on their 
understanding of drama and theatre 
● responding to texts imaginatively conveying ideas clearly and coherently 
● practically exploring the use of voice, movement, staging and characterisation 
● practically exploring ways in which the ideas of the director are interpreted in performance  
● the use of an appropriate subject-specific terminology  
● analysing the ways in which different performance and production elements are brought 
together to create theatre  
● applying practitioner methodology to their own dramatic interpretations 
● using research to develop ideas in a variety of contexts. 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2018.  
● The written examination is 2 hours and 30 minutes. 
● The assessment is out of 80 marks. 
● Students must answer one extended response question on the performance they have 
seen in Section A. For Section B they answer two questions related to an unseen extract 
from the performance text they have studied. In Section C they have one question based 
on an unseen named section of the complete performance text and practitioner they have 
chosen. 
● Section A: Live Theatre Evaluation  
O Consists of a choice of two extended response questions that students must answer 
on the live theatre performance.  
O Their response must analyse and evaluate a live theatre experience in response to a 
given statement.  
O Worth 20 marks. AO4 is assessed 
O Students may take in notes, however these notes must be attached to the form 
provided in Appendix 2. 
● Section B: Page to Stage: Realising a Performance Text 
O Consists of two extended response questions that students must answer based on an 
unseen extract from their chosen performance text.  
O The questions ask students to demonstrate how they, as theatre makers, intend to 
realise the extract in performance.  
O Students will need to demonstrate an understanding of the extract within the context of 
the whole text and respond from the point of view of a performer and a designer.  
O Worth 36 marks. AO3 is assessed. 
O Performance texts are not allowed in the examination as extracts will be provided. 
● Section C: Interpreting a Performance Text 
O Consists of a choice of two extended response based on unseen named section of 
the chosen performance text. Students are required to demonstrate how their re-
imagined production concept (of the complete chosen text) will communicate ideas to a 
contemporary audience. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
62 
O Students will also have to outline how the work of their chosen theatre practitioner has 
influenced their overall production concept and demonstrate an awareness of the 
performance text in its original performance conditions. 
O Worth 24 marks. AO3 is assessed. 
O Clean copies of performance texts must be taken into the examination for this section, 
but no other printed materials, please see page 7 for specific information about the 
requirements.  
Synoptic assessment  
Synoptic assessment requires students to work across different parts of a qualification and to 
show their accumulated knowledge and understanding of a topic or subject area. 
Synoptic assessment enables students to show their ability to combine their skills, knowledge 
and understanding with breadth and depth of the subject.  
This component assesses synopticity drawing on the knowledge, understanding and skills 
learned in Components 1 and 2. 
Sample assessment materials  
A sample paper and mark scheme for this component can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) 
document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
63 
Assessment Objectives 
 
Students must: % in GCE 
A level 
AO1 Create and develop ideas to communicate meaning as part of the 
theatre-making process, making connections between dramatic 
theory and practice 
20 
AO2 Apply theatrical skills to realise artistic intentions in live performance 30 
AO3 Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of how drama and 
theatre is developed and performed 
30 
AO4 Analyse and evaluate their own work and the work of others 20 
Total 100% 
 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
Component Assessment Objectives Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives AO1 % AO2 % AO3 % AO4 % 
Component 1: Devising 20 10 0 10 40% 
Component 2: Text in 
Performance 
0 20 0 0 20% 
Component 3: Theatre 
Makers in Practice 
0 0 30 10 40% 
Total for GCE A level  20% 30% 30% 20% 100% 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
64 
3 Administration and general information 
Entries 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for this qualification can be found in 
our UK Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations officers and is 
available on our website: qualifications.pearson.com 
Discount code and performance tables  
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more than one GCE qualification with 
the same discount code will have only one of the grades they achieve counted for the 
purpose of the School and College Performance Tables. This will be the grade for the larger 
qualification (i.e. the A level grade rather than the AS grade). If the qualifications are the 
same size, then the better grade will be counted) (please see Appendix 9: Codes).  
Please note that there are two codes for AS GCE qualifications; one for Key Stage 4 (KS4) 
performance tables and one for 16-19 performance tables. if a KS4 student achieves both a 
GCSE and an AS with the same discount code, then AS result will be counted over the GCSE 
result. 
Students should be advised that, if they take two GCE qualifications with the same discount 
code, colleges, universities and employers they wish to progress to are likely to take the 
view that this achievement is equivalent to only one GCE. The same view may be taken if 
students take two GCE qualifications that have different discount codes but which have 
significant overlap of content. Students or their advisers who have any doubts about their 
subject combinations should check with the institution to which they wish to progress before 
embarking on their programmes. 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, 
special consideration and malpractice 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality policy requires all students to 
have equal opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our qualifications 
to be awarded in a way that is fair to every student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the Equality Act 2010) are not, 
when they are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in comparison to 
students who do not share that characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification and that 
this achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their peers. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be available in English. All student work must be in 
English.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
65 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with special 
educational needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to:  
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the assessment.  
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an individual 
student with a disability, without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding bodies comply with the duty under the 
Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students will 
then know what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for assessment.  
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable adjustments 
where a person with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in undertaking an 
assessment. The awarding organisation is required to take reasonable steps to overcome 
that disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be unique to that individual and 
therefore might not be in the list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of factors, 
which will include: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding 
organisation, timeframes or affects the security or integrity of the assessment. This is 
because the adjustment is not ‘reasonable’. 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student's mark or grade to 
reflect temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the examination/ 
assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a material effect on a 
candidate’s ability to take an assessment or demonstrate their level of attainment in  
an assessment. 
In relation to live theatre access for Component 3, any extenuating circumstances requests, 
which come through via special arrangement, will be dealt with on a case by case basis. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to apply for access arrangements 
and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special 
consideration, please refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
66 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that compromises or seeks to 
compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in non-examination assessment discovered before the candidate has 
signed the declaration of authentication form does not need to be reported to Pearson. 
Candidate malpractice found in non-examination assessment after the declaration of 
authenticity has been signed, and in examinations must be reported to Pearson on a JCQ M1 
Form (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form should be emailed to 
candidatemalpractice@pearson.com. Please provide as much information and supporting 
documentation as possible. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies 
with Pearson. 
Failure to report candidate malpractice constitutes staff or centre malpractice.  
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and maladministration of 
our qualifications. As with candidate malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is any act that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of assessment or undermines the  
integrity of the qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. Centres should be aware 
that if they do not submit the online forms relating to contrasting text requirements or the 
live performance statement, then this may result in centre malpractice/maladministration. If 
there are extenuating circumstances that prevent students from seeing live theatre 
performance, centres need to apply for special arrangements and if centres fail to do this, it 
may result in centre malpractice/maladministration. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported 
immediately, before any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson on a  
JCQ M2 (a) Form (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form, 
supporting documentation and as much information as possible should be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions 
lies with Pearson. Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More-detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the document 
JCQ General and Vocational Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice. 
Centre marking training will be organised by Pearson and will include training on the 
administrative requirements and best practice so as to avoid potential maladministration 
and/or malpractice. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
67 
Examiners and moderators for the non-examination assessment components will be trained 
in the administrative arrangements that are required of centres. The following examples of 
possible centre maladministration or malpractice should be brought to the attention of 
Pearson: 
● incorrect group sizes 
● incorrect times allocated to groups 
● recordings not being made 
● recordings not sent to examiner 
● recordings sent in unusable format 
● candidate costume making candidates hard to identify 
● candidates not identified on recordings 
● inappropriate use of non-assessed candidates 
● extremely small roles allocated to candidates. 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to comply with the requirements of 
Ofqual's General Conditions of Recognition. 
The raw marks for Components 1, 2 and 3 in this qualification will be scaled by Pearson to 
represent the relative weighting of 40% for Component 1, 20% for Component 2 and 40% 
for Component 3. Any marks submitted by the centre should be in raw marks based on the 
assessment grids for Component 1. 
 
Component Weighting Raw marks Scaling factor Scaling mark 
1 40% 80 1.5 120 
2 20% 60 1.0 60 
3 40% 80 1.5 120 
 
This A level qualification will be graded and certificated on a six-grade scale from A* to E 
using the total subject mark. Individual components are not graded. 
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum judged by Pearson to be of 
sufficient standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U result. 
The first certification opportunity for this qualification will be 2018. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
68 
Student recruitment and progression 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this qualification. 
Students who would benefit most from studying this qualification are likely to have a Level 2 
qualification such as a GCSE in Drama.  
Progression 
Students can progress from this qualification to: 
● drama schools, university courses that relate directly to drama and theatre 
● university courses that will benefit from the skills acquired from this GCE, for example law, 
human resources, people management 
● employment where people skills are essential, for example management, retail, nursing, 
industry and business environments 
● employment where time management, confidence, the ability to work collaboratively and 
to meet deadlines are desirable. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
69 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Non-examination (NEA) assessment authentication sheet 
(Component 1) 70 
Appendix 2: Live theatre evaluation notes form (Component 3) 71 
Appendix 3: Design roles minimum resource guidance for centres 72 
Appendix 4: Best practice when recording performance 74 
Appendix 5: Mark penalty tables for performances/design realisations not 
meeting the minimum assessment time – Component 2 76 
Appendix 6: The context for the development of this qualification 78 
Appendix 7: Transferable skills 80 
Appendix 8: Level 3 Extended Project qualification 81 
Appendix 9: Codes 83 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
70 
Appendix 1: Non-examination (NEA) 
assessment authentication sheet 
(Component 1) 
 
The authentication form must be completed and submitted digitally along with the portfolio. 
Please scan it and then insert at the front of each candidate's portfolio. The form requires 
information on the portfolio produced by each candidate and the performance/design 
realisation undertaken for Component 1. The form also requires the marks awarded for the 
portfolio and for the performance/design realisation. There is a section for teacher and 
candidate declarations in relation to the work submitted. 
Please see our website for the most up-to-date version of this form.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
71 
Appendix 2: Live theatre evaluation notes 
form (Component 3) 
 
This form must be completed and attached to the live theatre evaluation notes produced by 
each candidate. The form provides instructions on how to complete the notes and what 
happens after the notes are completed and what to do with them on the day of the 
examination. There is a section for teacher and candidate declarations in relation to the 
notes submitted. 
Please see our website for the most up-to-date version of this form:  
qualifications.pearson.com/en/qualifications/edexcel-a-levels/drama-and-theatre-
2016.coursematerials.html 
You will need to click on the ‘forms and administration’ tab. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
72 
Appendix 3: Design roles minimum resource 
guidance for centres 
Centres intending to offer design routes to students need to ensure they have the resources 
and appropriate equipment to support the students, so that they can meet the demands of 
this qualification.  
Centres must provide a performance space appropriate to the performance that has 
adequate space for technicians and well as actors and audience. 
The student is in the role of the designer not the technician, wardrobe manager, costume 
maker, carpenter or craftsperson, although they will have to be involved in the execution of 
the design. 
 
Design role Resource guidance 
Costume design ● Students will have to work within specified budget constraints to 
realise their design. 
● They should have access to an appropriate range of construction 
materials and, if required the equipment needed to manufacture the 
costumes. The ability to manufacture the costume is not a 
specification requirement though candidates need to be involved in the 
execution of the design.  
● Students may source individual elements for their costume design(s), 
however no complete costume can be sourced.  
● Health and safety risk assessments should be completed to ensure 
compliance with safety standards. 
Lighting design Students need access to: 
● a minimum of three different types of lantern 
● lighting bars or stands with T bars from which to hang lanterns 
● a minimum of twelve independently controllable channels.  
● a lighting console, this may be manual or programmable but should 
allow for cross fading and facilitate two-preset operation 
● health and safety risk assessments should be completed to ensure 
compliance with safety standards. 
Set design  ● Students will have to work within specified budget constraints to 
realise their design. 
● They should have access to an appropriate range of construction 
materials and, if required the equipment required to manufacture the 
set. The ability to manufacture the set is not a specification 
requirement though students need to be involved in the execution of 
the design.  
● Set and construction materials may come from the centre’s stock or 
can be hired/purchased.  
● Health and safety risk assessments should be completed to ensure 
compliance with safety standards. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
73 
 
Design role Resource guidance 
Sound design Students need access to: 
● a sound reproduction system 
● sound processing devices 
● at least two different types of microphone  
● access to pre-recorded sound sources 
● health and safety risk assessments should be completed to ensure 
compliance with safety standards. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
74 
Appendix 4: Best practice when recording 
performance 
The following guidance applies for the non-examination assessment components when 
recorded evidence is required for assessment purposes.  
The purpose of the recording is to evidence all marks awarded, therefore all recordings must 
be made under examination conditions.  
It must be understood that the performances and the recording of these are for examination 
purposes only. Any performances or recordings of performances undertaken by centres 
outside of the context of the examination must seek copyright permission for works in 
copyright.  
1. All recordings must be complete and unedited for each performance. 
2. The camera must be positioned to ensure the best possible and unobstructed recording 
is made of the performance, as it would be seen by the marker/examiner.  
3. Each student should introduce themselves at the start of each recording. They should 
provide the following information: 
● name and candidate number 
● details of the performance or design role. 
Before the assessment: 
4. Check resources for the recording. 
● Ensure that the camera being used has appropriate facilities for adjusting recorded 
sound levels – particularly if the camera is to be positioned some distance from the 
students.  
● Check that the picture recorded by the camera is clear enough to identify individual 
students.  
● Ensure that memory cards have sufficient space for each recording. 
● Check the camera battery is charged and a power lead is plugged in/available if 
needed. 
5. Clear student identification. 
● Plan with students costumes that will support identification on the recording, for 
example, different coloured t-shirts or jackets; distinct costume or prop items.  
● Test how these costumes look on camera from an identification point of view, 
particularly for students in large groups.  
● When watching work prior to the marking, check that students’ use of stage space 
can be captured by the camera. 
● Make any preparation for identification needed, for example: 
O A4 sheets stating student name and number in a large font for students to hold up 
to camera as part of the introduction 
O full length group photographs or static shot of students in costume (for visiting 
examiner assessment) 
O labelled screen shots of students in performance (for moderator assessment). 
● Ensure that students have had an opportunity to practice giving clear, well-paced 
introductions stating both name and candidate number. 
● Make a note on the appropriate paperwork of costume/costume changes for each 
candidate. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
75 
NB: Centres must not allow students to be costumed very similarly for example, all in 
black, as this is not supportive of the assessment process.  
Students are assessed as individuals and as such, it is vital that they can be identified 
individually throughout all assessed performances. 
6. Test the camera. 
● Record a small section of work (perhaps a dress rehearsal) using the actual camera 
needed for the performance with students speaking in the performance space. 
● Check that an audio signal has been recorded and that students can be seen without 
obstruction and heard clearly. 
● Adjust camera position and/or recording levels as needed. 
At the beginning of the assessment: 
7. Position the camera as practised. 
8. Recording must begin with all students in a full length group shot, as they appear in 
performance. 
9. Film each performance, beginning with the student introductions. Each student must 
then introduce themselves, with a clear pace and at audible volume, stating name, 
student number and role(s). Students must also describe and/or show any costume 
changes. 
NB: The performance for that group must follow the introductions in a single recording. 
During the performance: 
10. Check that recording is taking place for each group and that students are fully visible on 
screen. 
11. Check available power/battery/memory as needed in between the examination 
performances. 
After the examination: 
12. Check the recordings, ensuring that each group has been recorded with audio. 
13. Ensure that all recordings are backed up as well as transferred to the appropriate format 
for assessment. 
14. Recording should be saved with the centre number, qualification title and the relevant 
component number. 
15. Ensure that the recordings are kept secure until sent to Pearson and any backups kept 
safely until after EARs (enquiries about results). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
76 
Appendix 5: Mark penalty tables for 
performances/design realisations not 
meeting the minimum assessment time – 
Component 2  
The proportional time penalty will be applied, by Pearson Edexcel, after the work has been 
marked by the examiner, using the conversion tables below.  
Examiners will be required to only apply the assessment criteria as presented on pages 43–54. 
The penalty is proportional to the performance length. 
2-minute minimum for monologue 
Total time (minutes 
and seconds) 
Percentage applied 
to final mark 
1:45 to 1:59 87.50%  
1:30 to 1:44 75.00%  
1:15 to 1:29 62.50% 
1:00 to 1:14 50.00%  
0:45 to 0:59 37.50% 
0:30 to 0:44 25.00%  
0:15 to 0:29 12.50% 
0:00 to 0:14 0.00% 
 
5-minute minimum for duologue 
Total time (minutes 
and seconds) 
Percentage applied 
to final mark 
4:45 to 4:59 95.00%  
4:30 to 4:44 90.00%  
4:15 to 4:29 85.00%  
4:00 to 4:14 80.00%  
3:45 to 3:59 75.00% 
3:30 to 3:44 70.00%  
3:15 to 3:29 65.00%  
3:00 to 3:14 60.00% 
2:45 to 2:59 55.00% 
2:30 to 2:44 50.00% 
2:15 to 2:29 45.00%  
2:00 to 2:14 40.00%  
1:45 to 1:59 35.00%  
1:30 to 1:44 30.00% 
1:15 to 1:29 25.00%  
1:00 to 1:14 20.00% 
0:45 to 0:59 15.00% 
0:30 to 0:44 10.00%  
0:15 to 0:29 5.00% 
0:00 to 0:14 0.00%  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
77 
 
6-minute minimum for group 
Total time (minutes 
and seconds) 
Percentage applied 
to final mark 
5:45 to 5:59 95.83%  
5:30 to 5:44 91.67%  
5:15 to 5:29 87.50%  
5:00 to 5:14 83.33%  
4:45 to 4:59 79.17%  
4:30 to 4:44 75.00%  
4:15 to 4:29 70.83%  
4:00 to 4:14 66.67% 
3:45 to 3:59 62.50%  
3:30 to 3:44 58.33% 
3:15 to 3:29 54.17%  
3:00 to 3:14 50.00% 
2:45 to 2:59 45.83%  
2:30 to 2:44 41.67%  
2:15 to 2:29 37.50%  
2:00 to 2:14 33.33% 
1:45 to 1:59 29.17%  
1:30 to 1:44 25.00% 
1:15 to 1:29 20.83%  
1:00 to 1:14 16.67% 
0:45 to 0:59 12.50%  
0:30 to 0:44 8.33% 
0:15 to 0:29 4.17%  
0:00 to 0:14 0.00% 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
78 
Appendix 6: The context for the 
development of this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] and our 
ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
● reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with those 
taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
● consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including learned bodies, 
subject associations, higher-education academics and teachers to ensure this qualification 
is suitable for a UK context 
● reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in their 
documents GCE Qualification Level Conditions and Requirements and GCE Subject Level 
Conditions and Requirements for Drama and Theatre published in May 2015. 
 
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification Principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
● demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning and 
measuring higher-order skills 
● rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and valid 
assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in end users of the knowledge, skills 
and competencies of certified students 
● inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students develop at 
different rates and have different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
● empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills, see Appendix 7. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
79 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
May 2014 
“ The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important change to the 
education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications will assist them in 
helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an ‘Expert 
Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or because of 
our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the world as diverse as 
Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification development 
process that has included: 
● extensive international comparability of subject content against the highest-performing 
jurisdictions in the world 
● benchmarking assessments against UK and overseas providers to ensure that they are at 
the right level of demand 
● establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-specific 
expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
● subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future oriented. The 
design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, meaning learner outcomes 
have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a learner’s 
success in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident that we have 
supported the development of qualifications that are outstanding for their coherence, 
thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as representing world-class best 
practice. 
”    
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Lee Sing Kong  
Director, National Institute of Education, 
Singapore 
  
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
  
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
 
All titles are correct as of May 2014. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
80 
Appendix 7: Transferable skills 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently flagged the 
need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable them to respond with 
confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines skills, or 
competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that can be learned and 
that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform an activity or task and can be 
built upon and extended through learning.’ 
[1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected and 
evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this process, we 
identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the most evidence-based and 
robust skills framework. We adapted the framework slightly to include the Program for 
International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT Literacy and Collaborative Problem Solving 
(CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves: [2]  
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve general 
cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and communicate. [3]  
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, oral communication, written communication, assertive 
communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, service 
orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared understanding, 
taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team organisation. 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work stress, 
adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, and physical 
adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual teams, 
work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and able to acquire 
new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher education, 
as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the teaching and learning of 
this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning materials, developed with 
stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
 
[1]  OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012) 
[2]  Koenig J A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop  
(National Academies Press, 2011) 
[3]  PISA – The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy (2011) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
81 
Appendix 8: Level 3 Extended Project 
qualification 
What is the Extended Project? 
The Extended Project is a standalone qualification that can be taken alongside GCEs. It 
supports the development of independent learning skills and helps to prepare students for 
their next step – whether that be higher education study or employment. The qualification:  
● is recognised by higher education for the skills it develops  
● is worth half of an Advanced GCE qualification at grades A*–E  
● carries UCAS points for university entry.  
The Extended Project encourages students to develop skills in the following areas: project 
management, research, the development and realisation of a performance project and 
evaluation, critical thinking, extended writing and project management. Students identify 
and agree a topic area of their choice for in-depth study (which may or may not be related to 
a GCE subject they are already studying), guided by their teacher.  
Students can choose from one of four approaches to produce:  
● a dissertation (for example an investigation based on secondary research)  
● an investigation/field study (for example a practical experiment)  
● a performance (for example in theatre or drama)  
● an artefact (for example creating a sculpture in response to a client brief or solving an 
engineering problem).  
The qualification is higher education based and students are assessed on the skills of 
managing, planning and evaluating their project. Students will research their topic, develop 
skills to review and evaluate the information, and then present the final outcome of their 
project. 
The Extended Project has 120 guided learning hours (GLH) consisting of a 40-GLH taught 
element that includes teaching the technical skills (for example research skills) and an  
80-GLH guided element that includes mentoring students through the project work. The 
qualification is 100% internally assessed and externally moderated. 
How to link the Extended Project with Drama and Theatre  
The Extended Project creates the opportunity to develop transferable skills for progression to 
higher education and to the workplace, through the exploration of either an area of personal 
interest or a topic of interest from within the drama and theatre qualification content.  
Through the Extended Project students will develop skills that support their study of Drama 
and Theatre, including:  
● conducting, organising and using research  
● independent research in the subject area  
● planning, project management and time management  
● consideration of alternative methods and techniques 
● evaluating arguments and processes 
● critical thinking.  
In the context of the Extended Project, critical thinking refers to the ability to identify and 
develop arguments for a point of view or hypothesis and to consider and respond to 
alternative arguments and methods.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
82 
Types of Extended Project related to Drama and Theatre 
Students may produce a performance on any topic, theme or issue that can be researched 
and argued, for example, corruption, rights and responsibilities or women in society. 
The performance can use primary and/or secondary research sources to provide a reasoned 
defence or a point of view, with consideration of counter-arguments, to raise awareness, and 
to consider alternatives.  
An alternative might be, for example:  
● the impact of unemployment on a community  
● child poverty. 
A project might consider an issue that lends itself to experiential research, for example, a 
visit to the theatre or taking part in a workshop.  
Using the Extended Project to support breadth and depth  
In the Extended Project, students are assessed on the quality of the work they produce and 
the skills they develop and demonstrate through completing this work. Students should 
demonstrate that they have extended themselves in some significant way beyond what they 
have been studying in drama and theatre. Students can demonstrate extension in one or 
more dimensions:  
● deepening understanding – where a student explores a topic in greater depth than in 
the specification content. This could be an in-depth exploration of one aspect of the broad 
pre-release context 
● broadening skills – where a student learns a new skill or acting style  
● widening perspectives – where the student’s project spans different subjects. A student 
studying drama with geography may wish to research the impact of tourism on a 
particular region or locality.  
A wide range of information to support the delivery and assessment of the Extended Project, 
including the specification, teacher guidance for all aspects, an editable scheme of work and 
exemplars for all four approaches, can be found on our website. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Drama and Theatre  
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
83 
Appendix 9: Codes 
 
Type of code Use of code Code 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for 
performance tables is assigned a discount 
code indicating the subject area to which 
it belongs. 
Discount codes are published by the DfE. 
Please see the GOV.UK 
website 
 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an 
Ofqual Regulated Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) code. 
The RQF code is known as a Qualification 
Number (QN). This is the code that 
features in the DfE Section 96 and on the 
LARA as being eligible for 16–18 and 19+ 
funding, and is to be used for all 
qualification funding purposes. The QN 
will appear on students’ final certification 
documentation. 
The QN for this 
qualification is:  
601/8302/0 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to 
enter students for a qualification. Centres 
will need to use the entry codes only 
when claiming students’ qualifications. 
A level – 9DR0 
Component codes These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be 
entered for individual components. 
Component 1: 9DR0/01 
Component 2: 9DR0/02 
Component 3: 9DR0/03 
 
*www.gov.uk/government/publications/2018-performance-tables-discount-code 
 
 
Db200225 9781446948033_GCE2016_AL_DRAMATHRE_ISSUE6.DOC.1–90/0 
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office: 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121
