A Level 
Physical Education
Specification
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education (9PE0)
First teaching from September 2016
First certification from 2018 Issue 3
 
About Pearson 
We are the world’s leading learning company operating in countries all around the world. We provide 
content, assessment and digital services to schools, colleges and universities, as well as professional 
and vocational education to learners to help increase their skills and lifelong employability prospects. 
We believe that wherever learning flourishes so do people.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References to third party materials made in this document are made in good faith. Pearson does not 
endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may be subject to change, 
or any opinions expressed therein. (Materials may include textbooks, journals, magazines and other 
publications and websites.) 
 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
 
ISBN 978 1 446 92710 6 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2024 
 
 
Summary of Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in 
Physical Education specification Issue 3 changes  
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this current issue  Page 
number 
The forward slash between inline and roller hockey has been removed 26 
 
If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, contact us via our website at: 
qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/contact-us.html. 
 
 

 
Contents 
1 Introduction 1 
Why choose Pearson Edexcel A Level in Physical Education? 1 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this qualification 2 
Qualification at a glance 3 
2 Subject content and assessment information 5 
Component 1: Scientific Principles of  Physical Education 6 
Component 2: Psychological and Social Principles of Physical Education 15 
Component 3: Practical performance 25 
Component 4: Performance Analysis and Performance Development Programme 42 
Assessment Objectives 61 
3 Administration and general information 62 
Entries 62 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special consideration and malpractice 62 
Student recruitment and progression 66 
Appendix 1: Practical performance authentication sheet 69 
Appendix 2: Performance Analysis and Performance Development Programme (PDP) 
authentication sheet 70 
Appendix 3: Performance Analysis and Performance Development Programme (PDP) training 
record form 71 
Appendix 4: Performance Analysis and Performance Development Programme (PDP) core  
skills list 73 
Appendix 5: Recording practical performances 82 
Appendix 6: Glossary of key terms 87 
Appendix 7: Command word taxonomy 98 
Appendix 8: Calculators 99 
Appendix 9: The context for the development of this qualification 100 
Appendix 10: Transferable skills 102 
Appendix 11: Level 3 Extended Project qualification 103 
Appendix 12: Codes 105 

 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
1 
1 Introduction 
Why choose Pearson Edexcel A Level in Physical 
Education? 
We’ve listened to feedback from all parts of the physical education and sport subject 
community, including higher education. We’ve used this opportunity of curriculum change to 
redesign qualifications that reflect the demands of a truly modern and evolving physical 
education and sporting environment – qualifications that enable your students to apply 
themselves and give them the skills to succeed in their chosen pathway. 
Clear and coherent structure – our qualification has a straightforward structure with four 
engaging and up-to-date components, assessed through externally examined papers and 
non-examined assessments. 
Clear question papers – we have focused on ensuring that our question papers are clear 
and accessible for students and that mark schemes are straightforward in making the 
requirements clear. 
Develops a holistic understanding of physical education – stimulating content is at the 
heart of this engaging qualification, students will receive a well-rounded and full introduction 
to the world of PE, sport and sport science through the combination of physical performance 
and academic challenges. 
Provides a real applied focus – the new specification content encourages students to 
contextualise theory and to develop and apply their knowledge, understanding and quality of 
performances in practical assessments. 
Reflects today’s global world – students will engage with key issues and themes relating 
to contemporary global influences on physical education and sport.  
Develops transferable skills for progression to higher education – students will 
develop a multitude of skills, including numeracy, communication and an understanding of 
practical performances in order to support progression to the next level of study. The blend 
of scientific and social knowledge positions candidates to access the numerous physical 
education, sport and physical activity higher education programmes.  
Supports progression from Key Stage 4 – we have designed the AS and A Level that 
builds on and embeds the physical development and skills learned in Key Stage 4, deepening 
their knowledge of content studied previously whist avoiding unnecessary repetition and also 
ensuring that learners new to the subject are appropriately supported. 
AS and A Level qualifications that are co-teachable – the AS and A Level Physical 
Education course has been designed to be co-teachable, with the same topics at both AS and 
A Level providing flexibility for you and your students. At A Level students are required to 
study additional content within the topic areas to further enhance their knowledge. Please 
note that AS and A Level content will be assessed to a different standard, appropriate to the 
level of study. 
Facilitate employment in the sport, leisure and tourism sector – the knowledge, skills 
and understanding from this qualification positions candidates strongly for employment in a 
range of roles in this dynamic and growing employment sector. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
2 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this 
qualification 
Planning  
● Our Getting Started guide gives you an overview of the new GCE Physical Education 
qualification to help you to get to grips with the changes to content and assessment, and 
to help you understand what these changes mean for you and your students. 
● We will give you an editable course planner and scheme of work that you can adapt to 
suit your department. 
● Our mapping documents highlight key differences between your current GCE Physical 
Education specification and our new specification. 
Teaching and learning  
There will be a range of free teaching and learning support to help you deliver the new 
qualifications, including: 
● topic booklets, with background information about the topic and resource/further 
reading lists  
● guidance on teaching approaches to deliver the content in a practical way. 
Preparing for exams and NEA 
We will also provide a range of resources to help you prepare your students for the 
assessments, including: 
● levelled exemplars of student work with examiner commentaries for both the external 
and internal assessments. 
ResultsPlus  
ResultsPlus provides the most detailed analysis available of your students’ exam 
performance. It can help you identify the topics and skills where further learning would 
benefit your students.  
Get help and support 
Our subject advisor service, led by Penny Lewis, and online community will ensure you 
receive help and guidance from us and that you can share ideas and information with other 
teachers. You can sign up to receive e-updates from Penny Lewis to keep up to date with 
qualification updates and product and service news. To contact the PE and sport team, email 
TeachingPEandSport@pearson.com or phone UK: 0844 576 0036  
Learn more at qualifications.pearson.com  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
3 
Qualification at a glance 
Content and assessment overview 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education consists of two externally-
examined papers and two non-examined assessments. 
Components 1 and 2 will be assessed in May/June in any single year. Components 3 and 4 
may be assessed at any point during the course, with marks submitted by the centre prior to 
moderation. Moderation will take place in the same year as the written examinations. 
Component 1: Scientific Principles of Physical Education  
(*Component code: 9PE0/01)  
Written examination: 2 hours and 30 minutes 
40% of the qualification 
140 marks 
Content overview 
● Topic 1: Applied anatomy and physiology 
● Topic 2: Exercise physiology and applied movement analysis 
Biomechanics is embedded within the content of Topics 1 and 2. 
Assessment overview 
● Students must answer all questions. 
● The assessment comprises two sections: Section A – Applied anatomy and physiology and 
Section B – Exercise physiology and applied movement analysis. 
● The assessment consists of short-answer, long-answer and extended-answer questions. 
● One extended-answer question, marked with an asterisk, requires students to use their 
knowledge and understanding from across the course of study in their answer. 
Calculators may be used in the assessment. Information on the use of calculators during the 
examinations for this qualification can be found in Appendix 8: Calculators. 
 
Component 2: Psychological and Social Principles of Physical Education 
(*Component code: 9PE0/02)  
Written examination: 2 hours  
30% of the qualification 
100 marks 
Content overview 
● Topic 3: Skill acquisition 
● Topic 4: Sport psychology 
● Topic 5: Sport and society 
Assessment overview 
● Students must answer all questions. 
● The assessment comprises two sections: Section A – Skill acquisition and sport psychology 
and Section B – Sport and society. 
● The assessment consists of short-answer, long-answer and extended-answer questions. 
● Two extended-answer questions, marked with an asterisk, require students to use their 
knowledge and understanding from across the course of study in their answers. 
Calculators may be used in the assessment. Information on the use of calculators during the 
examinations for this qualification can be found in Appendix 8: Calculators. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
4 
 
Component 3: Practical Performance (*Component code: 9PE0/03)  
Non-examined assessment: internally assessed, externally moderated 
15% of the qualification 
40 marks 
Content overview 
● Skills performed in one physical activity as a player/performer 
OR 
● Skills performed in one physical activity as a coach 
Assessment overview 
● It is recommended that the minimum duration for the student activity is approximately 54 
hours, combining preparation and the assessed performance. 
● The assessment will be internally marked by the centre and externally moderated by 
Pearson. 
● The assessment consists of students completing one physical activity from the set list on 
pages 26–27 of this specification.  
● Students can be assessed in either the role of player/performer or coach. 
● As a player/performer, students will be assessed against set assessment criteria, which 
can be found in the Practical Performance Assessment Criteria. There are separate 
assessment criteria for each physical activity. Generic assessment criteria are on pages 
31–35 of this specification. 
● As a coach, students will be assessed against set assessment criteria, which can be found 
on pages 36–41 of this specification and in the Practical Performance Assessment Criteria. 
 
Component 4: Performance Analysis and Performance Development Programme 
(*Component code: 9PE0/04)  
Non-examined assessment: internally assessed, externally moderated 
15% of the qualification  
40 marks 
Content overview 
● In the role of player/performer or coach analyse two components of a physical activity 
(one physiological component and either a tactical or technical component).  
● In the role of player/performer or coach analyse, implement and evaluate a Performance 
Development Programme. 
Assessment overview 
● Carrying out and producing the Performance Analysis and PDP may take place over 
multiple sessions, up to a combined duration of 54 hours. 
● The assessment will be internally marked by the centre and externally moderated by 
Pearson. 
● The assessment consists of students producing a Performance Analysis and then 
developing a Performance Development Programme.  
● Students can be assessed in either the role of player/performer or coach. 
● As a player/performer and coach students will be assessed against set assessment criteria 
which can be found on pages 50–59 of this specification. There are separate assessment 
criteria for the Performance Analysis and the Performance Development Programme. 
*See Appendix 12: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to this 
qualification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
5 
2 Subject content and assessment 
information 
Qualification aims and objectives 
The aims and objectives of this qualification are to enable students to: 
● develop theoretical knowledge and understanding of the factors that underpin physical 
activity and sport and use this knowledge to improve performance  
● understand how physiological and psychological states affect performance  
● understand the key socio-cultural factors that influence people’s involvement in physical 
activity and sport  
● understand the role of technology in physical activity and sport  
● refine their ability to perform effectively in physical activity and sport by developing skills 
and techniques and selecting and using tactics, strategies and/or compositional ideas 
● develop their ability to analyse and evaluate to improve performance  
● understand the contribution which physical activity makes to health and fitness  
● improve as effective and independent learners and as critical and reflective thinkers with 
curious and enquiring minds.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
6 
Component 1: Scientific Principles of  
Physical Education 
Topic 1: Applied anatomy and physiology 
Overview 
Students will understand the anatomical/structural and physiological/functional roles 
performed in the identified systems of the body. They will understand how the controlled 
stress of exercise will affect the systems and the way that the effect is measured. The topic 
will cover how different stresses/types of exercise will bring about both acute responses and 
chronic adaptations.  
The principles of Newton’s Three Laws of Motion – force, centre of mass and stability – will 
also be covered and are essential to a student’s understanding of how sporting technique 
and performance can be improved. Students will understand concepts of energy and how 
they relate to physical activity and sport. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
7 
Content 
Subject content What students need to learn 
1.1 Muscular 
skeletal system 
Knowledge and understanding of the anatomy and physiology of the 
muscular and skeletal systems. Application of this understanding to 
physical activity and sport through the content listed below. 
1.1.1 Names of muscles, bones and movements produced. 
 
Region/ 
joint 
Muscle(s) Bone(s) Movement 
Shoulder Trapezius  
Posterior- 
deltoids 
Anterior- 
deltoids 
Pectoralis 
Latissimus dorsi 
Humerus  
Clavicle 
Scapula 
Horizontal- 
flexion  
Horizontal-
extension 
Abduction  
Adduction 
Rotation 
Circumduction 
Hip Gluteus 
Hamstring 
group 
Psoas major 
Pelvis 
Femur 
Flexion 
Extension 
Abduction 
Adduction 
Rotation  
Circumduction 
Elbow Bicep brachii 
Tricep brachii 
Radius 
Ulna 
Humerus 
Flexion 
Extension 
Leg and 
knee 
Quadricep 
group 
Hamstring 
group 
Gastrocnemius 
Soleus 
Femur 
Patella 
Tibia 
Fibula 
Flexion 
Extension 
Ankle and 
foot 
Gastrocnemius 
Soleus 
Tibialis anterior 
Tibia 
Fibula tarsals 
Metatarsals 
Phalanges 
Plantar flexion  
Dorsi flexion 
Eversion  
Inversion 
Wrist and 
hand 
 Radius 
Ulna 
Carpals 
Metacarpals 
Phalanges 
Supination 
Pronation 
Core/trunk Rectus 
Abdominus 
Latissimus dorsi 
Regions of the 
vertebral column 
(cervical, 
thoracic, lumbar, 
sacral, coccyx) 
Flexion 
Extension 
Rotation 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
8 
Subject content What students need to learn 
 1.1.2 The stretch-shortening cycle, including the different types of 
contraction/muscular action: isotonic/eccentric, 
isotonic/concentric and isometric. Application of how movement 
or stability is produced as a result of these different 
contractions/muscular actions during physical activity and 
sporting movements. 
1.1.3 The concept of agonist, prime mover, antagonist, fixator, 
synergist and how a muscle can take on these different roles 
when providing stability or movement in a variety of physical or 
sporting situations. 
1.1.4 The components of an anatomical lever and how the body uses 
the lever systems (1st, 2nd and 3rd class) in physical activity 
and sport. This should include the mechanical advantages and 
disadvantages of each lever. 
1.1.5  Newton’s Three Laws of Motion and how they apply to sporting 
contexts: Law of Inertia, Law of Acceleration and Law of Action 
and Reaction. 
1.1.6  The principles related to the stability of the body in relation to 
the centre of mass and its implication in physical activities. 
1.1.7 The calculation of force and resultant force: a mass of 1 kg 
exerts a force of 9.81 N (down). 
1.1.8 How the muscular and skeletal systems respond, acutely, both 
structurally and functionally to the stress of warming up and 
immediate physical or sporting activity. 
1.2 Cardio-
respiratory 
system and 
cardiovascular 
systems 
1.2.1 Knowledge, understanding and application of the anatomy and 
physiology of the cardiovascular, circulatory and respiratory 
systems in physical activity. Understanding of how they 
function individually and in conjunction with each other. 
1.2.2  The structure and function of the respiratory system to include 
the larynx, pharynx, trachea, bronchus, bronchiole, alveoli. 
1.2.3  The physiology of the respiratory system as a mechanical 
process of ventilation (inspiration and expiration). The cause 
and effect process, including the role of pressure gradients, 
partial pressure (pp) and diffusion. 
1.2.4  Respiratory values and capacities: tidal volume, inspiratory 
reserve volume, expiratory reserve volume, residual volume, 
vital capacity, inspiratory capacity, functional residual capacity, 
total lung capacity. 
1.2.5 The anatomical components and structure of the cardio vascular 
system to include, the heart – atria, ventricles, valves, septum, 
atrioventricular (AV) and sinoatrial (SA) nodes, myocardia – 
blood, and blood vessels (arteries, veins, and capillaries). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
9 
Subject content What students need to learn 
 1.2.6  The physiology of the cardiovascular system with regards to the 
cardiac cycle, systemic and pulmonary circulation, venous 
return, vascular shunting, heart rates, (resting, working, 
maximum, heart rate reserve and recovery), stroke volume, 
cardiac output, end diastolic and end systolic volumes. 
1.2.7  Understanding of bradycardia, why it may be beneficial and 
how, anatomically and physiologically, it may occur. 
1.2.8  The cardiorespiratory and cardiovascular systems and how they 
respond acutely, both structurally and functionally, to the stress 
of warming up and immediate physical or sporting activity. 
1.2.9  Understanding of what constitutes an unhealthy lifestyle and its 
effects on the cardiovascular and cardiorespiratory systems. 
1.3 Neuro-
muscular 
system 
1.3.1 Knowledge, understanding and application of the anatomy and 
physiology and the function of the neuro-muscular system 
during physical activity. 
1.3.2  The characteristics and anatomical make-up of the different 
fibre types: slow twitch (type I), fast oxidative glycolytic (IIa) 
and fast glycolytic (type IIx, formerly known as IIb). 
1.3.3  The different structure of each fibre type: how it facilitates their 
physiology and affects their suitability for particular types of 
physical activities. 
1.3.4  The fibre recruitment patterns for endurance and power-based 
events, and how specific training can enable athletes to gain 
control over the recruitment pattern. 
1.3.5  The anatomy of the neuro-muscular system, including the 
central nervous system, muscle fibres, myofibrils, sarcomeres, 
motor units, motor neurones and neuro-muscular end plates, 
the protein filaments of actin and myosin, and the roles of the 
globular proteins of troponin and tropomyosin. 
1.3.6  The physiology of a muscular contraction, from a nervous 
impulse to a muscular response. To include:  
 the neuro-muscular transfer, sliding filament theory, the all-or-
none law. Knowledge of the five stages of a muscle contraction 
(resting, excitation, contraction, recharge and relaxing). 
Understanding of wave summation and gradation of 
contraction. 
1.3.7  Understanding of how the neuro-muscular system responds 
acutely, both structurally and functionally, to the stress of 
warming up and immediate physical or sporting activity. 
1.3.8 The chronic adaptations of the cardiorespiratory, 
cardiovascular, muscular-skeletal and neuro-muscular systems 
to training. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
10 
Subject content What students need to learn 
1.4 Energy 
systems: 
fatigue and 
recovery 
1.4.1 Knowledge and understanding of the concepts of energy, 
with specific reference to physical activity and sport. 
1.4.2 Understanding of the forms of energy, processes by 
which it is regenerated, how depletion occurs and the 
recovery process. 
1.4.3  Forms of energy to include: mechanical, electrical, 
potential, chemical and kinetic. The role of energy as 
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) in muscular contraction 
and the use of phosphocreatine (PC), glycogen and fat as 
sources for ATP re-synthesis. 
1.4.4  The characteristics and physiology of the three energy 
pathways (ATP-PC, glycolytic and aerobic). 
1.4.5  The characteristics of the three pathways with regards to 
ease and speed of ATP production, the force of contraction 
that each will support, the intensity and duration of 
exercise supported by each as the dominant energy 
provider, and the regeneration of ATP for each pathway. 
1.4.6  The principle of the energy continuum when based 
around athletic running events. 
1.4.7  Use of the continuum as a medium to support 
understanding of the joint and collaborative role of the 
three energy pathways in physical activity. 
1.4.8  Positioning of athletic running events on the energy 
continuum. 
1.4.9  The concept of fatigue and factors that contribute to 
fatigue: energy depletion, dehydration and the build-up 
of waste products (including an exploration of the role of 
lactic acid in performance). 
1.4.10  Stages of recovery and their application to specific 
physical and sporting contexts. 
1.4.11  The fast component of recovery and re-phosphorylisation; 
the speed and rate of phosphogen replenishment. 
1.4.12  The slow component of recovery; the oxidation of lactate 
(removal of lactate and H+), replenishment of energy 
stores and the two-hour window of opportunity: 
rehydration, physical cooling and thermoregulation; the 
48-hour window of opportunity: resaturation of 
myoglobin, re-synthesis of protein, glycogen and 
carbohydrate (CHO); exercise induced muscle damage 
(EIMD) and delayed onset muscular soreness (DOMS). 
1.4.13  EPOC (excess post-exercise oxygen consumption), and 
the stages of recovery. 
1.4.14  Understanding of how the energy systems respond 
acutely to the stress of warming up/priming exercise. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
11 
Topic 2: Exercise physiology and applied movement analysis 
Overview 
Students will understand the importance of diet and nutrition pre-, during and post-physical 
activity. They will also study fatigue and recovery, which will build from their knowledge of 
energy systems in Topic 1: Applied anatomy and physiology. 
Students will gain an understanding of how to apply knowledge of energy systems and how 
to train, maintain and improve their performance. This includes an understanding of fitness 
components, methods of training and physiological adaptations. 
Students will also understand how to prevent and rehabilitate from injury. Students will be 
able to demonstrate an understanding of movement analysis through the use of examples to 
include linear motion, angular motion, projectile motion and fluid mechanics. 
Content 
Subject content What students need to learn 
2.1 Diet and 
nutrition and 
their effect on 
physical activity 
and 
performance 
2.1.1  Knowledge and understanding of dietary manipulation for 
performance pre-, during and post-physical activity. 
2.1.2  Optimal weight for performance to include energy balance, 
energy intake and expenditure. 
2.1.3  Electrolytes, hypotonic, hypertonic and isotonic solutions and 
their importance in maintaining hydration and performance. 
2.1.4  The role and use of supplementation to enhance energy stores, 
hydration, recovery, metabolic process and delay fatigue. 
2.1.5 Contemporary supplements. 
2.1.6  Strategies for ensuring optimal food, fuel and fluid intake for 
pre-, during and post-physical activity: carbohydrate (CHO) 
loading, two-hour window of opportunity, protein intake, pre-, 
during and post-event hydration. 
2.2 Preparation and 
training 
methods in 
relation to 
maintaining and 
improving 
physical activity 
and 
performance 
2.2.1  Knowledge and understanding of preparation and training 
methods in relation to maintaining and improving physical 
activity and performance. 
2.2.2 Fitness tests: functional thresholds, lactate threshold/anaerobic 
threshold/maximum steady state, gas analysis, multi-stage 
fitness test, step tests, yo-yo test, Cooper minute run, Wingate 
test, maximum accumulated oxygen deficit (MAOD), RAST 
(repeat anaerobic sprint test), Cunningham and Faulkner, jump 
tests, Margaria-Kalaman, strength tests, agility tests, sprint 
tests < 100 m. 
2.2.3  Interpret, calculate and present data (tables and graphs) based 
on fitness test results. 
2.2.4  Determinants of movement/running performance and their 
application to sprint, endurance and intermittent activities. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
12 
Subject content What students need to learn 
 2.2.5  Components of fitness: localised muscular endurance, 2VO
•
 
max, anaerobic capacity, maximal strength, strength, power, 
speed, agility, coordination, reaction time, balance, flexibility, 
exercise economy, maximal and 'submaximal' aerobic fitness. 
2.2.6  Principles of training: individual needs, specificity, progressive 
overload, Frequency Intensity Time and Type (FITT), 
overtraining, reversibility. 
2.2.7  Different ways of measuring and calculating intensity: 
percentage of one repetition maximum (RM), Rate of Perceived 
Exertion (RPE), percentage of functional threshold, target HR, 
work to rest ratios. 
2.2.8  Target heart rate: understanding and use of Karvonen’s theory. 
2.2.9  Contemporary technologies used by the performer and coach 
to monitor fitness and performance. 
2.2.10  Periodisation: Macro, Meso and Micro Cycles Knowledge and 
understanding of the preparation phase (general and specific), 
competition phase and transition phase. 
2.2.11  Methods of training and their appropriateness for different 
activities: interval, circuits, cross, continuous, fartlek, flexibility 
(static, ballistic and proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation 
(PNF)), weights (free weights and machines), resistance 
(including pulleys, parachutes), assisted (including bungees, 
downhill), plyometrics, speed agility quickness (SAQ) and 
functional stability. 
 Advantages and disadvantages of each method of training. 
2.2.12 Preparation for performance at altitude, in heat and in 
humidity. 
2.2.13  Knowledge and understanding of strategies for speeding up 
recovery following physical activity: cooling down, massage, 
ice baths, compression clothing. 
2.3 Injury 
prevention and 
the 
rehabilitation of 
injury 
2.3.1  Knowledge and understanding of the different 
classifications of common sporting injuries. 
2.3.2  Acute injuries: cruciate ligament injury; soft tissue 
damage, sprain, Achilles tendon injury, fracture, 
dislocation. 
2.3.3  Overuse injuries: strain, shin splints (periostitis), 
tendonitis (including tennis elbow and golfer’s elbow), 
stress fractures. 
2.3.4  Prevention of injuries 
 Conditioning, muscle balance, technique, protective 
equipment, managing risks. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
13 
Subject content What students need to learn 
 2.3.5  Rehabilitation from injuries 
 Contemporary recovery methods and timescales for 
return to play for injuries in 2.3.1, e.g. ultrasounds, 
physiotherapy, hyperbaric chambers, oxygen tents, 
compression garments, ice baths, nutrition, climate 
chambers, cryotherapy. 
 POLICE – Protection, Optimal Loading, Ice, Compression, 
Elevation. 
 RICE – Rest, Ice, Compression, Elevation. 
 Advantages and disadvantages of rehabilitation 
strategies. 
2.4 Linear motion 2.4.1  Knowledge and understanding of the factors associated 
with linear motion and the application of definitions, 
equations, calculations and units of measurement in a 
sporting context. 
2.4.2 Calculation of the distance and displacement, speed and 
average speed, velocity and acceleration. 
 Speed = distance/time (s =d/t) 
 Velocity = displacement/time or distance/time (m/s) 
 Acceleration = (final velocity – initial velocity)/time 
taken (m/s²) 
2.4.3  Plot, label and interpret graphs of motion. To include 
distance/time, speed/time graphs and velocity/time 
graphs. 
2.5 Angular motion 2.5.1  Knowledge and understanding of how angular motion is 
applied in a sporting context. 
2.5.2  Factors affecting moment of inertia: mass and 
distribution of mass from axis of rotation. 
2.5.3  Effects of increasing or decreasing the moment of inertia 
when rotating about an axis (whole body or specific joint). 
2.5.4  Conservation of angular momentum during flight, 
moment of inertia and its relationship with angular 
velocity. 
2.6 Projectile 
motion 
2.6.1  Knowledge, understanding and application of projectile 
motion in refining technique in different sporting 
contexts. 
2.6.2  Forces acting during flight that affect projectile motion: 
gravity, air resistance and lift forces. 
2.6.3  Factors that determine the horizontal displacement of a 
projectile: velocity of release, height of release, angle of 
release. 
2.6.4  Technique modification through the application of 
technology by the performer and coach in order to 
improve performance. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
14 
Subject content What students need to learn 
2.7 Fluid mechanics 2.7.1  Knowledge, understanding and application of 
aerodynamics and hydrodynamics to appropriate sports 
contexts. 
2.7.2  Factors affecting fluid friction and air resistance: 
velocity, drag force, mass, streamlining and surface 
characteristics of body. 
2.7.3  Interaction of lift forces with objects: upward and 
downward lift forces, angle of attack and the Bernoulli 
effect. 
2.7.4  Types of spin: topspin, backspin, sidespin. Magnus effect 
and how they impact on flight path and bounce. 
2.7.5  Principles of fluid mechanics and how it has influenced 
technological advancements in technique modification, 
clothing/suits, equipment/apparatus. 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2018. 
● The assessment is 2 hours and 30 minutes. 
● The assessment comprises two sections: Section A – Applied anatomy and physiology and 
Section B – Exercise physiology and applied movement analysis. 
● The assessment is out of 140 marks. 
● Students must answer all questions. 
● The assessment consists of short-answer, long-answer and extended-answer questions. 
● Calculators may be used in the examination. Information on the use of calculators during 
the examinations for this qualification can be found in Appendix 8: Calculators. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and mark scheme for this component can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
15 
Component 2: Psychological and Social Principles of 
Physical Education 
Topic 3: Skill acquisition 
Overview 
Students are required to show an understanding of the nature and development of skills in 
sport. This understanding could be enhanced and developed through applied practical 
experiences in the role of either coach and/or performer. Students should have an awareness 
of the relevant learning theories and how they relate to skill development. At A Level, 
students will develop a detailed appreciation of the role of memory systems in the acquisition 
of skill. 
Students are expected to be able to relate knowledge of practices, feedback and guidance to 
practical performance situations. Students should be able to understand how quantitative 
data can be generated in appropriate areas of skill acquisition and be able to produce and 
evaluate the meaning of such data. 
Content 
Subject content What students need to learn 
3.1 Coach and 
performer 
3.1.1  Coaching styles to improve the performance of learners: 
command, reciprocal, guided discovery and problem solving. 
3.1.2  The development of tactics and strategies in a competition or 
performance to optimise outcome. 
3.1.3  Dissection of a skill in order to identify technical elements: 
preparation, execution and recovery phases leading to the 
correct result or outcome. Exploration of how to analyse a skill 
in order to identify any technical strengths and weaknesses. 
How to compare to higher-level performer. 
3.2 The 
classification 
and transfer of 
skills 
3.2.1  Knowledge and understanding of skill classifications. 
 Classification continuums as gross/fine, internally 
paced/externally paced, discrete/serial/continuous. The 
open/closed continuum in relation to the sporting environment, 
decision making and practice structure. 
3.2.2  The uses of transfer of skills. 
 Transfer as positive/negative, proactive/retroactive, bilateral 
and zero. Transfer as the effect of one skill on another as a 
result of practice/experience. 
3.3 Learning 
theories 
3.3.1  The associative theories (classical and operant conditioning). 
Reinforcement – positive, negative, punishment, stimulus–
response (S-R) bond – and its use in skill learning. 
3.3.2  Thorndike's three laws in relation to learning as effect, exercise 
and readiness and their application to practical situations. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
16 
Subject content What students need to learn 
 3.3.3  Fitts and Posner's three stages of learning (cognitive, 
associative and autonomous). The characteristics and coaching 
requirements at each stage. The type and role of different types 
of feedback at each stage. 
3.4 Practices 3.4.1 Knowledge and understanding of practice methods and 
structure as a coach and for a performer and their impact on 
performance. 
3.4.2  Practice methods as part, progressive part, whole, whole-part-
whole. 
 Practice structure as in massed, distributed, fixed and variable. 
3.5 Guidance 3.5.1  The types, purpose and effectiveness of guidance methods: 
visual, verbal, manual and mechanical. 
 Visual guidance in the form of demonstration and visual 
materials. 
 Verbal guidance in the form of knowledge of direct, indirect and 
prompting. 
 Manual and mechanical guidance in the form of physical support 
and aids, restrictions and forced responses. 
3.5.2  Uses of technology to underpin guidance methods in order to 
optimise performance, e.g. to measure, monitor and evaluate 
performance. 
3.6 Feedback 3.6.1  The types, purposes and effectiveness of feedback as 
motivation, reinforcement and detection and correction of 
errors. 
3.6.2  Types of feedback as in positive/negative, knowledge of 
performance, knowledge of results, concurrent/terminal, 
intrinsic/extrinsic. 
3.6.3  Uses of technology to support types of feedback in order to 
optimise performance. 
3.6.4  Open and closed loop control 
 Open loop models to include input, executive system, effector 
system and output. 
 Closed loop control models – input, executive system, effector 
system, output and feedback. 
 Application of when each loop could be used. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
17 
Subject content What students need to learn 
3.7 Memory 
models 
3.7.1  Information processing 
 Components of information processing, including: input, 
stimulus identification, perception and selective 
attention, response selection, response programming, 
output – based on the models of Welford and Whiting. 
 Detection, comparison and recognition (DCR) phases. 
3.7.2  The three memory systems as short-term sensory store 
(STSS), short-term memory (STM) and long-term 
memory (LTM). 
3.7.3  STM and STSS: capacity, duration, encoding, chunking, 
selective attention. 
3.7.4  LTM: capacity, duration, encoding, recall, multi-store 
memory. 
3.7.5 Link between STSS, STM and LTM in terms of retrieval 
and rehearsal and how this affects output. 
3.7.6 Measuring reaction and response times using appropriate 
technology. 
 Hick's Law, simple/choice reaction time. 
 Plotting, interpreting and analysing data generated from 
reaction and response times. 
 Psychological refractory period. 
 Implications to a coach and performer in optimising 
performance. 
3.7.7  Understanding that schema theory is an organised 
package of information stored in LTM that updates and 
modifies motor programmes. 
 Recall schema as in information about producing the 
movement. 
 Recognition schema as in judging the movement. 
 Schemas based on knowledge of the initial conditions, 
response specifications, sensory consequences and 
movement outcomes. 
 Implications of schema theory to a coach and performer 
in optimising performance. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
18 
Topic 4: Sport psychology 
Overview 
Students will have an understanding of the role that sports psychology has in facilitating 
optimal sporting performance of an individual athlete, sports teams and individuals in the 
teams. Students will understand the different psychological views, theories and perspectives, 
as indicated in the specification, and be able to apply this understanding by way of 
explanation to behaviours that ultimately affect sporting performance. Central to this topic 
will be the ongoing debate offering explanations between either nature or nurture or the 
interaction of both. 
Students will look at the theories and then apply the different interpretation of each to the 
different situations and scenarios identified. They will be able to demonstrate both support 
for, and challenge to, a given theory or perspective and provide sporting examples to 
support this view. 
Content 
Subject content What students need to learn 
4.1 Factors that can 
influence an 
individual in 
physical 
activities 
4.1.1  Knowledge and understanding of different personality theories 
and their application to different sporting situations. 
 Personality theories 
Trait (Innate) theory – introvert/extrovert, neurotic/stable 
(Eysenck, Cattell’s 16 Personality Factors) 
 Interactionist theory 
Behaviour = function (personality, environment)  
Hollander’s and Martens personality structure. 
4.1.2 Wood’s Triadic Model: ideas/cognitions, emotions/effects and 
actions/behaviour. 
 Understanding how attitudes are formed and shape behaviour. 
 Changing attitudes: negative to positive – create ‘cognitive 
dissonance’ – Festinger. 
4.1.3 Arousal and its effect on performance. 
 Positive/negative effects, under-/over-arousal, 
introverts/extroverts. 
 Arousal and achieving optimal levels for performance – task 
differences, e.g. simple/gross skills, situational factors, stage 
of learning and personalities – Inverted-U hypothesis, Hull’s 
Drive Theory. 
 Catastrophe Theory. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
19 
Subject content What students need to learn 
 4.1.4  Anxiety and its effect on performance. The three dimensions of 
anxiety: cognitive, somatic and behavioural. Types of anxiety, 
state and trait anxiety. 
 The effects of anxiety of performance: over arousal, choking 
and catastrophe theory. 
 Relationship between arousal and anxiety. 
 Stress and stressors leading to anxiety – physiological, 
psychological, behavioural symptoms. 
 Cognitive/Somatic strategies: mental practice/rehearsal, use of 
visualisation and imagery, ‘self talk’, pre-game routines, 
relaxation techniques, centring, thought stopping, PMR 
(Progressive Muscle Relaxation). 
4.1.5  Aggression v. Assertion 
 Knowledge and understanding, in relation to the player, coach 
and spectator, of aggression and assertion and the difference 
between the two. 
 Theories 
Instinct (Lorenz), Social Learning (Bandura), Aggressive-Cue 
Hypotheses (Berkowitz) and Frustration-Aggression Hypothesis 
(Dollard). 
 Types of aggression: hostile, channelled, reactive and 
instrumental. 
 Causes of aggression, e.g. over-arousal, under developed 
moral reasoning, bracketed morality, and application to 
specific sporting situations. 
 Strategies to reduce aggression/aggressive play. 
4.1.6  Knowledge and understanding of motivation 
 Types of motivation – self-motivation characteristics, positive, 
negative, intrinsic and extrinsic; link to rewards – 
internal/external, tangible/intangible. 
 Theories of motivation 
Achievement Motivation Theory (Atkinson and McClelland). 
 NAF (Need to Avoid Failure) and NACH (Need to Achieve). 
 Characteristics of each and how they may be reflected in the 
same individual but in different circumstances and/or times. 
 An application of these theories to optimise performance. 
 Factors that influence behaviour: situation, personality, 
motivation and expectation. 
 Use of goal setting to develop and enhance motivation. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
20 
Subject content What students need to learn 
 4.1.7  Definition, knowledge and understanding of social facilitation, 
including social inhibition. The positive and negative effects on 
a performer. 
 The role of and effect of ‘others’ 
– passive (audience/co-actors)  
– interactive others (competitors/spectators). 
 The effects of social facilitation on a novice to a highly  skilled 
performer, the dominant response and the link to arousal 
(Drive theory and Inverted-U). 
 Causes of and the and effects of Evaluation Apprehension 
(Zajonc and Cottrell). 
 External influences, e.g. significant others, homefield 
advantage, distraction effect, proximity effect, and their 
impact on performance. 
 Strategies to combat social inhibition. 
4.2 Dynamics of a 
group/team and 
how they can 
influence the 
performance of 
an individual 
and/or team. 
4.2.1  Knowledge and understanding of the characteristics of a 
successful and cohesive group/team. 
 Understanding that group cohesion is based on a combination 
of task or social cohesion. 
 Theories 
Carron: the four factors that affect formation and development 
of a cohesive group/team – environmental, personal, 
leadership and team factors.  
 Steiner: actual productivity = group productivity – losses due 
to faulty processes 
 Group dynamics and how they can influence the performance 
of an individual and/or team. 
 Social loafing: causes and factors that contribute to minimising 
its effect. 
 Coordination/cooperation factors: Ringlemann Effect 
 Strategies to develop group cohesion. 
4.3 Goal setting 4.3.1  Knowledge and understanding of SMART(ER) targets (specific, 
measurable, achievable, realistic, time-bound, evaluated and 
recorded). 
 The importance and relevance of goal setting and the different 
types used to optimise performance: subjective, objective, 
outcome/product, performance, process, realistic and 
aspirational goals; short-, medium- and long-term goals. 
4.4 Attribution 
theory 
4.4.1  A knowledge and understanding of reasons for success 
and failure in sport. 
 Weiner’s attribution theory and the four attributions: 
ability, effort, luck, task difficulty. 
 The three main dimensions of attribution: locus of 
causality, locus of stability and locus of controllability. 
 Strategies to allow for attribution retraining. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
21 
Subject content What students need to learn 
4.5 Confidence and 
self-efficacy 
4.5.1  Knowledge and understanding of self-confidence. 
 Knowledge and understanding of Vealey’s model of 
sport-specific confidence, including relevant sporting 
examples. 
4.5.2  Self-efficacy 
 Bandura Self-Efficacy: Explanation and effect of the four 
factors that build sport-specific self-confidence: past 
accomplishments, verbal persuasion, emotional arousal 
and vicarious experiences (modelling). 
 Learned helplessness and its impact on performance. 
4.6 Leadership 4.6.1 Knowledge and understanding of the importance of 
effective leadership and its impact on performance.  
 The different types of leadership styles: autocratic, 
laissez-faire and democratic, based on the models of 
Fiedler and Chelladuri. 
 Advantages and disadvantages of each leadership style. 
 Theories of leadership 
An understanding of how leaders are created: Trait 
theory (Great Man Theory) vs Social learning, 
Interactionist theory. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
22 
Topic 5: Sport and society 
Overview 
Students will understand the dynamic relationship between sport and society. They will 
understand the parallels between societal changes and sport and will utilise this knowledge 
and understanding to consider historical and contemporary events and trends and potential 
future developments. 
Students will understand how, as society developed and became increasingly commercial and 
political, these phenomena were reflected in sport. Students will understand the context of 
varying ethics, pressures on performers to cheat and consider a range of factors that 
influence deviance and the response of national and international organisations. 
Students will understand the relationship between media and sport and the role of social 
media. 
Content 
Subject content What students need to learn 
5.1 The factors 
leading to the 
emergence and 
development of 
modern day 
sport 
5.1.1  Overview of the emergence and development of modern-day 
sport. The historical and social context of popular recreations: 
characteristics of mob activities (peasants) and those for the 
courtly/aristocracy in pre-industrial Britain – field sports, 
games and pastimes. 
5.1.2 The effect of the Industrial Revolution on British society and 
how it was reflected in recreational activities. The impact on 
recreational activities leading from: industrialisation, 
urbanisation, education and transport developments. 
5.1.3 The social cultural factors that influenced the development of 
rational recreation of sport in the post-industrial era. The role 
played by Thomas Arnold, Muscular Christianity and the cult of 
athleticism, the development of factory teams; the growth of 
the sporting press; establishment of the early national 
governing bodies (NGBs). 
5.1.4 The emergence of competing for corporations rather than 
geographically-based teams; advantages and disadvantages.  
5.1.5 Equality and diversity in disability sport and for gender, with 
specific reference to the ParaSport movement and improved 
opportunities for women in global sport. 
5.1.6 Migration patterns of sporting labour and the impact on 
domestic competitions and national teams. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
23 
Subject content What students need to learn 
5.2 Globalisation of 
sport 
5.2.1 Overview of the concept of the 'globalisation of sport'; 
definition, features and the impacts on sport and society. 
5.2.2  Colonial diffusion of sport across the British Empire; roles of 
the Army, Church, Industry and Education. Overview of the 
further creation and development of international sport. 
5.2.3  The creation, development and impact of national and 
international governing bodies on sport and society. 
5.2.4  The context and impact of participating at the modern Olympic 
Games, World Cups, and major international sporting events. 
Exploration of the issues of bidding for, staging and competing 
at world events. 
5.3 Commercial-
isation of sport 
5.3.1 Knowledge and understanding of the commercialisation 
of sport and its impact on society. 
5.3.2 An understanding of the concept of commercialisation 
and commodities. Comparisons between advertising, 
sponsorship, endorsement and merchandising. 
5.3.3  The historical and social context of commercialisation: 
broken time payments; spectatorism; developments in 
the media. 
5.3.4  The events of the 1968, 1972 and the 1976 Olympics 
and their impact on the 1984 games in Los Angeles. The 
blueprint for the commercialisation of future sport 
created by Peter Ueberroth at the 1984 Games. 
5.3.5  Franchises in sport (USA and UK), the concept of the 
‘golden triangle’. Sports stars as global stars. The 
Americanisation of sport. The concept of competitive 
sports fixtures and events being played on other 
continents. For example, NFL, NBA, Tour de France. 
5.4 Ethics and 
deviance in 
sport 
5.4.1  Knowledge and understanding of ethics and deviance in 
sport. The pressures on sports performers and 
spectators to behave in a deviant way. 
5.4.2  The impact of commercialisation on the sportsmanship 
ethic and the growth of gamesmanship in the UK. 
5.4.3  Deviance in sport: use of performance enhancing drugs, 
(early conception of drug use up to the modern day); 
blood doping and transfusions; diuretics and pain relief; 
simulation; bribery; ‘bungs’; match fixing, betting 
syndicates and other contemporary forms of deviance. 
5.4.4  Different responses of national and international 
governing bodies, governments and the law to combat 
deviance in sport, including the utilisation of 
technology. 
5.4.5  The role of the World Anti-doping Agency (WADA) in 
combating the use of performance enhancing drugs. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
24 
Subject content What students need to learn 
5.5 The relationship 
between sport 
and the media 
5.5.1  Knowledge and understanding of the two-way 
relationship between sport and the media. The 
development of media coverage from print to televised 
events and its role in sport. Reasons for the growth of 
live media/social media coverage and its implications 
for performers, supporters and the sport. 
5.5.2 The impact of technology on the viewing experience. 
 The advantages and disadvantages of the development 
of specific sports media packages and the growth of 
‘pay per view’. 
5.6 Development 
routes from 
talent 
identification 
through to elite 
performance 
5.6.1  Knowledge and understanding of UK talent 
identification and development: novice to elite 
performer. The historical influences on UK provisions – 
East Germany and Australia. 
5.7 Participation and 
health of the 
nation 
5.7.1 Knowledge and understanding of barriers to participation, the 
benefits of mass participation and the impact of wearable 
technology on participation. 
5.7.2  Concept of mass participation and initiatives/programmes to 
promote community participation in the UK. 
5.7.3  Participation trends in the UK in the 21st century. 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2018. 
● The assessment is 2 hours. 
● The assessment comprises two sections: Section A – Skill acquisition and sport psychology 
and Section B – Sport and society. 
● The assessment is out of 100 marks. 
● Students must answer all questions. 
● The assessment consists of short-answer, long-answer and extended-answer questions. 
● Calculators may be used in the examination. Information on the use of calculators during 
the examinations for this qualification can be found in Appendix 8: Calculators. 
Sample assessment materials  
A sample paper and mark scheme for this component can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
25 
Component 3: Practical performance 
Content 
Students will be required to perform in one physical activity, in the role of either 
player/performer or coach. They will be required to demonstrate their skills while under 
pressure, in conditioned practice and a formal/competitive situation. Students must choose 
and perform one physical activity from the set list on pages 26 and 27. 
Students should be taught to make relevant and appropriate links between their learning in 
Components 1 and 2 and use this to benefit their performances in the physical activities. 
Students are required to demonstrate their ability to: 
● perform a range of skills and techniques in physical activity 
● make decisions, implement strategies, tactics and/or compositional ideas, and apply 
knowledge and understanding of rules and regulations while performing physical activity  
● apply knowledge and understanding of theories, concepts, principles and methods to 
physical activity and performance. 
General performance skills 
Students should be aware of and apply appropriate and relevant physical attributes and 
psychological elements to the demands of their chosen activities.  
Students must demonstrate appropriate levels of fitness in order to perform adequately.  
Students must be aware of and apply appropriate and relevant rules/laws of the activity that 
they are performing. Students must perform their chosen activities safely. If they do not, 
then the teacher must intervene. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
26 
Physical activity list 
The list below contains the permitted physical activities that students must select from. This 
list has been set by the Department for Education. Any changes or additions to the activities 
will in the first instance be indicated on our website. The rules in the right hand column 
provide further clarification as to the scope of a physical activity. 
 
Physical activity Rules 
Acrobatic gymnastics*  
Amateur boxing  
Association football Cannot be five-a-side. 
Athletics Can be assessed in one event from the disciplines of either Track or 
Field (including 5K and 10K track* and cross country*). 
Race walking is not a permitted Athletics event. 
Badminton  
Basketball Cannot be ‘street basketball’. 
BMX cycling* Racing only, not tricks. 
Camogie  
Canoeing  
Cricket  
Cycling Track or road cycling. 
Dance Acceptable dances include: ballet, ballroom, contemporary/modern, 
cultural (includes hip-hop, Irish, Indian, jazz, Latin), folk and street. 
Diving Platform diving. 
Equestrian Can be assessed in either show jumping, cross country or dressage. 
Field hockey  
Figure skating* Men's and ladies' singles or team. 
Futsal*  
Gaelic football  
Golf  
Gymnastics Floor routines and apparatus. 
Handball  
Hurling  
Ice hockey*  
Inline Roller hockey*  
Kayaking  
Lacrosse  
Netball  
Rock climbing Can be indoor or outdoor. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
27 
Physical activity Rules 
Rowing  
Rugby league Cannot be tag rugby. 
Rugby union Can be assessed as sevens or fifteen a side. Cannot be tag rugby. 
Sailing* Crew-based events or single-handed dinghy. Royal Yachting 
Association recognised sailing-boat classes only. Students must 
perform as helmsman. 
Sculling Team* or singles. 
Skiing Outdoor/indoor on snow. Must not be on dry slopes. 
Snowboarding Outdoor/indoor on snow. Must not be on dry slopes. 
Squash  
Swimming Not synchronised swimming. 
Table tennis  
Tennis  
Trampolining  
Triathlon* Sprint only. 
Volleyball  
Water polo*  
Windsurfing*  
Specialist physical 
activity** 
Rules 
Blind cricket  
Boccia  
Goalball  
Powerchair football  
Polybat  
Table cricket  
Wheelchair basketball  
Wheelchair rugby  
 
* These activities are available for first teaching from September 2020 and first certification 
from Summer 2022. 
** The specialist activities are available only to those students with a physical disability, and 
in line with entry criteria set out by that activity’s National Governing Body. If a student is 
classified as eligible, then they should be assessed in the classification based on the relevant 
activity’s National Governing Body classification criteria. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
28 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2018. 
● It is recommended that the minimum duration for the student activity is approximately 
54 hours, combining preparation and the assessed performance. 
● The assessment is out of 40 marks. 
● Marks must be submitted at the end of the course. 
● The assessment will be internally marked by the centre and externally moderated by 
Pearson. 
● The assessment consists of students completing one physical activity from the set list on 
pages 26–27 of this specification. 
● Students can be assessed in either the role of player/performer or coach. 
● As a player/performer, students will be assessed against set assessment criteria which can 
be found in the Practical Performance Assessment Criteria. There are separate assessment 
criteria for each physical activity. Generic assessment criteria are on pages 31–35 of this 
specification. 
● As a coach, students will be assessed against set assessment criteria which can be found 
on pages 36–41 of this specification and in the Practical Performance Assessment Criteria. 
● Centres must ensure that marks for each performance submitted are valid for the series in 
which they are submitted. 
● The activities with a single asterisk in the set list of physical activities on pages 26–27 of 
this specification are available for first teaching from September 2020 and first 
certification from Summer 2022. 
Practical performance setting  
Students should choose their physical activity with the support and advice of their teacher.  
Assessing the physical activities 
Teachers must design physical activities to enable all students to demonstrate their skills and 
techniques in order to meet the assessment criteria. Formal/competitive activities are 
defined as, for example and where appropriate, performances in a full-sided game and 
performances in front of an audience/judges. If students are participating in a team game 
then a full-sided game must be demonstrated in the assessment of the activity. Where it 
becomes apparent to the teacher assessing that students are not being given the opportunity 
to demonstrate their full range of skills during a formal/competitive game situation, the 
teacher may intervene to create an opportunity for a conditioned practice (for example by 
permitting defenders to switch sides) to allow students to demonstrate their appropriate 
skills. This condition applies predominately to team game activities (such as football, rugby 
union, rugby league, hockey, lacrosse, basketball, camogie, hurling, handball, netball, 
volleyball) but may also apply to other activities where necessary. 
It is recommended that the minimum duration for the student activity is approximately 
54 hours, combining preparation and the assessed performance. 
The ideal model would be for this time to be a block, with one activity being followed, leading 
up to the assessed performance. Acceptable alternatives include intensive teaching 
programmes. The duration of assessed performances in each physical activity should be 
based on appropriate timings to allow students to demonstrate the requirements of a 
player/performer or coach in the selected physical activity. For example, the duration of 
competitive situations will differ for each selected physical activity. 
Formal assessment of the physical activity may take place at any point during the course. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
29 
Practical performance preparation  
Teaching and learning 
To help students choose a physical activity, teachers should cover the following key points: 
● the role of the player/performer or coach in their chosen physical activity 
● how they can develop the skills, techniques and attributes to perform successfully in their 
chosen physical activity 
● the rules and laws of their chosen physical activity. 
Resources  
Students should have access to a range of resources/equipment to enable them to meet the 
practical demands of their chosen physical activity. Resources and equipment used should 
follow governing body guidelines/rules, for example ESAA (English Schools Athletics 
Association) rules for athletics events. 
Practical performance taking 
Students must choose and perform one physical activity from the set list in the role of 
player/performer or coach. 
Authenticity and Collaboration 
Students and teachers must sign the Practical performance authentication sheet, please see 
Appendix 1. This is to ensure that the practical performance is the student’s own work. 
Feedback  
Teacher support is a permitted, and important, part of the preparation for the assessed 
practical performance. Teachers can help students to understand rules/laws of the activities 
and the assessment criteria. However, feedback is not permitted in the assessed practical 
performance, unless it is required for health and safety reasons, for example to reduce the 
risk of injury. During the assessed practical performance teachers are not allowed to coach 
their students. Any additional feedback must be recorded on the Practical performance 
authentication sheet, please see Appendix 1. 
Time control 
It is suggested that the minimum duration for each student activity is approximately 54 
hours, combining preparation and the assessed performance. 
The duration of assessed performances in each activity should be based on an appropriate 
time to allow students to demonstrate the requirements of a player/performer in the selected 
physical activity, for example the duration of competitive situations will differ for each 
selected physical activity. 
Formal assessments of activities may take place at any point during the course. 
Safety 
All activities submitted will need to comply with all the appropriate recommendations related 
to the safety of students as recognised by the Association for Physical Education in their 
publication, Safe Practice in Physical Education & School Sport 2012. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
30 
Practical performance marking, standardisation and 
moderation 
Teachers should mark the practical performances of students in the role of player/performer 
using the assessment criteria in the Practical performance assessment criteria. There are 
separate assessment criteria for each physical activity. These document is found on the 
Pearson website. Generic assessment criteria can be found on pages 31–35 of this 
specification. 
Teachers should mark the practical performances of students in the role of coach using the 
assessment criteria on pages 36–41 of this specification. These assessment criteria can also 
be found in the Practical performance assessment criteria. 
Teachers should include any comments on the Practical performance authentication sheet in 
Appendix 1 to justify the marks awarded. 
Where marking has been carried out by more than one teacher in a centre, there must be a 
process of internal standardisation carried out to ensure that there is a consistent application 
of the assessment criteria. 
Marks awarded by the centre will be subject to external moderation by Pearson. Moderation 
will ensure consistency with national standards and will include a review of marking to 
ensure that the rules have been correctly applied by centres. Pearson/moderators, in 
consultation with the centre, will select a representative sample of students of different 
abilities, and in a range of activities, and taking cohort size into account. For activities that 
cannot be assessed live on moderation day, centres must video record the evidence of the 
assessment. This evidence will be used to support the marks awarded and must be provided 
if requested by Pearson for moderation purposes. 
If the moderation indicates that centre assessment does not reflect national standards, an 
adjustment will be made to students’ final marks to compensate for this.  
For further information please refer to the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ) document 
Instructions for conducting non-examination assessments (new GCE and GCSE 
specifications) on the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk. The assessment of this qualification 
must comply with these instructions. 
Videoing practical performances on moderation day 
Centres must video the students in the sample on moderation day. This is to support an EAR, 
if requested. Centres that do not record on moderation day cannot request an EAR. Please 
see Appendix 5: Recording practical performances, pages 82–86 for full advice and guidance. 
Centres must submit to Pearson the video evidence collected on moderation day.  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
31 
Practical performance generic assessment criteria: player/performer 
The following is generic assessment criteria, explaining the standard expected at each level for a player/performer. 
The assessment criteria for each specific physical activity can be found on our website in the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Practical performance assessment criteria. The criteria should be used to mark each student’s performance. 
 
Skills/Content 
Students will be assessed on the quality of appropriate skills, techniques and decision making processes under pressure, to meet the 
challenges of conditioned practice and a formal/competitive situation. 
 
Level Marks Guidance Description 
 0  No rewardable evidence 
1 1–8 (1–4 marks) 
Performance meets all 
requirements of this level. 
Demonstrates a basic level of performance. Skills, techniques and decision making are characterised 
by little precision, control and fluency, during a formal/competitive situation. 
 
● Position-specific skills and techniques performed to a basic level. 
● Skills and techniques performed to a basic level. 
● Basic influence on performance and motivation of self and others. 
● Any tactical changes are ineffectively applied in response to the opposition’s actions, with multiple 
misjudgements. 
● Attempts to adapt to changes in a competitive situation to dominate opponents but with little 
success. 
(5–8 marks) 
Performance meets all 
requirements of this level 
and may sometimes exceed 
expectations. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
32 
 
Level Marks Guidance Description 
2 9–16 (9–12 marks) 
Performance meets all 
requirements of this level. 
Demonstrates a competent level of performance. Skills, techniques and decision making are 
characterised by some precision, control and fluency, during a formal/competitive situation. 
 
● Position-specific skills and techniques performed to a competent level. 
● Skills and techniques performed to a competent level. 
● Competent influence on performance and motivation of self and others. 
● Tactical changes are sometimes effectively applied in response to the opposition’s actions but with 
misjudgements. 
● Attempts to adapt to changes in a competitive situation to dominate opponents with some success. 
(13–16 marks) 
Performance meets all 
requirements of this level 
and may sometimes exceed 
expectations. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
33 
 
Level Marks Guidance Description 
3 17–24 (17–20 marks) 
Performance meets all 
requirements of this level. 
Demonstrates a good level of performance. Skills, techniques and decision making are characterised 
by good precision, control and fluency, during a formal/competitive situation. 
 
● Position-specific skills and techniques performed to a good level. 
● Skills and techniques performed to a good level. 
● Good influence on performance and motivation of self and others. 
● Tactical changes are effective in response to the opposition’s actions but with minor 
misjudgements. 
● Adapts effectively to changes in a competitive situation to dominate opponents with a good level of 
success. 
(21–24 marks) 
Performance meets all 
requirements of this level 
and may sometimes exceed 
expectations. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
34 
 
Level Marks Guidance Description 
4 25–32 (25–28 marks) 
Performance meets all 
requirements of this level. 
Demonstrates a very good level of performance. Skills, techniques and decision making are 
characterised by very good precision, control and fluency, during a formal/competitive situation. 
 
● Position-specific skills and techniques performed to a very good level. 
● Skills and techniques performed to a very good level. 
● Very good influence on performance and motivation of self and others. 
● Applies tactical changes effectively in response to the opposition’s actions with few, if any, 
misjudgements. 
● Adapts effectively to changes in a competitive situation to dominate opponents with a very good 
level of success. 
(29–32 marks) 
Performance meets all 
requirements of this level 
and may sometimes exceed 
expectations. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
35 
 
Level Marks Guidance Description 
5 33–40 (33–36 marks) 
Performance meets all 
requirements of this level. 
Demonstrates an outstanding level of performance. Skills, techniques and decision making are 
characterised by outstanding precision, control and fluency, during a formal/competitive situation. 
 
● Position-specific skills and techniques performed to an outstanding level. 
● Skills and techniques performed to an outstanding level. 
● Outstanding influence on performance and motivation of self and others. 
● Applies tactical changes highly effectively in response to the opposition’s actions without 
misjudgements. 
● Adapts highly effectively to changes in a competitive situation to dominate opponents with an 
outstanding level of success. 
(37–40 marks) 
Performance meets all 
requirements of this level 
and may sometimes exceed 
expectations. 
 
Where it becomes apparent to the assessor that students are not being given the opportunity to demonstrate their full range of skills during a game 
situation, assessors may intervene to create an opportunity (for example permitting defenders to switch sides) to allow students to demonstrate their 
appropriate skills. This is to guarantee that all students have the opportunity to demonstrate their skills and decision making because in a competitive game, 
for example football, it may be that a defender never gets to touch the ball through no fault of their own but because of how the game has evolved. 
Therefore, giving the player/performer the opportunity to demonstrate appropriate skills in a formal/competitive situation is necessary so that relevant and 
legitimate marks may be awarded.
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
36 
Practical performance assessment criteria: coach  
The following is assessment criteria for the coach. It can be applied to the assessment of the coach in all of the physical activities in the set list. 
 
Skills/Content 
Students will be assessed on their ability to coach effectively through the planning, organisation and delivery of coaching sessions to 
an individual, group or team while under observation in conditioned practice and a formal/competitive situation: 
• judgement of the authority shown by the coach 
• sport/activity specific knowledge (of laws, techniques, safeguarding and regulations) 
• strategy/planning/aim 
• organisation (logistics, planning, health and safety, risk management) 
• motivation/inspiration/empathy with individual, group or team 
• performance of coaching in a formal/competitive situation – ability to communicate, adapt, and refine – their coaching style and 
strategies to meet their aim(s) 
• analysis and evaluation – feedback and guidance before, during and after the formal/competitive situation, reflecting potential 
changes in strategy 
• use of appropriate physical characteristics/attributes to benefit their own performance 
• demonstrate psychological control (e.g. anxiety, arousal, aggression). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
37 
 
Level Marks Guidance Description 
 0  No rewardable evidence. 
1 1–8 (1–4 marks) 
Performance meets all 
requirements of this level. 
The coach has demonstrated little authority in the planning, organisation, delivery and evaluation of 
their coaching when under the demands of a formal/competitive performance with an individual, 
group or team. 
● Inappropriate and little organisation, with no clear or relevant aim(s), failing to utilise SMART(ER) 
principles, with inappropriate coaching not relevant to the skill, abilities and fitness of the 
individual, group or team. 
● Unclear and convoluted coaching delivery, reflecting a lack of sport/activity-specific knowledge. 
● Ineffective adaptations of communication and coaching style, reflecting a lack of empathy in 
meeting the needs of the individual, group or team through the use of voice, gesture and/or 
demonstration. 
● Responding poorly and inappropriately to changing formal/competitive situation and/or external 
conditions. 
● The feedback and guidance (based on poor quality interpretation of performance data and/or 
observation) when given is inaccurate, lacks support for and not targeted to needs of the individual, 
group or team. 
● Self-reflection demonstrates limited consideration of the areas for personal improvement as a 
coach. 
(5–8 marks) 
Performance meets all 
requirements of this level 
and may sometimes exceed 
expectations. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
38 
 
Level Marks Guidance Description 
2 9–16 (9–12 marks) 
Performance meets all 
requirements of this level. 
The coach has demonstrated limited authority in the planning, organisation, delivery and evaluation of 
their coaching when under the demands of a formal/competitive performance with an individual, 
group or team. 
● Some evidence of appropriate and structured organisation, with a defined aim(s), a limited use of 
SMART(ER) principles, with emerging coaching relevant to the skill, abilities and fitness of an 
individual, group or team. 
● The level of coaching delivery, reflects some simplistic sport/activity-specific knowledge. 
● Adaptations of communication and coaching structure/methods support in part with emerging 
empathy the needs of the individual, group or team seen through the occasional appropriate use of 
voice, gesture and/or demonstration, responding with occasional flexibility and corrections to a 
changing formal/competitive situation and/or external conditions. 
● Attempts to respond to changing formal/competitive situation and/or external conditions with 
limited success. 
● The feedback and guidance is mainly uninformative (based on a simplistic interpretation of 
performance data and/or observation) and when given only occasionally meets the needs of the 
individual, group or team. 
● Self-reflection demonstrates some relevant insight when considering of the areas for personal 
improvement as a coach. 
(13–16 marks) 
Performance meets all 
requirements of this level 
and may sometimes exceed 
expectations. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
39 
 
Level Marks Guidance Description 
3 17–24 (17–20 marks) 
Performance meets all 
requirements of this level. 
The coach has demonstrated an emerging level of authority in the planning, organisation, delivery and 
evaluation of their coaching when under the demands of a formal/competitive performance with an 
individual, group or team. 
● Invariably appropriate and structured organisation, with a defined aim(s), based in part on the full 
use of SMART(ER) principles, with observations of appropriate coaching relevant to the skill, 
abilities and fitness of the individual, group or team. 
● Reliable quality coaching delivery, reflecting a developing sport/activity-specific knowledge. 
● Increasing and more effective adaptations of communication and coaching style, showing 
appropriate empathy to meet the needs of the individual, group or team seen through the 
developing use of voice, gesture and/or demonstration. 
● Responses show signs of flexibility to the changing formal/competitive situation and/or external 
conditions. 
● The feedback and guidance (based on some accurate interpretation of performance data and/or 
observation) when given can be relevant and targeted to needs of the individual, group or team. 
● Self-reflection demonstrates a more secure insight into the areas for personal improvement as a 
coach. 
(21–24 marks) 
Performance meets all 
requirements of this level 
and may sometimes exceed 
expectations. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
40 
 
Level Marks Guidance Description 
4 25–32 (25–28 marks) 
Performance meets all 
requirements of this level. 
The coach has demonstrated a secure level of authority in the planning, organisation, delivery and 
evaluation of their coaching when under the demands of a formal/competitive performance with an 
individual, group or team. 
● Appropriate and structured organisation, with a defined aim(s), effectively using SMART(ER) 
principles, with appropriate coaching relevant to the skill, abilities and fitness of the individual, 
group or team, with occasional errors. 
● Sessions reflect clear, concise, and increasingly effective coaching delivery, reflecting a more 
detailed range of sport/activity-specific knowledge and an invariable ability to manage the coaching 
environment. 
● Evidence of effective adaptations of communication and coaching style, showing appropriate 
empathy to meet the needs of the individual, group or team, with few, if any, errors in the use of 
voice, gesture, and/or demonstration. 
● Responses to changing formal/competitive situation and/or external conditions are flexible and 
correct with only minor misjudgements. 
● The feedback and guidance (based on accurate interpretation of performance data and/or 
observation) given is accurate, relevant and targeted to needs of the individual, group or team, 
with only few minor misjudgements, and the use of coaching aids, e.g. video, may be employed. 
● Self-reflection demonstrates informative considerations of the areas for personal improvement as a 
coach. 
(29–32 marks) 
Performance meets all 
requirements of this level 
and may sometimes exceed 
expectations. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
41 
 
Level Marks Guidance Description 
5 33–40 (33–36 marks) 
Performance meets all 
requirements of this level. 
The coach has demonstrated an assured level authority in the planning, organisation, delivery and 
evaluation of their coaching when under the demands of a formal/competitive performance with an 
individual, group or team. 
● Appropriate and structured organisation, with a clearly defined aim(s), fully utilising SMART(ER) 
principles, with appropriate coaching relevant to the skill, abilities and fitness of the individual, 
group or team. 
● Clear, concise, and effective coaching delivery, reflecting a thorough sport/activity-specific 
knowledge and a mature ability to manage the coaching environment. 
● Effective and enhancing adaptations of communication and coaching style, showing appropriate 
empathy to meet the needs of the individual, group or team seen through the effective use of 
voice, gesture and/or demonstration. 
● Responding flexibly and correctly to changing formal/competitive situation and/or external 
conditions. 
● The feedback and guidance (based on accurate interpretation of performance data and/or 
observation) given is insightful, relevant and targeted to needs of the individual, group or team, 
and the use of coaching aids, e.g. video, may be employed. 
● Self-reflection demonstrates critical and insightful considerations of the areas for personal 
improvement as a coach. 
(37–40 marks) 
Performance meets all 
requirements of this level 
and may sometimes exceed 
expectations. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
42 
Component 4: Performance Analysis and Performance 
Development Programme 
In Component 4 students must complete a Performance Analysis and then, based on the results of the 
analysis, produce a Performance Development Programme (PDP). Full details are outlined on the 
following pages.  
Performance Analysis 
Overview 
In the Performance Analysis, in either the role of player/performer or coach, students will investigate 
two components of a physical activity (one physiological component and either a technical or a 
tactical component) in order to analyse and evaluate the effectiveness of their own performance. 
Students will demonstrate knowledge and understanding of performance analysis in order to produce 
an evaluation to demonstrate strengths and weaknesses and areas for development of a performance. 
Content 
● The Performance Analysis is designed to engage the student in an independent study of their chosen 
physical activity. 
● Students must choose the same physical activity for both the physiological component and either 
the technical or tactical component. 
● It is recommended that students carry out their Performance Analysis and PDP in the same role and 
physical activity as undertaken for Component 3: Practical performance. 
● Students are required to analyse quantitative and qualitative data to support their conclusions. 
● It is recommended that students choose a tactical or technical skill from the list in Appendix 4. The 
list is offered a guide for students but they are permitted to choose a skill from outside the list.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
43 
The following table outlines what is required from students in the role of player/performer or coach for 
the physiological, technical and tactical components of a physical activity. 
 
Physiological component (compulsory) 
Player/performer Coach 
The student will: 
● consider all the components of fitness 
required for their performance in their 
chosen physical activity in order to 
justify the three most important 
components of fitness 
● select a fitness test for each of the three 
identified components of fitness and 
analyse the validity and reliability of the 
selected fitness tests 
● perform the selected fitness tests and 
use the quantitative data generated in 
the tests to identify the strengths and 
areas for development of each of the 
three components of fitness 
● analyse the fitness test results and 
explain the priorities for training in the 
future in order to enhance performance. 
The student will: 
● consider all the components of fitness 
required for either an individual or group in 
their chosen physical activity in order to 
justify the three most important 
components of fitness 
● select a fitness test for each of the three 
identified components of fitness and 
analyse the validity and reliability of the 
selected fitness tests 
● supervise the selected fitness tests on 
either an individual or group. Use the 
quantitative data generated in the tests to 
identify the strengths and areas for 
development of each of the three 
components of fitness 
● analyse the fitness test results and explain 
and justify the priorities for training in the 
future in order to enhance performance. 
 
Technical component 
Player/performer Coach 
The student will: 
● using qualitative data, analyse the three 
phases (preparation, execution, 
recovery) and the result in one identified 
core skill for both themselves and by 
comparison with a higher- level 
performer 
● identify strengths and weaknesses and 
justify the key area(s) for development 
on the basis of the analysis undertaken. 
The student will: 
● using qualitative data, analyse one core 
element of coaching for both themselves 
and by comparison with a higher-level 
coach. The core elements of coaching are: 
o types of practice 
o communication (verbal/non-verbal) 
o coaching styles 
o guidance and feedback 
o planning and organisation 
● identify strengths and weaknesses and 
justify the key area(s) for development on 
the basis of the analysis undertaken. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
44 
 
Tactical component 
Player/performer Coach 
The student will: 
● using qualitative and/or quantitative 
data analyse one tactic and its 
application 
● analyse how and why the tactic can be 
adapted to changing circumstances in a 
competitive or formal performance. 
The student will: 
● using qualitative and/or quantitative data 
analyse one tactic and its application 
● analyse how and why the tactic can be 
adapted to changing circumstances in a 
competitive or formal performance. 
 
Definitions of key terms  
The following definitions explain the meanings of the key terms which are used in the Performance 
Analysis: 
● physical activity refers to any of the Department for Education’s approved sports or physical 
activities 
● a player/performer will participate in a physical activity approved by the Department for 
Education 
● a coach is responsible for leading an individual, group or team in one physical activity with the aim 
of optimising the coach’s performance. The focus of this work is on the role of the coach and the 
quality of knowledge and understanding to coach; not the improvement of those being coached 
● components of a physical activity 
o physiological components are those aspects of performance linked to the body's response to 
exercise and adaptations to training 
o technical components are the specific sequence of sub-routines to be mastered to achieve 
success in the performance of the identified skill 
o tactical components are plans devised and implemented in order to gain an advantage in a 
competitive or formal situation  
● skills are organised movement patterns requiring body control, rhythm and timing, motor 
production and co-ordination  
● a peer is someone of the same age (within +/- one school year to take account of biological 
maturity) in the activity identified. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
45 
Performance Development Programme 
Overview 
The Performance Development Programme (PDP) is designed to lead on from the student’s 
Performance Analysis. The purpose of the PDP is to optimise the student’s performance in the role of a 
player/performer or coach. 
Player/performer 
As a player/performer, students will identify one of the two components of a physical activity they 
worked on in their Performance Analysis (physiological, technical or tactical). They will then plan, 
perform and record their performance in this component of the physical activity over 8–10 weeks. They 
will apply appropriate principles and methods of training and SMART(ER) targets to a plan designed to 
optimise performance. They will then critically evaluate the outcomes of their programme against its 
original aims. 
Coach 
As a coach, students will identify one of the two components of a physical activity they worked on in 
their Performance Analysis (physiological, technical or tactical). They will then plan, perform and 
record their coaching performance in this component of the physical activity, with the involvement of 
the individual or group they are coaching, over 8–10 weeks. Through the delivery of a coaching 
programme the student will demonstrate enhanced knowledge and application of coaching principles 
and theory. They will then critically evaluate the outcomes of their programme against its original 
aims.  
Content 
Planning 
Player/performer Coach 
The student will select one component of 
performance, (physiological, technical or 
tactical), and based on the outcomes of the 
Performance Analysis, outline an 
appropriate training programme that 
includes: 
● SMART(ER) targets  
● principles and methods of training  
● the selection of appropriate test(s) to 
monitor progress.  
The student will select one component of 
coaching, (physiological, technical or tactical) 
and based on the outcomes of the 
Performance Analysis, outline an appropriate 
coaching programme for their 
individual/group/team that includes: 
● SMART(ER) targets  
● application of the principles and methods 
of coaching 
● the selection of appropriate methods to 
monitor their own coaching progress. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
46 
 
Performing and recording 
Player/performer Coach 
The student will undertake the training 
programme as planned and document a 
record of every training session undertaken 
throughout the development. The student 
may gather as much evidence as 
appropriate to the needs of the review and 
evaluation. A template is provided but 
evidence may also be recorded in other 
formats. 
The student will lead their 
individual/group/team through a coaching 
programme as planned and document a 
record of every training session undertaken 
throughout the development. The student 
may gather as much evidence as appropriate 
to the needs of the review and evaluation. A 
template is provided but evidence may also 
be recorded in other formats. 
 
Review and evaluation 
Player/performer Coach 
The student will produce a critical 
evaluation of their personal development 
based on: 
● an evaluation of the effectiveness of the 
training programme based on evidence 
gathered and supported by qualitative 
and quantitative data 
● suggestions for future development. 
The student will produce a critical evaluation 
of their personal development as a coach 
based on: 
● an evaluation of the effectiveness of the 
coaching programme based on evidence 
gathered and supported by qualitative and 
quantitative data 
● suggestions for future development. 
 
Definitions of key terms  
The following definitions explain the meanings of the key terms which are used in the Performance 
Development Programme: 
● physical activity refers to any of the Department for Education’s approved sports or physical 
activities 
● a player/performer will participate in a physical activity approved by the Department for 
Education 
● a coach is responsible for leading an individual, group or team in one physical activity with the aim 
of optimising the coach’s performance. The focus of this work is on the role of the coach and the 
quality of knowledge and understanding to coach; not the improvement of those being coached 
● Components of a physical activity 
o physiological components are those aspects of performance linked to the body's response to 
exercise and adaptations to training 
o technical components are the specific sequence of sub-routines to be mastered to achieve 
success in the performance of the identified skill 
o tactical components are plans devised and implemented in order to gain an advantage in a 
competitive or formal situation  
● skills are organised movement patterns requiring body control, rhythm and timing, motor 
production and co-ordination  
● a peer is someone of the same age (within +/- one school year to take account of biological 
maturity) in the activity identified 
● the programme is concerned with identifying the training necessary to achieve aims and objectives 
linked to further improving performance 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
47 
● the recording will be a written account to provide evidence of the training undertake 
● the review and evaluation requires the student to critically assess the extent to which the stated 
aims have been achieved. 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2018. 
● Carrying out and producing the Performance Analysis and PDP may take place over multiple 
sessions, up to a combined duration of 54 hours. 
● The assessment will be internally marked by the centre and externally moderated. 
● The assessment consists of 40 marks. 
● Marks must be submitted at the end of the course prior to moderation. 
● The assessment consists of students producing a Performance Analysis and then developing a 
Performance Development Programme.  
● Students can be assessed in either the role of player/performer or coach. 
● As a player/performer and coach students will be assessed against set assessment criteria which can 
be found on pages 50–59 of this specification. There are separate assessment criteria for the 
Performance Analysis and the Performance Development Programme. 
Students are assessed only on their analysis and evaluation of the Performance Analysis and PDP. They 
are not assessed on whether or not any improvement occurs in their performance. 
Performance Analysis and PDP setting 
It is recommended that students carry out their Performance Analysis and PDP in the same role and 
physical activity as undertaken for Component 3: Practical performance, to give them the opportunity 
to develop breadth and depth of knowledge and understanding in their chosen activity. They should 
choose their physical activity and their Performance Analysis and PDP with the support and advice of 
their teacher. 
Performance Analysis and PDP preparation 
Teaching and learning 
To help students prepare for the Performance Analysis and PDP teachers should cover the following key 
points: 
● aim and planning analysis 
● carrying out and monitoring their Performance Analysis and PDP 
● evaluation of data and the programme. 
Feedback 
Teachers may help students to understand rubrics and assessment criteria. Teachers must not provide 
students with solutions. Any additional feedback must be recorded on the Performance Analysis and 
Performance Development Programme authentication sheet, please see Appendix 2. 
Resources 
Students must have equal access to IT resources. Students should have access to a range of resources 
and equipment to enable them to fulfil the requirements of their Performance Analysis and PDP. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
48 
Performance Analysis and PDP writing 
Students will be required to submit their Performance Analysis and PDP in one of two formats: 
electronically or hard copy. 
Hard copy can be handwritten or word-processed text. 
Word count 
Performance Analysis and PDP: maximum 3500 words. 
Students should be advised that if they exceed the word count it is likely that they will not be able to 
satisfy the requirement of producing of a concise and coherently structured Performance Analysis and 
PDP. 
The use of Physical Activity Readiness Questionnaires (PARQs), graphs, charts, tables, and 
diagrams/flow charts do not count towards the word count. The bibliography does not count towards 
the word count. 
Training record 
Training record forms for each training session (or appropriate alternative evidence) must be 
submitted. 
Additional instructions 
Where students are unable to undertake the Performance Analysis and PDP because of injury or illness 
they may undertake the whole of Component 4 based on the performance of a peer or complete the 
whole of Component 4 in a different role and/or activity. 
Authenticity 
Students and teachers must sign the Performance Analysis and Performance Development Programme 
authentication sheet, please see Appendix 2. This is to ensure that the work is the student’s own. 
Collaboration 
Teachers and centres must be satisfied that the work is the student’s own and should sign the 
Performance Analysis and Performance Development Programme authentication sheet to this effect. 
The work of the individual student may be informed by working with others but students must provide 
an individual response. 
Time control 
It is recommended that the duration for the Performance Analysis and PDP is 54 guided-learning 
hours, combining preparation and the final piece of written work. 
Allocation of student time for each section of the Performance Analysis and PDP should be taken into 
consideration. For example, students might require more time to produce their analysis of the 
physiological component than they need for their review and evaluation. 
Feedback 
Teachers can help students to understand rubrics and assessment criteria. Teachers must not provide 
students with solutions. Any additional feedback must be recorded on the Performance Analysis and 
Performance Development Programme authentication sheet, please see Appendix 2. 
Resources 
Students must have equal access to IT resources. Students should have access to a range of resources 
and equipment to enable them to fulfil the requirements of their Performance Analysis and PDP. 
Storing students’ work 
Where students are completing their Performance Analysis and PDP over a number of sessions, at the 
end of each session their work must be saved and kept securely. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
49 
Marking, standardisation and moderation 
Teachers should mark the assignment using the assessment criteria on the following pages. Teachers 
may annotate students’ work but should also include any comments on the Performance Analysis and 
Performance Development Programme authentication sheet to justify the marks awarded. 
Where marking has been carried out by more than one teacher in a centre, there must be a process of 
internal standardisation carried out to ensure that there is a consistent application of the assessment 
criteria. 
Marks awarded by the centre will be subject to external moderation by Pearson. Moderation will ensure 
consistency with national standards and will include a review of assignments to ensure that the 
assignment-setting rules have been correctly applied by centres. Pearson will notify centres of the 
students whose work has been selected for moderation. This sample will take cohort size into account. 
If the moderation indicates that centre assessment does not reflect national standards, an adjustment 
will be made to students’ final marks to compensate.  
For further information please refer to the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ) document Instructions 
for conducting non-examination assessments (new GCE and GCSE specifications) on the JCQ website: 
www.jcq.org.uk. The assessment of this qualification must comply with these instructions. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
50 
Performance Analysis assessment criteria 
Teachers must mark students’ work using the assessment criteria on the following pages. 
There are separate grids for the roles of player/performer and coach. For both player/performer and 
coach there are also separate grids for the different components of a physical activity (physiological, 
technical and tactical). 
Performance Analysis: player/performer 
Performance Analysis: player/performer 
Physiological component 
Level Marks Description 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–2 ● Justification of the three most important components of fitness 
selected is weak and they are not relevant to the demands of the 
activity. 
● Fitness tests are not selected and performed for each component of 
fitness and justification for each based upon the validity and reliability 
of the test is weak. 
● Interpretation of quantitative data for each component of fitness is 
incomplete, has errors and demonstrates a weak level of 
understanding. 
● Priorities for training and future development are not fully identified 
and analysis of test results is basic. 
2 3–4 ● The three most important components of fitness selected are not fully 
justified and not all are relevant to the demands of the activity. 
● Fitness tests are selected and performed for each component of 
fitness but each is only partially justified based on the validity and 
reliability of the test. 
● Interpretation of quantitative data for each component of fitness has 
errors and demonstrates a limited level of understanding. 
● Identification of priorities for training and future development based 
on an analysis of test results. 
3 5–6 ● The three most important components of fitness selected are justified 
and relevant to the demands of the activity. 
● Fitness tests are selected and performed for each component of 
fitness and each is justified based upon the validity and reliability of 
the test. 
● Correct interpretation of quantitative data for each component of 
fitness demonstrates a good level of understanding. 
● Correct identification of priorities for training and future development 
based on a good analysis of test results. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
51 
 
Performance Analysis: player/performer 
Physiological component continued 
Level Marks Description 
4 7–8 ● Selection of the three most important components of fitness are 
substantially justified and fully relevant to the demands of the 
activity. 
● An appropriate fitness test is selected and performed for each 
component of fitness and each is substantially justified based on the 
validity and reliability of the test. 
● Correct interpretation of quantitative data for each component of 
fitness demonstrates a very good level of understanding. 
● Correct identification of priorities for training and future development 
based on very good analysis of test results. 
5 9–10 ● Selection of the three most important components of fitness are fully 
justified based on the demands of the activity. 
● An appropriate fitness test is selected and performed for each 
component of fitness and each is fully justified based on the validity 
and reliability of the test. 
● Correct interpretation of quantitative data for each component of 
fitness demonstrates a high level of understanding. 
● Correct identification of priorities for training and future development 
based on a highly structured analysis of test results. 
 
Performance Analysis: player/performer 
Technical component 
Level Marks Description 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–2 ● An appropriate core skill may not be identified. 
● Annotated images of the performer may not be used and analysis of 
the technical detail does not cover each of the three phases and 
result. 
● Annotated images may not be used and comparison between the 
student and a higher-level performer does not cover the three phases 
and result, demonstrating a basic level of understanding of the core 
skill. 
● Qualitative data may not be used to support a weak analysis of the 
strengths and weaknesses of the core skill. Key areas for 
development are not identified and justified. 
2 3–4 ● A core skill is identified. 
● Annotated images of the performer are used, but analysis of the 
technical detail for each of the three phases and result is inaccurate 
and lacks detail. 
● Annotated images are used, but comparison between the student and 
a higher-level performer for the three phases and result is inaccurate 
and lacks detail, demonstrating a limited level of understanding of the 
core skill. 
● Some qualitative data is used to support an analysis of the strengths 
and weaknesses of the core skill. Key areas for development are only 
partially identified and justified. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
52 
 
Performance Analysis: player/performer 
Technical component continued 
Level Marks Description 
3 5–6 ● An appropriate core skill is correctly identified. 
● Annotated images of the performer are used to make an analysis of 
the technical detail for each of the three phases and result. 
● Annotated images are used to make a comparison between the 
student and a higher-level performer for the three phases and result, 
demonstrating a good level of understanding of the core skill. 
● Qualitative data supports a good analysis of the strengths and 
weaknesses of the core skill to identify and justify key areas for 
development. 
4 7–8 ● An appropriate core skill is correctly identified. 
● Appropriately annotated images of the performer are used to make 
an accurate analysis of the technical detail for each of the three 
phases and result. 
● Appropriately annotated images are used to make a comparison 
between the student and a higher level performer for the three 
phases and result, demonstrating a very good level of understanding 
of the core skill. 
● Qualitative data supports a very good analysis of the strengths and 
weaknesses of the core skill to identify and fully justify key areas for 
development. 
5 9–10 ● An appropriate core skill is correctly identified. 
● Appropriately annotated images of the performer are used to make 
an accurate and highly structured analysis of the technical detail for 
each of the three phases and result. 
● Appropriately annotated images are used to make a valid comparison 
between the student and a higher level performer for the three 
phases and result, demonstrating a high level of understanding of the 
core skill. 
● Qualitative data supports a highly structured analysis of the strengths 
and weaknesses of the core skill to identify and fully justify key areas 
for development. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
53 
 
Performance Analysis: player/performer 
Tactical component 
Level Marks Description 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–2 ● An appropriate tactic may not be identified. 
● Annotated images of the tactic may not be used and analysis of the 
technical detail does not cover each of the three phases and result, 
demonstrating a weak level of understanding. 
● Annotated images and diagrams may not be used and analysis of 
how the tactic can be adapted to changing circumstances is 
incomplete. 
● Qualitative and/or quantitative data may not be used to support a 
weak justification as to why the adapted tactic is selected. 
2 3–4 ● A tactic is identified. 
● Annotated images and diagrams are used, but the analysis of the 
application of the tactic is inaccurate and lacks detail, demonstrating 
a limited level of understanding. 
● Annotated images and diagrams are used, but an analysis of how the 
tactic can be adapted to changing circumstances is inaccurate and 
lacks detail. 
● Some qualitative and/or quantitative data supports a justification as 
to why the adapted tactic is selected. 
3 5–6 ● An appropriate tactic is correctly identified. 
● Annotated images and diagrams are used to make an analysis of the 
application of the tactic, demonstrating a good level of 
understanding. 
● Annotated images and diagrams are used to make an analysis of how 
the tactic can be adapted to changing circumstances. 
● Qualitative and/or quantitative data supports a good justification as 
to why adapted tactic is selected. 
4 7–8 ● An appropriate tactic is correctly identified. 
● Appropriately annotated images and diagrams are used to make an 
accurate analysis of the application of the tactic, demonstrating a 
very good level of understanding. 
● Appropriately annotated images and diagrams are used to make an 
accurate analysis of how the tactic can be adapted to changing 
circumstances. 
● Appropriate qualitative and/or quantitative data supports a very good 
justification as to why adapted tactic is selected. 
5 9–10 ● An appropriate tactic is correctly identified. 
● Appropriately annotated images and diagrams are used to make an 
accurate and highly structured analysis of the application of the 
tactic, demonstrating an advanced level of understanding. 
● Appropriately annotated images and diagrams are used to make an 
accurate and highly structured analysis of how the tactic can be 
adapted to changing circumstances. 
● Appropriate qualitative and/or quantitative data supports a strong 
justification as to why the adapted tactic is selected for the 
individual/group. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
54 
Performance Analysis: coach 
Performance Analysis: coach 
Physiological component 
Level Marks Description 
 0 No rewardable material 
1 1–2 ● Justification of the three most important components of fitness 
selected is weak and they are not relevant to the demands of the 
activity for the individual/group tested. 
● Fitness tests are not selected and performed for each component of 
fitness and justification for each based on the demands of the 
individual or group is weak. 
● Interpretation of quantitative data for each component of fitness is 
incomplete, has errors and demonstrates a weak level of 
understanding in relation to the individual/group. 
● Priorities for individual/group training and future development are not 
fully identified and analysis of test results is basic. 
2 3–4 ● The three most important components of fitness selected are not fully 
justified and are not all relevant to the demands of the activity for the 
individual/group tested. 
● Fitness tests are selected and performed for each component of 
fitness but each is only partially justified based on the demands of 
the individual/group. 
● Interpretation of quantitative data for each component of fitness has 
errors and demonstrates a limited level of understanding in relation 
to the individual/group. 
● Identification of priorities for training and future development of 
individual/group based on an analysis of test results. 
3 5–6 ● The three most important components of fitness selected are justified 
and relevant to the demands of the activity for the individual/group 
tested. 
● Fitness tests are selected and performed for each component of 
fitness and each is justified based on the demands of the 
individual/group. 
● Correct interpretation of quantitative data for each component of 
fitness demonstrates a good level of understanding in relation to the 
individual/group. 
● Correct identification of priorities for training and future development 
of individual/group based on a good analysis of test results. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
55 
 
Performance Analysis: coach 
Physiological component continued 
Level Marks Description 
4 7–8 ● Selection of the three most important components of fitness are 
substantially justified and fully relevant to the demands of the 
activity for the individual/group tested. 
● An appropriate fitness test is selected and performed for each 
component of fitness and each is substantially justified based on the 
demands of the individual/group. 
● Correct interpretation of quantitative data for each component of 
fitness demonstrates a very good level of understanding in relation to 
the individual/group. 
● Correct identification of priorities for training and future development 
of individual/group based on very good analysis of test results. 
5 9–10 ● Selection of the three most important components of fitness are fully 
justified based upon the demands of the activity for the 
individual/group tested. 
● An appropriate fitness test is selected and performed for each 
component of fitness and each is fully justified based on the demands 
of the individual/group. 
● Correct interpretation of quantitative data for each component of 
fitness demonstrates a high level of understanding in relation to the 
individual/group. 
● Correct identification of priorities for training and future development 
of individual/group based on a highly structured analysis of test 
results. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
56 
 
Performance Analysis: coach 
Technical component 
Level Marks Description 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–2 ● An appropriate core element of coaching for the individual/group may 
not be identified. 
● Analysis of the core element of coaching is incomplete. 
● Comparison between the student and a higher-level coach is 
incomplete, demonstrating a basic level of understanding of the core 
element of coaching. 
● Qualitative data may not be used to support a weak analysis of the 
strengths and weaknesses of the core element of coaching. No key 
areas for development are identified and justified. 
2 3–4 ● A core element of coaching for the individual/group is identified. 
● Analysis of the core element of coaching is inaccurate and lacks 
detail. 
● Comparison between the student and a higher-level coach is 
inaccurate and lacks detail, demonstrating a limited level of 
understanding of the core element of coaching. 
● Some qualitative data is used to support an analysis of the strengths 
and weaknesses of the core element of coaching. Key areas for 
development are only partially identified and justified. 
3 5–6 ● An appropriate core element of coaching is correctly identified. 
● An accurate analysis of the core element of coaching is made but with 
errors. 
● Comparison between the student and a higher-level coach is valid, 
demonstrating a good level of understanding of the core element of 
coaching. 
● Qualitative data supports a good analysis of the strengths and 
weaknesses of the core element of coaching to identify and justify 
key areas for development. 
4 7–8 ● An appropriate core element of coaching is correctly identified. 
● An accurate analysis of the core element of coaching is made. 
● Comparison between the student and a higher-level coach is detailed 
and structured, demonstrating a very good level of understanding of 
the core element of coaching. 
● Appropriate qualitative data supports a very good analysis of the 
strengths and weaknesses of the core element of coaching to identify 
and justify key areas for development. 
5 9–10 ● An appropriate core element of coaching is correctly identified. 
● An accurate and highly structured analysis of the core element of 
coaching is made. 
● Comparison between the student and a higher-level coach is valid, 
detailed and structured, demonstrating a high level of understanding 
of the core element of coaching. 
● Appropriate qualitative data supports a highly structured analysis of 
the strengths and weaknesses of the core element of coach to 
identify and fully justify key areas for development. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
57 
 
Performance Analysis: coach 
Tactical component 
Level Marks Description 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–2 ● An appropriate tactic may not be identified for the individual/group. 
● Annotated images of the tactic may not be used and analysis of the 
application of the tactic by the individual/group is incomplete, 
demonstrating a weak level of understanding. 
● Analysis of how the tactic can be adapted to changing circumstances 
by the individual/group is incomplete. 
● Qualitative and/or quantitative data may not be used to support a 
weak justification as to why the tactic is adapted for the 
individual/group. 
2 3–4 ● A tactic is identified for the individual/group. 
● Annotated images and diagrams are used, but analysis of the 
application of the tactic by the individual/group is inaccurate and 
lacks detail, demonstrating a limited level of understanding. 
● Analysis of how the tactic can be adapted to changing circumstances 
by the individual/group is inaccurate and lacks detail. 
● Some qualitative and/or quantitative data supports a justification as 
to why the tactic is adapted for the individual/group. 
3 5–6 ● An appropriate tactic is correctly identified for the individual/group. 
● Annotated images and diagrams are used to make an analysis of the 
application of the tactic by the individual/group, demonstrating a 
good level of understanding. 
● Annotated images and diagrams are used to make an analysis of how 
the tactic can be adapted to changing circumstances by the 
individual/group. 
● Qualitative and/or quantitative data supports a good justification as 
to why the tactic is adapted for the individual/group. 
4 7–8 ● An appropriate tactic is correctly identified for the individual/group. 
● Appropriately annotated images and diagrams are used to make an 
accurate analysis of the application of the tactic by the 
individual/group, demonstrating a very good level of understanding. 
● Appropriately annotated images and diagrams are used to make an 
accurate analysis of how the tactic can be adapted to changing 
circumstances by the individual/group. 
● Appropriate qualitative and/or quantitative data supports a very good 
justification as to why the tactic is adapted for the individual/group. 
5 9–10 ● An appropriate tactic is correctly identified for the individual/group. 
● Appropriately annotated images and diagrams are used to make an 
accurate and highly structured analysis of the application of the tactic 
by the individual/group, demonstrating an advanced level of 
understanding. 
● Appropriately annotated images and diagrams are used to make an 
accurate and highly structured analysis of how the tactic can be 
adapted to changing circumstances by the individual/group. 
● Appropriate qualitative and/or quantitative data supports a strong 
justification as to why the tactic is adapted for the individual/group. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
58 
Performance Development Programme assessment criteria 
For the Performance Development Programme the assessment criteria for player/performer and coach 
is combined. There is separate assessment criteria for the planning and review and evaluation stages 
of the assessment. 
Player/performer and coach 
Performance Development Programme: player/performer and coach 
Planning 
Level Marks Description 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–2 ● A component of performance is identified based on the outcomes of 
the Performance Analysis. 
● Analysis and justification of SMART(ER) targets as appropriate to the 
student is incomplete. 
● Principles and methods of training are applied and used inaccurately. 
● Selection of test(s) to monitor progress demonstrates a basic level of 
understanding. 
2 3–4 ● A component of performance is identified based on the outcomes of 
the Performance Analysis. 
● Analysis and justification of SMART(ER) targets as appropriate to the 
student has some accuracy but is inconsistent and lacks detail. 
● Principles and methods of training are applied and used with some 
accuracy but with inconsistencies. 
● Selection of test(s) to monitor progress demonstrates limited level of 
understanding. 
3 5–6 ● An appropriate component of performance is correctly identified based 
on the outcomes of the Performance Analysis. 
● Accurate analysis and justification of SMART(ER) targets as 
appropriate to the student, but with inconsistencies. 
● Principles and methods of training are applied and used accurately but 
with inconsistencies. 
● Selection of appropriate test(s) to monitor progress demonstrates a 
good level of understanding. 
4 7–8 ● An appropriate component of performance is correctly identified based 
on the outcomes of the Performance Analysis. 
● Accurate analysis and justification of SMART(ER) targets as 
appropriate to the student. 
● Correct application and accurate use of the principles and methods of 
training. 
● Accurate selection of appropriate test(s) to monitor progress 
demonstrates a very good level of understanding. 
5 9–10 ● An appropriate component of performance is correctly identified based 
on the outcomes of the Performance Analysis. 
● Accurate and highly structured analysis and justification of SMART(ER) 
targets as appropriate to the student. 
● Detailed application and consistently accurate use of the principles and 
methods of training. 
● Accurate and effective selection of appropriate test(s) to monitor 
progress demonstrates high level of understanding. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
59 
 
Performance Development Programme: performer and coach 
Review and evaluation 
Level Marks Description 
 0 No rewardable material. 
1 1–2 ● Qualitative and quantitative data may not be used to support an 
evaluation as to the effectiveness of the programme in achieving its 
aim. 
● Analysis and evaluation of the reasons for changes in test scores are 
incomplete, without links to the aims. 
● Recommendations for future development are not based on an 
interpretation of the outcomes and demonstrate a basic level of 
understanding of the context of the student. 
2 3–4 ● Some qualitative and quantitative data supports an evaluation as to 
the effectiveness of the programme in achieving its aim. 
● Analysis and evaluation of the reasons for changes in test scores are 
unclear and inaccurate, with weak links to the aims. 
● Recommendations for future development are based on an incorrect 
interpretation of the outcomes and demonstrate a limited level of 
understanding of the context of the student. 
3 5–6 ● Qualitative and quantitative data supports a developed critical 
evaluation as to the effectiveness of the programme in achieving its 
aim. 
● Analysis and evaluation of the reasons for changes in test scores are 
clear, accurate and link to the aim, but have inconsistencies. 
● Well-chosen recommendations for future development are based on 
the correct interpretation of the outcomes and demonstrate a good 
level of understanding of the context of the student. 
4 7–8 ● Appropriate qualitative and quantitative data supports a 
well-developed critical evaluation as to the effectiveness of the 
programme in achieving its aim. 
● Accurate analysis and clear evaluation of the reasons for changes in 
test scores, linking to the aim. 
● Well-chosen recommendations for future development are based on 
the correct interpretation of the outcomes and demonstrate a very 
good level of understanding of the context of the student. 
5 9–10 ● Appropriate qualitative and quantitative data supports an assured, 
well-developed critical evaluation as to the effectiveness of the 
programme in achieving its aim. 
● Accurate, highly structured analysis and clear evaluation of the 
reasons for changes in test scores, linking directly to the aim. 
● Mature and perceptive recommendations for future development are 
based on the correct interpretation of the outcomes and demonstrate 
a high level of understanding of the context of the student. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
60 
Security and backups 
It is the centre’s responsibility to keep the work that students have submitted for assessment secure. 
The rules on storage also apply to electronic data. For example, centres should collect memory sticks 
for secure storage between sessions or restrict student access to specific areas of the centre’s IT 
network. 
For materials stored electronically, centres are strongly advised to utilise firewall protection and virus-
checking software, and to employ an effective backup strategy, so that an 
up-to-date archive of students’ evidence is maintained. 
Further information 
For up-to-date advice on teacher involvement and administration of non-examination assessments, 
please refer to the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ) document Instructions for conducting non-
examination assessments (new GCE and GCSE specifications) available on the JCQ website: 
www.jcq.org.uk 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
61 
Assessment Objectives 
 
Students must: % in GCE 
A Level 
AO1 Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of the factors that 
underpin performance and involvement in physical activity and sport. 
23 
AO2 Apply knowledge and understanding of the factors that underpin 
performance and involvement in physical activity and sport. 
23 
AO3 Analyse and evaluate the factors that underpin performance and 
involvement in physical activity and sport. 
24 
AO4 ● Demonstrate and apply relevant skills and techniques in physical 
activity and sport. 
● Analyse and evaluate performance. 
30 
Total 100 
 
 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
Component 
Assessment Objectives Total % for all 
Assessment 
Objectives AO1 % AO2 % AO3 % AO4 % 
Component 1: Scientific 
Principles of Physical 
Education 
15 15 10 0 40 
Component 2: 
Psychological and Social 
Principles of Physical 
Education 
8 8 14 0 30 
Component 3: Practical 
performance 
0 0 0 15 15 
Component 4: 
Performance Analysis and 
Performance Development 
Programme 
0 0 0 15 15 
Total for GCE A Level 23 23 24 30 100 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
62 
3 Administration and general information 
Entries 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for this qualification can be found in our UK 
Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations officers and is available on our 
website: qualifications.pearson.com 
Discount code and performance tables 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more than one GCE qualification with the same 
discount code will have only one of the grades they achieve counted for the purpose of the school and 
college performance tables. This will be the grade for the larger qualification (i.e. the A Level grade 
rather than the AS grade). If the qualifications are the same size, then the better grade will be counted 
(please see Appendix 12: Codes). 
Students should be advised that if they take two GCE qualifications with the same discount code, 
colleges, universities and employers they wish to progress to are likely to take the view that this 
achievement is equivalent to only one GCE. The same view may be taken if students take two GCE 
qualifications that have different discount codes but which have significant overlap of content. Students 
or their advisers who have any doubts about their subject combinations should check with the 
institution they wish to progress to before embarking on their programmes. 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special 
consideration and malpractice 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality policy requires all students to have equal 
opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our qualifications to be awarded in a 
way that is fair to every student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the Equality Act 2010) are not, when they 
are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in comparison to students who do not 
share that characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification and that this 
achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their peers. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be available in English. All student work must be  
in English. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
63 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with special educational 
needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to: 
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the assessment. 
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an individual disabled 
student without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access arrangements are the principal way in 
which awarding bodies comply with the duty under the Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable 
adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students will then know 
what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for assessment. 
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable adjustments where a 
person with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in undertaking an assessment. The 
awarding organisation is required to take reasonable steps to overcome that disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be unique to that individual and therefore might 
not be in the list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of factors, which will 
include: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding organisation, 
timeframes or affects the security or integrity of the assessment. This is because the adjustment is not 
‘reasonable’. 
Special consideration  
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student's mark or grade to reflect 
temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the examination/assessment, which has 
had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a material effect on a candidate’s ability to take an 
assessment or demonstrate his or her level of attainment in an assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to apply for access arrangements and special 
consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special consideration, 
please refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
64 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that compromises or seeks to compromise the 
process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the qualifications or the validity of 
results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in controlled assessments discovered before the candidate has signed the 
declaration of authentication form does not need to be reported to Pearson. 
Candidate malpractice found in controlled assessments after the declaration of authenticity has been 
signed, and in examinations must be reported to Pearson on a JCQ Form M1 (available at 
www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form should be emailed to 
candidatemalpractice@pearson.com. Please provide as much information and supporting 
documentation as possible. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies with 
Pearson. 
Failure to report candidate malpractice constitutes staff or centre malpractice. 
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and maladministration of our 
qualifications. As with candidate malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is any act that compromises 
or seeks to compromise the process of assessment or undermines the integrity of the qualifications or 
the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported immediately, before 
any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson on a JCQ Form M2(a) (available at 
www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form, supporting documentation and as much 
information as possible should be emailed to pqsmalpractice@pearson.com. Note that the final decision 
regarding appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More-detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the document General and 
Vocational Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and Assessments Policies and 
Procedures, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
65 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to comply with the requirements of Ofqual's 
General Conditions of Recognition. 
The raw marks for Components 1, 2, 3 and 4 in this qualification will be scaled by Pearson to represent 
the relative weighting of 40% for Component 1, 30% for Component 2, 15% for Component 3 and 
15% for Component 4. Any marks submitted by the centre should be in raw marks based on the 
assessment grids for Components 3 and 4. 
 
Component Weighting Raw marks Scaling factor Scaling mark 
Component 1 40% 140 1.000 140 
Component 2 30% 100 1.050 105 
Component 3 15% 40 1.313 53 
Component 4 15% 40 1.313 53 
 
This A Level qualification will be graded and certificated on a six-grade scale from A* to E using the 
total subject mark. Individual components are not graded. 
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum judged by Pearson to be of sufficient 
standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U result. 
The first certification opportunity for this qualification will be in 2018. The activities with a single 
asterisk in the physical activities tables on pages 26–27 will have a first certification opportunity in 
2022. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
66 
Student recruitment and progression 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this qualification. 
Progression 
Students who would benefit most from studying this qualification are likely to have a Level 2 
qualification such as a GCSE in Physical Education. 
Students can progress from this qualification to: 
● further study of physical education in higher education 
● vocational courses such as the BTEC National in Sport and Sport and Exercise Sciences 
● apprenticeships or other training 
● employment in a related sector. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
67 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Practical performance authentication sheet 69 
Appendix 2: Performance Analysis and Performance Development Programme (PDP) 
authentication sheet 70 
Appendix 3: Performance Analysis and Performance Development Programme (PDP) 
training record form 71 
Appendix 4: Performance Analysis and Performance Development Programme (PDP) 
core skills list 73 
Appendix 5: Recording practical performances 82 
Appendix 6: Glossary of key terms 87 
Appendix 7: Command word taxonomy 98 
Appendix 8: Calculators 99 
Appendix 9: The context for the development of this qualification 100 
Appendix 10: Transferable skills 102 
Appendix 11: Level 3 Extended Project qualification 103 
Appendix 12: Codes 105 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
68 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
69 
Appendix 1: Practical performance 
authentication sheet 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 9PE0/03 
Centre name: 
 
Centre number: 
Candidate name: 
 
Candidate number: 
Practical performance Mark 
awarded 
Comments 
[NB: Comment box expands as you start entering 
text] 
Activity /40  
Total /40  
 
Teacher declaration 
I declare that the work submitted for assessment has been carried out without assistance other than 
that which is acceptable according to the rules of the specification.  
Assessor name:  
Assessor signed:  Date:  
 
Candidate declaration 
I certify that the work submitted for this assessment is my own. I understand that false declaration is 
a form of malpractice. 
Candidate signed:  Date:  
 
Additional candidate declaration 
By signing this additional declaration you agree to your work being used to support Professional 
Development, Online Support and Training of both Centre-Assessors and Pearson Moderators. If you 
have any concerns please email: teachingPEandSport@pearson.com 
Candidate signed:  Date:  
This form can be adapted by centres as required.

 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
70 
 
Appendix 2: Performance Analysis and 
Performance Development Programme 
(PDP) authentication sheet 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 9PE0/04 
Centre name: 
 
Centre number: 
Candidate name: 
 
Candidate number: 
Performance Analysis and PDP start date: Performance Analysis and PDP completion date: 
 
Activity Mark 
awarded 
Comments 
[NB: Comment box expands as you start entering 
text] 
Performance Analysis: 
physiological component 
/10  
Performance Analysis: 
technical/tactical component 
/10  
PDP: planning /10  
PDP: review and evaluation /10  
TOTAL /40  
 
Teacher declaration 
I declare that the work submitted for assessment has been carried out without assistance other than 
that which is acceptable according to the rules of the specification.  
Assessor name:  
Assessor signed:  Date:  
 
Candidate declaration 
I certify that the work submitted for this assessment is my own. I have clearly referenced any sources 
used in the work. I understand that false declaration is a form of malpractice. 
Candidate signed:  Date:  
 
Additional candidate declaration 
By signing this additional declaration you agree to your work being used to support Professional 
Development, Online Support and Training of both Centre-Assessors and Pearson Moderators. If you have 
any concerns please email: teachingPEandSport@pearson.com 
Candidate signed:  Date:  
This form can be adapted by centres as required.  

 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
71 
 
Appendix 3: Performance Analysis and 
Performance Development Programme 
(PDP) training record form 
 
Centre number  
 
Centre name  
Candidate 
number 
 
 
Candidate 
name 
 
Chosen physical 
activity 
 
Role 
Please circle Player/performer              Coach 
Component of 
physical activity 
Please circle 
Physiological                 Technical                  Tactical 
Aim(s) of the 
session 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Date, time and 
location of 
session 
 
Start time  Finish time  
Context of 
session 
(individual/group 
/team) 
 
Description of training session (to include): drills (including progressions), conditioned 
practices/games; specific exercises; method/intensity/recovery 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
72 
 
 
This form can be adapted by centres as required.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
73 
 
 
Appendix 4: Performance Analysis and 
Performance Development Programme 
(PDP) core skills list 
The following list is for use with Component 4: Performance Analysis and Performance Development 
Programme. Students should use the list to identify one technical or one tactical skill to analyse. 
Students are permitted to identify skills from outside the list.  
 
Physical 
activity 
Technical skill Tactical skill 
Amateur boxing Jab 
Upper cut 
Hook 
Right cross 
‘Haymaker’ 
Boxing against southpaw 
Counter punching 
Fighting close 
Defensive boxing tactics 
Association 
football 
Outfield player 
Dribbling/ball control 
Turning, e.g. drag back 
Block tackle 
Side foot pass, heading for 
distance or goal 
Shooting – drive instep 
Jockeying 
Ball control – both feet 
Goal keeper 
Shot stopping 
Goal kicking 
Dealing with back passes 
Catching – crosses 
Free kicks – defending/attacking 
Defending corners, attacking from set 
pieces 
Overlap running 
Formations – analysis of one formation 

 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
74 
 
Physical 
activity 
Technical skill Tactical skill 
Athletics Each athletic event must be 
from the disciplines of Track 
and Field 
For the purposes of the 
Performance Analysis, each 
event can be broken down into 
4 phases (rather than 3 as 
specified in the assessment) 
Jumps: run up, take off, flight, 
landing 
Track events: head carriage, 
arm action, trunk, leg action 
Throw: initial stance, 
movement, release, follow 
through/recovery 
In addition, students may 
select starts or relay change 
overs as alternatives to 
segments of the running action 
Pacing 
Relay change overs 
Lane draws, 400 m 
Marathon, 1500 m tactics 
Use of pace makers 
Timing of when to enter competitions 
Throwing into/with wind 
Badminton Overhead clear 
Drop shot 
Short or high service 
Smash 
Drive 
All shots selected can be either 
forehand or backhand, but not 
both 
Rotation defence 
Doubles/mixed doubles  
Front/back 
Sides – in/out – rotation 
Basketball Jump shot 
Interception 
Effective long passing 
Chest pass 
Javelin pass 
Bounce pass 
Lay-up shot 
Post play 
Person-to-person defence  
Zone defence 
Attacking the zone 
Fast breaks 
Post play 
Rebounding 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
75 
 
Physical 
activity 
Technical skill Tactical skill 
Camogie Hurl 
Ground stroke 
The dribble 
Striking on the run 
Roll lift 
High block 
Striking form the hand 
The hook 
The low catch 
Breaking down a defence 
2 v 1 
Tackling 
Interceptions 
Restarts 
Canoeing Cross bow draw stroke 
Back strokes 
Forward paddle stroke 
Backward paddle stroke 
Sweep stroke 
Pivot turns 
White water strategies 
Portage strategies 
Pacing in marathon racing 
Swimming Breast stroke, back stroke, 
front crawl, butterfly: for the 
purposes of the Performance 
Analysis, each stroke can be 
broken down into 5 phases 
(rather than 3 as specified in 
the assessment): arm action, 
leg action, torso positioning, 
head positioning/breathing 
pattern, timing/rhythm of 
stroke 
Race turns 
Starts 
Relay 
Long distance racing 
Medley tactics 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
76 
 
Physical 
activity 
Technical skill Tactical skill 
Cricket Batting: 
Front foot off drive, cover 
drive, hook, forward defensive, 
reverse sweep 
 
Bowling: 
Off spin 
Leg spin  
Seam 
 
Wicket keeping: 
Keeping to spin 
Keeping to pace/seam 
Fielding the return ball 
Stumping 
Field placing to left-handed/right-handed 
pair of batsman, to spin, last 6 overs 
Power Play tactics 
Setting field – spin or pace 
Cycling Racing position in saddle (back 
alignment) 
Arm 
Leg action 
Sprint finish 
Tactics in peloton 
Pacing in pursuit events 
Breakaway – when/why 
Coping with inclines 
Dance  Any move or technique in 
ballet, tap, jazz, contemporary 
Choreography in group 
Choreography as an individual 
Use of space 
Motiffs 
Diving Swallow 
Plain header 
Half twist 
Somersault - front or back 
Somersault with half twist 
Entry into water 
Construction of a higher tariff dive 
Selection of dives to win competitions – 
when/why 
Field hockey Push pass 
Slap hit 
Jab tackle 
Indian dribble 
Reverse stick 
Flick 
Short corner defending 
Attacking short corner 
23 m hit – attack or defence 
Creating overlaps 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
77 
 
Physical 
activity 
Technical skill Tactical skill 
Gaelic football Crouch lift 
High catch 
Bounce 
Toe tap 
Punt kick 
Fist pass 
Near/hand tackle 
Block down 
Attack and defence from re-starts 
Set plays 
Overlaps 
1 v 1 
Golf Drive 
Long irons  
Short irons 
Chipping 
Putting  
Club selection to achieve par 
Draw and fade – application 
Coping with adverse weather – wind  
When to change clubs at the tee off 
Gymnastics Selection of one skill from a 
range of disciplines, e.g. 
Pommel horse 
Vault  
Floor 
Beam 
Rings 
Parallel bars 
Uneven bars 
Construction of floor routine 
Choreography floor routine 
Tariff build – vaults, horse, rings 
Handball Passing out of hand 
Catching 
Throwing 
Shooting 
Dribbling 
Counter attacking – fast break 
Moving up court 
Defence starts 
Team attack against organised defence 
1 v 1 situations attack 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
78 
 
Physical 
activity 
Technical skill Tactical skill 
Equestrian Show Jumping/Cross Country: 
Walk 
Track left 
Track right 
Trot 
Canter 
Clear fences/natural obstacles 
 
Dressage: 
Walk 
20 m circle 
Leg yield 
Lengthening stride, e.g. trot 
and canter 
Serpentine 
Shoulder in 
Trot 
Trot-halt transitions 
Tactics to complete a cross-country course  
Show jumping considerations under time 
restrictions 
Riding in adverse conditions 
Hurling Pick up and pass 
The ground block 
The chest catch 
The feint/side step 
The hook 
The ground flick 
Striking from the hand 
Set play free hit options 
Attacking formation 
Defending – set play 
Kayaking Reverse paddle 
Draw stroke 
Eskimo roll 
Forward paddle stroke 
Backward paddle stroke 
Reverse sweep stroke 
Sculling draw stroke 
White water strategies 
Portage strategies 
Pacing in marathon racing 
Lacrosse Pass 
Tackle 
Draw 
Cradle 
Catch 
Fast breaks formations 
Attacking/defending restarts 
1 v 1 
Creating space 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
79 
 
Physical 
activity 
Technical skill Tactical skill 
Netball Centre passes  
Shooting 
Bounce pass 
Chest pass 
Javelin pass 
Dodging 
Interceptions 
Attacking Centre Pass 
Defending Centre Pass 
Attacking Circle Rotation 
Clearing and Driving 
Zone defence 
Rock climbing Flagging 
Dynamic moves 
Static moves 
Holds, e.g. crimping/side pull 
Route assessment 
Move mapping 
Grade assessment 
Grade reassessment 
Rowing/sculling Rowing stroke 
Scull stroke 
Race strategies when in a: 
Coxless boat/coxed boat 
Single 
Double 
4s 
8s 
Rugby league Play the ball, tackle 
Front tackle 
Off-load pass 
Grubber kick 
Chip kick 
High ball catch 
Dummy run 
Scrum – set moves 
Penalty moves 
Attacking/Defending restarts 
Rugby union Rucking 
Mauling 
Lateral pass 
Tackle – front or side 
Kicking  
Out of hand 
Hand off 
Side step 
Lineout throw 
Scrum – hooking 
Lineout strategy 
Scrum strategy 
Back moves inside opposition 20 m 
Back row moves 
Defending the short side 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
80 
 
Physical 
activity 
Technical skill Tactical skill 
Skiing Parallel turns 
Schuss 
Snowplough turn 
Carved turns 
Traverses 
Carving on a black run 
Straight descent on a black run 
with a controlled stop 
Downhill race slalom tactics 
Freestyle – using the terrain 
Slope style 
Snowboarding Air to fakie 
Jumping moguls 
Ollies 
Spins 
Wheelies 
Butters 
Tactics to score max. marks in using 
halfpipe 
Squash Drive 
Drop shot 
Volley  
Boast 
Service – drive, lob 
All shots selected can be either 
forehand or backhand, but not 
both 
Dominating the ‘T’ 
Effective use of the front wall 
Playing the side walls 
Lob to back corners 
Table tennis Chop, flip, lob, smash, drive 
All shots selected can be either 
forehand or backhand, but not 
both 
Defending service 
Attacking service 
Counter attack 
Tennis Top spin serve  
Cross court  
Smash 
Lob 
Drop volley 
All shots selected can be either 
forehand or backhand, but not 
both 
Attacking/defending first service 
Mixed doubles tactics 
Doubles tactics 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
81 
 
Physical 
activity 
Technical skill Tactical skill 
Trampolining Swivel hips 
Cat twist 
Cork screw 
Barani 
Swivel hips 
Front drop 
Pike somersault 
Front drop to seat drop 
Front or back somersault 
Building a 10-bounce routine to score 
different tariff 
When to introduce somersaults 
Volleyball Dig or polish dig 
Volley 
Spike 
Smash 
Set 
Block 
Rotation – tactics for positions 2 and 4 
Fakes 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
82 
Appendix 5: Recording practical performances 
The following guidance applies to Component 3: Practical Performance when recorded evidence is 
required for assessment purposes. 
The purpose of the recording is to evidence all marks awarded. Therefore, all recordings must be made 
under controlled conditions. 
All recordings must be a complete and unedited recording of each performance. 
The camera must be positioned to ensure that the best possible and unobstructed recording is 
made of the performance, as seen by the marker/examiner. 
Each student should be introduced at the start of each performance. They should provide the following 
information: 
● student name and number 
● performance role. 
Before the assessment 
Video evidence should be produced in a standard/common format, such as a DVD, or a ‘free to access’ 
IT application, such as Windows Media Player or Quicktime. This is important as it will ensure that the 
teacher/assessor is able to use the video for assessment purposes, and that Pearson will be able to use 
the video where necessary/appropriate for moderation. 
Video evidence should clearly show all the assessment requirements of the selected physical activity 
and sport, which may require a combination of: 
● wide-angled shots, to give an overall perspective 
● closer range shots, to show aspects such as stance, posture and position 
● close-up shots to show specific requirements and techniques, for example grips in golf. 
Students being assessed must be easily identifiable. If the video shows the student in a team game, 
they should be clearly identifiable by a number, bib or a particular item of clothing. Centres must 
consider the responsibilities relating to the acquisition, and use, of alternative forms of evidence, for 
example the need for parental, or even student, consent relating to the use of video. 
The following checks should be made to resources before the recording: 
● ensure that the camera being used has the appropriate facilities for adjusting recorded sound levels 
– particularly if the camera is to be positioned some distance from the students  
● check that the picture recorded by the camera is clear enough to identify individual students 
● ensure that memory cards have sufficient space for each recording 
● check the camera battery is charged and a power lead is plugged in/available if needed. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
83 
Student identification 
● Plan students’ kits that will support identification on the recording, for example different coloured 
bibs. 
● Test how these kits look on camera from an identification point of view, particularly for students in 
large groups. 
● When watching work prior to the marking, check that students’ use of space can be captured by the 
camera. 
● Ensure that students state their name, candidate number and role at the start of each activity. 
● Students are assessed as individuals and, as such, it is vital that they can be identified individually 
throughout all assessed performances. 
Test the camera 
● Record a small section of work (perhaps a small game/conditioned practice) using the actual camera 
needed for the performance with students. 
● Check that an audio signal has been recorded and that students can be seen without obstruction and 
heard clearly. 
● Adjust camera position and/or recording levels as needed. 
At the beginning of the assessment 
● Position the camera as practised. 
● Film each performance, beginning with the student introductions. Each student must introduce 
themselves, with a clear pace and at audible volume, stating name, student number and role. 
During the performance 
● Check that recording is taking place for each group and that students are fully visible on screen. 
● Check available power/battery/memory, as needed, in between the examination performances. 
After the assessment 
● Check the recordings, ensuring that each group has been recorded with audio. 
● Ensure that all recordings are backed up as well as transferred to the appropriate format for 
assessment 
● The recording should be saved with the centre number, qualification title and the relevant 
component number. 
● Ensure that the recordings are kept secure until sent to Pearson and any backups kept safely until 
after Enquiries about Results. 
Videoing, with activity specific examples 
The following offers advice to centres in order to: 
● Ensure the camera position is conducive to capturing what the moderator sees 
● Balance the need to capture individual skills and team performance 
● Capture multiple candidates 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
84 
Guidance on videoing racket sports/ring (badminton (2 or 4 people), squash (2), 
table tennis (2 or 4), tennis (2 or 4), boxing (2)) 
In preparation for moderation, it is recommended that a centre groups candidates, which will enable 
each candidate to show their skills in their best light. If part way through the assessment a candidate 
is not able to show skills due the ability of their partner/opponent, the centre/moderator can re-
arrange the players.  
A centre may wish to use only one court/ring to moderate the candidates. Other candidates may 
practice on additional courts but would move onto the designated court when being formally 
moderated. 
When videoing the moderation, ideally, the video recorder should be positioned to capture the whole 
court (or at least be able to capture the majority of the court to show the skills and techniques of the 
individuals). The camera could be focused on one court where candidates enter, perform and then 
leave. The camera could remain stationary to capture all candidates participating in the skills in 
isolation/unopposed situations, conditioned practice(s) and a game. 
If it is not possible to capture the whole court/ring from a static position, the person recording will 
have to move the video recorder to ensure that evidence is captured to show the skills of all the 
candidates, e.g. a forehand showing the length. It is essential that all candidates on court are captured 
on the video almost all of the time of the recording. 
It is strongly recommended that when recording, the whole court is captured and the recording does 
not concentrate on one player at a time because evidence may be missed of other players and hence 
may not capture everything that the moderator sees. 
Once the assessment has taken place and evidence has been captured the candidates will leave the 
court and 2 (or 4) more candidates would move to that court and be assessed. 
Moderators will moderate either 2 (singles) or 4 (doubles) players at the same time and hence centres 
will video the same evidence.  
Guidance on videoing handball (7 players per team), volleyball (6 players per team)
 
In preparation for moderation, it is recommended that a centre group(s) candidates, which will enable 
each candidate to show their skills in their best light. If part way through the assessment a candidate 
is not able to show some skills due the ability of their team players/opponents, the centre/moderator 
can re-arrange the players.  
A centre may wish to use only one court to moderate the candidates. Other candidates may practice on 
additional courts but would move onto the designated court when being formally moderated. 
When videoing the moderation, ideally, the video recorder should be positioned to capture the whole 
court (or at least be able to capture the majority of the court to show the skills/ability of the 
individuals). The camera could be focused on one court where candidates enter, perform and then 
leave. The camera could remain stationary to capture all candidates participating in the skills in 
isolation/unopposed situations, conditioned practice(s) and a game. 
If it is not possible to capture the whole court from a static position, the person recording will have to 
move the video recorder to ensure that evidence is captured to show the skills of all the candidates, 
e.g. a defensive shot lands towards the back of the court. It is essential that all candidates on court 
are captured on the video almost all of the time of the recording. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
85 
We strongly recommend that when recording, the whole court is captured and the recording does not 
concentrate on one player at a time because evidence may be missed of other players and hence may 
not capture everything that the moderator sees. If this is not possible, we recommend the recording 
should capture one team at a time. This is not ideal as it may take more time.  
Once the assessment has taken place and evidence has been captured the candidates will leave the 
court and more candidates would move to that court and be assessed. 
Guidance on videoing individual activities 
This guidance relates to: dance, athletics, triathlon, cycling, diving, golf, gymnastics, equestrian, 
canoeing, rowing, kayaking, windsurfing, sculling, rock climbing, skiing, snowboarding and 
trampolining. 
If a candidate is being assessed as part of a group, we strongly recommend that the video is 
positioned to capture the whole performance, e.g. the whole stage for a dance routine. The camera 
could remain stationary to capture all candidates participating in the performance.  
If only one person is being assessed, e.g. a solo dance routine, equestrian, etc., the camera could 
remain stationary to capture the whole routine. Alternatively, the recording could follow the candidate 
throughout the whole performance.  
In relation to rowing, sculling, etc., evidence would have to be captured on the move. 
Guidance on videoing team games 
This guidance relates to: football, basketball, camogie, Gaelic football, hockey, hurling, lacrosse, 
netball, rugby league, rugby union and futsal. 
It is recommended that as much evidence as possible is captured during skills in isolation/unopposed 
situations and conditioned practices. Practices should be set up to demonstrate the skills of the 
individual, and hence only a very small amount of evidence may need to be captured during the full 
game. When videoing the skills in isolation/unopposed situations and conditioned practices, the camera 
could be focused on one area where candidates enter, perform and then leave. The camera could 
remain stationary to capture all candidates participating in these practices. 
Alternatively, the camera can pan as appropriate between areas where different groups of candidates 
(for example of differing abilities) are performing in these practices. 
For a whole team game, ideally the camera should be positioned to capture the whole game. However, 
as this may not be realistic, the camera may be positioned in the most appropriate position, e.g. the 
halfway line. The camera should pan to follow the game as it progresses, ensuring as much as possible 
is captured and that the camera follows the eye-line of the moderator. The moderator and person 
responsible for recording will liaise to ensure the optimal camera position. 
It is essential that if a team activity is shown on moderation day, a full game is played, although it is 
anticipated that almost all of the evidence will be captured during practices. 
Guidance on videoing cricket 
It is recommended that as much evidence as possible is captured during the skills in 
isolation/unopposed situations and conditioned practices. Practices should be set up to demonstrate 
the skills of the individual, and hence only a very small amount of evidence may need to be captured 
during the full game. When videoing the skills in isolation/unopposed situations and conditioned 
practices, the camera could be focused on one area (e.g. central strip/wicket) and candidates could be 
assessed separately as a bowler, batter, or wicket keeper (if applicable), during which time candidates 
enter, perform and then leave. The camera could remain stationary to capture all candidates 
participating in the practices. Separate practices could be set up to demonstrate the skills of a fielder, 
and the camera could remain stationary to capture all candidates participating in these practice(s). 
It is essential, if cricket is an activity shown on moderation day, that a full game is played, although it is anticipated 
that almost all of the evidence will be captured during the practices. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
86 
Child protection 
● Video only the candidate(s) who is the subject of the assessment and try as far as possible not to 
include incidental imaging of any other children, especially where they can be identified. 
● Do not video closer-up for longer than is necessary for the purpose of the recording. 
● Do not video in changing rooms. 
● Ensure that recorded materials are stored securely, and are password protected if 
stored electronically. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
87 
Appendix 6: Glossary of key terms 
The following is a list of all the key terms from the content for Components 1 and 2 and their standard 
definitions. This list is not exhaustive but is a guide to the terms students will be expected to know and 
understand for use in the examination papers. Terms from outside the list can be assessed. 
 
Key word Definition 
Achievement 
motivation 
A form of motivation which predisposes an athlete to engage in or avoid 
achievement-related situations. 
Actin Thin protein filament found in the myofibril. 
Adenosine tri 
phosphate (ATP) 
The energy currency of the body. Found in all cells; when broken down 
it releases stored energy. 
Advertising Using sport to promote goods or services for sale in order to make them 
more well-known/promote them. 
Aerobic With oxygen. 
Aggression  In sport, behaviour intended to harm another person, either 
physiologically or psychologically, outside the laws of the game. 
Agility Changing position quickly and with control without losing balance in 
response to a stimulus. 
Agonist Muscle primarily responsible for a given movement. 
All-or-none law Each muscle fibre within a motor unit either contracts or does not 
contract – there is no such thing as a partial contraction. 
Americanisation The influence American sport has on the values of sport in other 
countries. 
Anaerobic capacity The amount of energy obtained from anaerobic sources (creatine 
phosphate breakdown and anaerobic glycolysis) in a single bout of 
exercise. This is the greatest amount of energy that can be released 
from the anaerobic system. 
Anaerobic power The rate at which energy is produced. This is the fastest rate at which 
energy (ATP) can be produced anaerobically during an activity. If two 
athletes are equal in terms of movement economy, then the athlete with 
greatest anaerobic power will be the fastest. 
Angular momentum The amount of motion a body has during rotation.  
Angular momentum = angular velocity x moment of inertia 
Angular velocity The rate of movement in rotation.  
Antagonist A muscle that opposes an agonist for a given movement and prevents 
overstretching of the agonist. 
Anxiety A negative aspect of stress. Worries over the possibility of failure. 
Arousal The state of general preparedness of the body for action involving both 
physiological and psychological factors. 
Assertion The use of physical force that is within the rules or ethics of a sport and 
is therefore legitimate. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
88 
Key word Definition 
Assisted training Bungee running uses the recoil action of the bungee cord to pull you at 
a faster rate than you could achieve on the flat or in a voluntary sprint. 
Associative stage of 
learning 
The second stage of learning where a motor programme becomes 
established through practice and gross error detection, feedback and 
correction (Fitts and Posner). 
Athlete A player/performer in any activity. 
Attitude A predisposition to respond positively or negatively to a person, object, 
idea or situation. 
Attribution theory A theory of motivation which proposes that individuals formulate 
common-sense explanations for their own behaviour and future 
behaviour (Weiner). 
Autonomous stage of 
learning 
The third stage of learning, where a motor programme is performed 
‘automatically’ without conscious thought, thus becoming habitual (Fitts 
and Posner). 
Balance The ability to maintain your centre of mass over a base of support. 
There are two types: static and dynamic. 
Ballistic stretching The use of the momentum of a body or limb to force it beyond its 
normal range of motion. 
Behavioural anxiety Feelings of tension, agitation or restlessness as a result of anxiety. 
Bernoulli effect Relationship between velocity and pressure acting on an object as it 
moves through a fluid/air, for example a ball in flight. 
Bosman ruling The court ruling which confirmed sports performers became ‘free 
agents’ once their contract had been completed, thus changing the 
relationship between sports employers and players (1995). 
Bradycardia The reduction in resting heart rate that accompanies training. Resting 
heart rate below 60 beats per minute.  
Bracketed morality The suspension of ethics, or morality, during competition. 
British Empire The collection of countries ruled by Britain that subsequently formed the 
Commonwealth of Nations. This imposed forms of government, religion 
and culture on those nations considered less advanced or civilised. 
Broken time 
payments 
Payment made to performers to compensate for lost wages when taking 
time off work to play. 
Bungs Secret payments between an agent and a member of staff at a football 
club as part of football transfers.  
Centering Using deep breathing as a way to refocus your concentration. 
Centre of mass The point where all the mass of a body is concentrated and the sum of 
all the moments of inertia of the body is zero. 
Chunking Individual pieces of information are bound together to increase the 
amount stored in the LTM and facilitate recall. 
Circuits Performing different exercises in a sequence at different exercise stations. 
Clarendon 
Commission 
A royal commission set up in 1864 to investigate the great public 
schools. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
89 
Key word Definition 
Classical conditioning An unconditioned stimulus is paired with a conditioned stimulus to 
create a conditioned response (Pavlov). 
Closed loop A control system which appears to be self-regulating. A closed-loop 
system involves feedback and a reference of correction during 
movement. 
Closed skill A motor skill that is performed in a stable or largely predictable 
environmental setting. The movement can be planned in advance. 
Coaching style: 
Command 
A coaching style where the coach makes all the decisions, while the 
athlete is expected to follow directions. 
Coaching style: 
Guided discovery 
A coaching style where the athlete is guided in order to achieve an 
outcome. The athlete/learner discovers a solution through task 
experiences. 
Coaching style: 
Problem solving 
A coaching style where a problem is set and the athlete/learner finds 
the answer. 
Coaching style: 
Reciprocal 
A coaching style where both the coach and the athlete/learner work 
together and have equal input to achieve mutual advantage. 
Cognitive anxiety Thoughts, nervousness, apprehension or worry that a performer has 
about their lack of ability to complete a task successfully. 
Cognitive dissonance Tension resulting from having contradictory thoughts or beliefs about 
something or someone. 
Cognitive stage of 
learning (Fitts and 
Posner) 
The first stage of learning, where cognitive, intellectual ability, is 
paramount in forming a motor programme through internalising 
information, discovery and initial practice (Fitts and Posner). 
Colonial diffusion The spread of British values, religion, sport and recreation throughout 
the British Empire during the 19th century. 
Commercialisation The treating of sport as a commodity, involving the buying and selling of 
assets, with the market as the driving force behind sport. 
Commodification The quality or state where an item or individual becomes saleable. 
Concentric Contractions involving the muscle shortening while contracting, as 
happens in the bicep during the upward phase of a bicep curl, or in the 
tricep during the upward phase of a push-up. 
Continuous skill A movement with no clear beginning and end. One end phase of the 
movement blends into the start of the next phase of the cycle. 
Continuous training Long-duration training where intensity remains constant throughout. 
Coordination The ability of the body to link movements together, either with other 
movements or in relation to an external object. 
Cross training Training in two or more sports in order to improve fitness and 
performance in a main sport. 
Cult of athleticism A philosophy of physical, moral and challenging activities that fostered 
the development of character in young men. A term associated with 
sport development in the public schools of England in the 19th century. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
90 
Key word Definition 
Dehydration The condition which occurs when the amount of water in the body falls 
below normal, disrupting the balances of sugars and salt (electrolytes) 
in the body. 
Deviance Behaviour that falls outside the norms or outside what is deemed to be 
acceptable (can be positive or negative). 
Discrete skill A movement with a clear beginning and end. 
Displacement The shortest straight-line measurement between two points. 
Distributed practice A form of practice which includes periods of rest between trials. 
Eccentric Contractions involving the muscle lengthening while contracting 
(remember a muscle is not always relaxing while lengthening), e.g. the 
bicep brachii in the downward phase of the bicep curl or tricep brachii in 
the downward phase of the press-up. 
Electrolytes Ions (electrically charged particles) of salts such as sodium. 
Electrolyte balance The proportion/concentration of electrolytes within the fluids of the 
body. 
Encoding Storing information in memory. 
Endorsement  Giving approval to a product or service and receiving payment in return.  
Energy The capacity to perform work. 
Evaluation 
apprehension 
A sense of anxiety caused by the performer perceiving that he or she is 
being judged by those in the audience (Zajonc). 
Exercise economy Energy required to maintain a constant velocity of movement. This is 
the ability to transfer energy into movement. For example, if two people 
are running at the same speed, one of them could be using less energy 
than the other because they are more economic. 
Externally paced skill A skill for which the timing and form are determined by factors outside 
the control of the performer. 
Fartlek training A long-duration activity where the intensity varies. 
Feedback Any information received by the learner during or after a performance 
about the performance.   
Fixator A muscle which allows the prime mover to work more efficiently by 
stabilising the bone where the prime mover originates. 
Fixed practice A form of practice that involves defined responses to a stimulus in order 
to reinforce the correct movement. Practice conditions and requirements 
remain the same. 
Flexibility The range of movement available at a joint. 
Franchises An authorisation given by a league to own a sports team. 
Frequency Intensity 
Time and Type (FITT) 
This describes how often you train, how hard you train, how long you 
train for and which method of training you select. 
Gamesmanship Bending the rules/laws of a sport to gain an unfair advantage without 
actually breaking the rules, for example time wasting. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
91 
Key word Definition 
Generalised motor 
programme 
The basic form of each movement stored in the LTM. Modifications may 
be made to meet the specific parameters which define exactly how the 
movement is to be executed on each occasion. 
Gentleman amateur Wealthy and of a high social position; did not need financial 
compensation to participate in sport. 
Glycolysis Process of breaking down glycogen into pyruvic acid, producing some 
(4) ATP. 
Golden triangle The link between sports events, sponsorship by businesses and the 
media. 
Guidance Information to aid the learning of a skill. This information can be given 
visually, e.g. through demonstrations; verbally, e.g. by the coach 
explaining how to perform the technique; manually, e.g. by physically 
moving a performer into the correct position; and mechanically, e.g. by 
using a harness in trampolining. 
Hick’s Law Relationship between the number of choices and reaction time. The 
more choices there are available, the slower the reaction time; as the 
number of choices increases, so does the reaction time. 
Homefield advantage The concept that playing at home has an advantageous effect for the 
home team. 
Horizontal component The horizontal motion of an object in parabolic flight. 
Hull’s Drive Theory Theory of arousal that suggests a linear relationship between arousal 
and performance; as arousal increases so does performance. 
Hydration Being hydrated means the body has the correct amount of water in 
cells, tissues and organs to function correctly.  
Hypertonic drinks When the glucose osmolality of the drink is greater than blood. 
Hypotonic drinks  When the glucose osmolality of the drink is lower than blood. 
Imagery The process of imagining yourself in a particular environment or situation 
by using all relevant senses; creating vivid mental pictures of the situation. 
Individual needs A successful training programme will meet individual needs, which are 
personal fitness needs based on age, gender, fitness level and the sport 
for which the person is training. 
Industrialisation Mechanisation of the manufacturing industry.  
Intangible rewards External rewards that cannot be touched, for example cheering from the 
crowd, congratulations from the team or coach. 
Internally paced skill A skill for which initiation and timing is determined by the performer. 
Interval training Training with a work-to-rest ratio (W:R) that is repeated. 
Inverted-U hypothesis Theory of arousal that suggests that optimal performance occurs when 
the performer reaches an optimal level of arousal. 
Isometric The muscle stays the same length, e.g. when holding a weight in a 
static position. 
Isotonic When the muscle is moving. Tension remains the same but the muscle 
length changes. Can be further divided into concentric and eccentric. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
92 
Key word Definition 
Isotonic drinks When the glucose osmolality of the drink is the same as blood. 
Karvonen’s Theory A method of calculating target heart rate zone.  
Target heart rate = (target heart rate range × %Intensity) + resting HR 
Leadership style: 
Autocratic 
A task-structured form of leadership that discourages coach-athlete 
interaction; where the leader makes all the decisions. 
Leadership style: 
Democratic 
The leader shares decision making and is concerned with developing 
relationships. 
Leadership style: 
Laissez-faire 
The leader takes a lower profile role and lets others make the decisions. 
Concerned with developing problem-solving capabilities of group 
members. 
Learned helplessness The belief that failure is inevitable because of negative previous 
experiences. 
Local muscular 
endurance 
The ability of a muscle or specific group of muscles to sustain repeated 
contractions against a resistance for an extended period of time. 
Locus of causality The internal/external factors that a performer believes caused an event 
or outcome. 
Locus of control The extent to which a performer believes that the outcome was within 
their control (or not). 
Locus of stability  The stable/unstable factors that a performer believes caused an event 
or outcome. 
Long Term Athlete 
Development (LTAD) 
A programme designed to enable an athlete to move through stages of 
structured development. 
Long-term memory 
(LTM) 
The third compartment of the memory model; a relatively permanent 
storage of large amounts of information. Capacity is theoretically 
unlimited. 
Magnus effect The generation of a sideways force on a spinning object due to the 
pressure differences that develop as a result of velocity changes caused 
by the spinning object, e.g. a ‘curve’ on a served tennis ball. 
Mass participation The concept where large numbers of a population are involved in regular 
physical activity, regardless of ability. 
Massed practice Practice that occurs without rest between trials. 
Maximal aerobic 
fitness 
The maximum volume of oxygen that can be utilised in one minute. This 
is the upper limit of the aerobic system (the person’s VO2 max). 
Maximal strength The maximum force that can be developed in a muscle or group of 
muscles during a single maximal contraction. 
Maximum speed Time taken to move a body (part or whole) through a movement over a 
pre-determined distance OR speed (distance divided by time). This is 
the fastest sprint speed attainable. 
Mental practice The mental or cognitive rehearsal of a skill or movement, with no actual 
physical movement taking place. 
Merchandising The practice in which the brand or image from one product is used to 
sell another, usually by professional sports teams and their players. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
93 
Key word Definition 
Migration patterns of 
sporting labour 
The movement of sporting workers across the world. 
Moment of inertia The resistance of a body to a change of state when rotating. 
Motor neurones Nerves that carry information from the central nervous system to the 
skeletal muscles.  
Motor programme An abstract code or generalised series of movements stored in the long-
term memory. 
Motor units A motor neurone and the muscle fibres it controls. 
Movement time Time from the start of the response or movement to the completion of 
the movement.  
Muscular Christianity An evangelical movement where Christianity was linked to physical 
development. A healthy mind in a healthy body. 
Myofibril Part of a muscle fibre. Contains sarcomeres and the contractile proteins 
actin and myosin. 
Myoglobin Protein found in the sarcoplasm. It has a high affinity for oxygen and 
helps transport oxygen from the capillary to the mitochondria.  
Myosin Thick protein filament found in the myofibril. 
Need to Achieve 
(nACH) 
The motivation to succeed or attain particular goals; people with nACH 
personalities show approach behaviour. 
Need to Avoid Failure 
(nAF) 
The motivation to avoid failure; people with nAF personalities show 
avoidance behaviour. 
One repetition 
maximum 
The maximum amount of weight an individual can lift in a single 
repetition for a given exercise. 
Open loop A control system with a predetermined set of instructions to perform a 
motor skill while feedback or an error detection process is available. No 
compensatory adjustments during the performance of a motor skill can 
be made. 
Open skill A motor skill performed in an unpredictable, changing environment 
which dictates how and when the skill is performed. 
Operant conditioning A form of learning where an individual forms an association between a 
particular behavioural response and a particular reinforcement (S-R 
Bond). 
Optimal loading A rehabilitation programme to encourage faster recovery.  
Overtraining Where a person trains too much, too often or with too little time for 
recovery between training sessions, risking injury or illness or an 
imbalance between training and recovery. 
Oxbridge melting pot  Oxbridge or other universities became a ‘melting pot’ for games. 
Different games were taken to Oxbridge, where they mixed and became 
standardised version of game(s).  
Part practice A method of practice where the skill is broken down into sub-routines. 
Partial pressure The pressure a gas exerts in a mixture of gases. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
94 
Key word Definition 
Pay-per-view A system by which the television viewer can pay for a private telecast to 
their home of an event.  
Perception The process of acquiring, selecting and organising sensory information. 
Performance goals Goals related to performance, which can be judged against other 
performances.  
Periodisation Dividing an overall training programme into parts/periods that are 
designed to achieve different goals. 
Personality trait Relatively general and enduring personal characteristics which 
predispose a person to think and behave in certain ways in given 
situations. 
Phosphocreatine (PC) An energy-rich compound of creatine and phosphoric acid, found in 
muscle cells. 
Playing professional Workers of a low social position who needed financial compensation to 
afford to participate in sport. 
Plyometrics A movement involving an eccentric contraction immediately before a 
concentric contraction. 
Popular recreations Sporting activities before the industrial revolution. 
Power The rate at which force is produced. 
Pressure gradient When there is a difference in neighbouring or adjoining pressures. 
Prime mover The muscle that is directly responsible for creating the movement 
produced at a joint. 
Proactive transfer When a previously learned skill influences the way a new skill is learned. 
Process goals Goals over which an individual has complete control in order to deal with 
the technique/tactic needed to perform well, for example run at 5-
minute mile pace. They help focus attention and reduce anxiety.  
Progressive overload The need to increase training demands on the body in order to 
encourage it to adapt further. 
Progressive part 
practice 
A method of practice where the skill is broken down into parts, each 
part learnt and then linked and practised as a sequence. 
Proprioceptive 
neuromuscular 
facilitation (PNF) 
A muscle group is passively stretched, then contracts isometrically 
against a resistance while in a stretched position, and is then passively 
stretched again. 
Psychological 
Refractory Period 
The delay in response to the second of two closely spaced stimuli, e.g. 
dodging or feinting to go one way then going another. This is as a result 
of the single channel hypothesis: the PRP is due to the brain’s inability 
to deal with two stimuli simultaneously. 
Rate of Perceived 
Exertion (RPE) 
A subjective rating (on the Borg Scale) of how hard the performer thinks 
their body is working based on their physical sensations during exercise, 
such as increased heart rate, breathing rate, sweating and muscle 
fatigue. 
Rational recreation A term associated with the development of sport that occurred during 
the industrial revolution, resulting in the codification and organisation of 
modern sport. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
95 
Key word Definition 
Reaction time Time taken to make a decision. 
Recall schema A recall schema contains all the information required before a motor 
programme is selected and performed. This is based on the initial 
conditions and response specifications. 
Recognition schema A recognition schema contains information needed to make corrections 
to a faulty performance and remember the correct performance. This is 
based on movement outcomes and sensory consequences. 
Reinforcement Process by which a connection (bond) between a stimulus and a 
response is established and developed. 
Re-phosphorylisation Resynthesis of phosphate to convert ADP back into Phosphocreatine 
(PC) and ATP. 
Resistance training Exercising your muscles using an opposing force. 
Response time Time from the stimulus being given to the end of the response 
= reaction time + movement time 
Retroactive transfer When a newly learned skill influences a previously learned skill. 
Reversibility The reversibility principle dictates that athletes lose the beneficial 
effects of training when they stop working out. Conversely, it also 
means that detraining effects can be reversed when athletes resume 
training. 
Ringelmann Effect The diminishing contribution of each individual as group size increases.  
Schema theory A mental framework or outline which functions to provide the ‘building 
blocks’ of decision making and movement from stored information for 
motor programme formation. 
Selective attention The process of picking out and focusing on those parts of the display 
that are relevant to performance and filtering out irrelevant information. 
Self-confidence A person’s belief in their ability to achieve success. 
Self-efficacy A situation-specific form of self-confidence (Bandura). 
Serial skill A series of specific (discrete) movements chained together in a 
sequence. 
Shamateurism The blurring of the distinction between amateurs and professionals as a 
result of the commercialisation of sport, resulting in a compromise in 
the ethics associated with an amateur. 
Shin splints 
(Periostitis) 
Inflammation of the periosteum of the tibia brought on by exercise or 
overtraining.  
Short-term memory 
(STM) 
The second of the three memory compartments; a short-term store for 
information to be processed. The STM Links the STSS to the LTM. The 
capacity of STM is 6 to 9 items of information and duration is around 20 
to 30 seconds. 
Short-term sensory 
store (STSS) 
The first of three memory compartments involved in information 
processing as part of the perceptual mechanism concerned with initial 
storage of information, which may last only one second. 
Significant other People who are held in high regard by an individual. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
96 
Key word Definition 
Social facilitation The influence of the presence of others on performance. These others 
could be in the audience or performing in the same activity (called co-
actors). 
Social inhibition Decrease in performance due to the presence of others. 
Social loafing Loss of individual effort in a group due to fall in motivation or lack of 
personal identity. 
Somatic anxiety Physiological responses to a situation where a performer feels that they 
may be unable to cope (symptoms include sweaty palms, increased 
heart rate, feelings of nausea). 
Specificity The principle of training that states that sports training should be 
relevant and appropriate to the sport for which the individual is training 
in order to produce a training effect. 
Spectatorism The concept and process in establishing that those watching sport 
become an entity. 
Speed Time taken to move a body (part or whole) through a movement over a 
pre-determined distance OR speed (distance divided by time). 
Speed, agility and 
quickness (SAQ) 
Targeting neuromuscular adaptations to aid speed of muscle firing. 
Sponsorship Provision of funds or other forms of support to an individual or event in 
return for some commercial benefit. 
Sportsmanship Conforming to the rules, spirit and etiquette of a sport. 
State anxiety (A-trait) anxiety felt in a particular situation. 
Static stretching The use of momentum of a body or limb to force it beyond its normal 
range of motion. 
Strength The force that can be developed in a muscle or group of muscles during 
a contraction. 
Submaximal aerobic 
fitness 
The ability to maintain a high percentage of VO2 max for a prolonged 
period of time. 
Synergist A muscle which aids the action of a prime mover by stabilising the joint 
at which the prime mover acts. 
Tangible rewards Rewards that can be touched, held or have physical substance, for 
example medals, money or trophies. 
Thorndike Law: Effect A law which states that rewarding a behaviour increases the probability 
that the behaviour will be repeated and punishment decreases the 
probability of repetition. 
Thorndike Law: 
Exercise 
The more frequently a stimulus and response are associated with each 
other the more likely the particular response is to follow the stimulus. 
Practice makes permanent. 
Thorndike Law: 
Readiness 
Learning is dependent on the learner’s physical and mental readiness 
and capability to perform a skill which strengthens the S-R Bond. 
Trait anxiety (A-trait) an enduring personality trait, giving a tendency to view all 
situations as threatening. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
97 
Key word Definition 
Tropomyosin Thread-like protein that winds around the surface of actin. 
Troponin Globular protein on actin filament. 
Type I Also known as slow-twitch muscle fibres, they are suited to low intensity 
aerobic work and can be used for a long period of time without 
fatiguing. 
Type IIa These are fast oxidative glycotic muscle fibres which provide fast 
contraction and high force but fatigue easily. They are used in anaerobic 
work, but can be improved through endurance training to increase their 
resistance to fatigue.  
Type IIx 
(previously type IIb) 
These are fast glycotic muscle fibres which provide very rapid 
contractions and very high forces but fatigue very easily. They are used 
in anaerobic work.  
Underdeveloped 
moral reasoning 
The moral justification that aggression is acceptable because of 
mitigating circumstances that are unsound. 
Urbanisation Development of cities caused by the movement of the working 
population from rural areas (where jobs were disappearing as a result of 
mechanisation) to towns (where new jobs were being created in 
factories). 
Variable practice A practice environment that has alternative forms of activity, situations 
and conditions. 
Vertical component The upward motion of an object in parabolic flight curve. 
Visualisation Using the visual senses to create an image of a game situation in the 
mind and imagining how to cope successfully. 
VO2 max Maximum volume of oxygen that can be utilised in one minute. 
Wave summation An increase in contraction strength as a result of muscles that are 
rapidly stimulated being unable to relax between repeated stimulations. 
Weight training Training with weights against a (variable) resistance either on machines 
or with free weights. Learners will need to know the difference between 
the use of machines and free weights. 
Whole-part-whole 
practice 
A skill is practised as a whole then broken into parts, a part is practised, 
then the skill is practised as a whole again. 
Whole practice A complete skill is practised without breaking it down into sub-routines. 
World Anti-Doping 
Agency (WADA) 
The agency responsible for promoting, coordinating and monitoring at 
international level the fight against the use of drugs in sport. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
98 
Appendix 7: Command word taxonomy 
This appendix lists all the command words, along with their definitions, that may appear in the 
examination papers for Components 1 and 2. 
 
Command 
word 
Definition 
Assess An account of something, with the relative importance of ideas balanced 
against each other and an evaluative statement. 
Analyse Examine something methodically and in detail, typically in order to explain 
and interpret it. 
Calculate Obtain a numerical answer, showing relevant working. If the answer has a 
unit, this must be included. 
Classify Group or place on a scale. 
Compare Explore similarities and differences between two or more factors. 
Consider Analysis of a stimulus to make a judgement. 
Define Statement of translation. 
Describe An account of something without reasons. 
Discuss Explore issues, lines of reasoning and situations, articulating different 
viewpoints. 
Examine Justification or exemplification of a point using analysis or evaluation. 
Explain How and why, the meaning of something with reasons. 
Evaluate Use analysis to make a judgement. 
Give The recall of a fact or an example. 
Identify Establish or indicate who or what someone or something is. 
Interpret Explain the meaning of something with reference to a stimulus. 
Justify Articulate a viewpoint with reasons. 
Label Requires addition of named structures or features to a diagram. 
List The recall of a series of names or things. 
Name The recall of a word or set of words by which someone or something is 
known. 
Outline A brief outline of non-linked points. 
Plot Mark on a diagram using data given. 
State The recall of a fact or an example. 
Suggest Analysis and evaluation of a data-based stimulus. 
Summarise Express the most important facts or ideas about something. 
Using an example Often used with explain or describe, where an example is required to 
exemplify the point(s) being made. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
99 
Appendix 8: Calculators 
Students may use a calculator in assessments for this qualification. Centres are responsible for making 
sure that calculators used by their students meet the requirements highlighted in the table below.  
Students must be familiar with the requirements before their assessments for this qualification. 
 
Calculators must be: 
● of a size suitable for use on a desk 
● either battery or solar powered 
● free of lids, cases and covers that have 
printed instructions or formulae. 
Calculators must not: 
● be designed or adapted to offer any of these 
facilities: 
o language translators 
o symbolic algebraic manipulation 
o symbolic differentiation or integration 
o communication with other machines or the 
internet 
● be borrowed from another candidate during 
an examination for any reason* 
● have retrievable information stored in them. 
 This includes: 
o databanks 
o dictionaries 
o mathematical formulae 
o text. 
The candidate is responsible for the 
following: 
● the calculator’s power supply 
● the calculator’s working condition 
● clearing anything stored in the 
● calculator. 
 
*An invigilator may give students a replacement calculator. 
Further information can be found in the JCQ documents Instructions for conducting examinations and 
Information for candidates for written examinations, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
100 
Appendix 9: The context for the development of 
this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] and our ambition 
to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
● reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with those taken in high-
performing jurisdictions overseas 
● consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including subject associations, higher-
education academics, teachers and employers to ensure this qualification is suitable for a UK context 
● reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in their documents GCE 
Qualification Level Conditions and Requirements and GCE Subject Level Conditions and Requirements 
for Physical Education, updated in February 2020. 
 
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification Principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
● demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning and measuring higher-
order skills 
● rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and valid assessment tasks 
and processes, and generating confidence in end users of the knowledge, skills and competencies of certified 
students 
● inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students develop at different rates 
and have different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
● empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills, see Appendix 10. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
101 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
May 2014 
“ The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important change to the 
education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications will assist them in 
helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an ‘Expert 
Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or because of 
our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the world as diverse as 
Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification development 
process that has included: 
● Extensive international comparability of subject content against the highest-performing 
jurisdictions in the world 
● Benchmarking assessments against UK and overseas providers to ensure that they are at 
the right level of demand 
● Establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-specific 
expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
● Subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future oriented. The 
design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, meaning learner outcomes 
have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a learner’s 
success in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident that we have 
supported the development of qualifications that are outstanding for their coherence, 
thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as representing world-class best 
practice.
”  
  
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Lee Sing Kong 
Director, National Institute of Education, 
Singapore 
  
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
  
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
       
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
102 
Appendix 10: Transferable skills 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently flagged the need for 
students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable them to respond with confidence to the 
demands of undergraduate study and the world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines skills, or competencies, 
as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that can be learned and that enable individuals 
to successfully and consistently perform an activity or task and can be built upon and extended 
through learning.’ 
[1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected and evaluated seven 
global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this process, we identified the National 
Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the most evidence-based and robust skills framework. We 
adapted the framework slightly to include the Program for International Student Assessment (PISA) 
ICT Literacy and Collaborative Problem Solving (CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves: 
[2]  
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve general cognitive 
skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and communicate. [3]  
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, oral communication, written communication, assertive 
communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, service orientation, self-
presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared understanding, taking 
appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team organisation. 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work stress, adapting to 
different personalities, communication styles and cultures, and physical adaptability to various 
indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual teams, work 
autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and able to acquire new information 
and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher education, as well as 
the demands of the workplace, and are important in the teaching and learning of this qualification. We 
will provide teaching and learning materials, developed with stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
 
[1]  OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012) 
[2]  Koenig J A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop  
(National Academies Press, 2011) 
[3]  PISA – The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy (2011) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
103 
Appendix 11: Level 3 Extended Project 
qualification 
What is the Extended Project?  
The Extended Project is a standalone qualification that can be taken alongside GCEs. It supports the 
development of independent learning skills and helps to prepare students for their next step – whether 
that be higher-education study or employment. The qualification:  
● is recognised by higher education for the skills it develops  
● is worth half of an Advanced GCE qualification at grades A*–E  
● carries UCAS points for university entry.  
The Extended Project encourages students to develop skills in the following areas: research, critical 
thinking, extended writing and project management. Students identify and agree a topic area of their 
choice for in-depth study (which may or may not be related to a GCE subject they are already 
studying), guided by their teacher.  
Students can choose from one of four approaches to produce:  
● a dissertation (for example an investigation based on predominately secondary research)  
● an investigation/field study (for example a practical experiment)  
● a performance (for example in music, drama or sport)  
● an artefact (for example creating a sculpture in response to a client brief or solving an engineering 
problem).  
The qualification is coursework-based and students are assessed on the skills of managing, planning 
and evaluating their project. Students will research their topic, develop skills to review and evaluate 
the information, and then present the final outcome of their project. 
The Extended Project has 120 guided learning hours (GLH), consisting of a 40-GLH taught element 
that includes teaching the technical skills (for example research skills) and an 80-GLH guided element 
that includes mentoring students through the project work. The qualification is 100% internally 
assessed and externally moderated. 
How to link the Extended Project with Physical Education 
The Extended Project creates the opportunity to develop transferable skills for progression to higher 
education and to the workplace, through the exploration of either an area of personal interest or a 
topic of interest from within the Physical Education qualification content.  
Students can choose to research any aspect of physical education which they may already be studying 
or have an additional interest in. Students could focus on performance analysis, fitness or training 
methods. Alternatively, they could research trends in physical education or the importance of healthy 
lifestyles, which could help in applying for a university place.  
Through the Extended Project students will develop skills that support their study of physical 
education, including:  
● conducting, organising and using research  
● independent reading in the subject area  
● planning, project management and time management  
● defining a hypothesis to be tested in investigations or developing a design brief  
● collecting, handling and interpreting data and evidence  
● evaluating arguments and processes, including arguments in favour of alternative interpretations of 
data and evaluation of experimental methodology  
● critical thinking.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
104 
Types of Extended Project related to Physical Education 
● What are the long-term health effects of binge drinking?  
● How can training and diet improve flat-water canoe techniques?  
● How can sports fitness improve through football?  
Using the Extended Project to support breadth and depth  
In the Extended Project, students are assessed on the quality of the work they produce and the skills 
they develop and demonstrate through completing this work. Students should demonstrate that they 
have extended themselves in some significant way beyond what they have been studying in physical 
education. Students can demonstrate extension in one or more dimensions:  
● deepening understanding – where a student explores a topic in greater depth than in the 
specification content. This could be an in-depth exploration of one of the social or scientific topics in 
the specification. 
● broadening skills – where a student learns a new skill. This might be related to practical skills or 
theoretical understanding, and developing additional skills or techniques in these areas. 
● widening perspectives – where the student’s project spans different subjects. A student studying 
physical education with geography may wish to research the impact of major sports events and their 
impact on tourism and local businesses. 
A wide range of information to support the delivery and assessment of the Extended Project, including 
the specification, teacher guidance for all aspects, an editable scheme of work and exemplars for all 
four approaches, can be found on our website. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Physical Education 
Specification – Issue 3 – September 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
105 
Appendix 12: Codes 
 
 
*https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/16-to-19-qualifications-discount-codes-and-point-scores 
 
Type of code Use of code Code 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for performance 
tables is assigned a discount code indicating 
the subject area to which it belongs. 
Discount codes are published by the DfE. 
Please see the GOV.UK 
website* 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an Ofqual 
Regulated Qualifications Framework (RQF) 
code. 
The RQF code is known as a Qualification 
Number (QN). This is the code that features 
in the DfE Section 96 and on the LARA as 
being eligible for 16–18 and 19+ funding, 
and is to be used for all qualification funding 
purposes. The QN will appear on students’ 
final certification documentation. 
The QN for this 
qualification is: 
601/8278/7 Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to enter 
students for a qualification. Centres will 
need to use the entry codes only when 
claiming students’ qualifications. 
Advanced GCE – 9PE0 
Component codes These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be 
entered for individual components. 
Component 1: 9PE0/01 
Component 2: 9PE0/02 
Component 3: 9PE0/03 
Component 4: 9PE0/04 
DB170924 9781446927106_GCE2016_AL_PE_ISS3.DOC.1–112/0 
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office:  80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121
