Specification
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian
(listening, reading and writing) (9PN0)
First teaching from September 2018
First certification from 2020 Issue 1
A Level 
Persian

 
 
 
Contents 
1 Introduction 2 
Why choose the Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian? 2 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this qualification 3 
Qualification at a glance 4 
2 Subject content and assessment information 7 
Themes, sub-themes and research subjects 8 
Paper 1: Translation into English, reading comprehension and writing (research 
question) in Persian 11 
Paper 2: Translation into Persian and written response to works 22 
Paper 3: Listening, reading and writing in Persian 30 
Assessment Objectives 37 
3 Administration and general information 38 
Entries 38 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special consideration and 
malpractice 38 
Student recruitment and progression 41 
Appendix 1: Prescribed literary texts and films 45 
Appendix 2: Grammar list 46 
Appendix 3: The context for the development of this qualification 48 
Appendix 4: Transferable skills 50 
Appendix 5: Level 3 Extended Project qualification 51 
Appendix 6: Codes 53 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) 
 – Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
2 
1 Introduction 
Why choose the Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE 
in Persian? 
We believe languages should appeal to all students. Our new Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE 
in Persian (listening, reading and writing) has been developed to inspire all students to 
appreciate the language, literature, film and culture of Persian-speaking countries. 
We have listened to feedback from the languages community – subject associations, 
academics and advisors, together with teachers and students – and have designed a 
motivating course of study that will enable your students to develop advanced level 
knowledge and understanding of the Persian language and the culture of Persian-speaking 
countries, as well as practical and valuable language and transferable study skills. This 
qualification will help to prepare students for higher education and enhance their 
employability profile. 
Inspiring and engaging themes – our qualification features familiar and popular themes, 
as well as some new content that provides clear links to some of the most fundamental and 
interesting aspects of the culture of Iran and Afghanistan. 
Popular literary texts and films – we offer a choice of literary texts and films that includes 
contemporary and more classic titles. 
Rewards creativity – our assessments place an emphasis on communication and grammar, 
as well as giving students plenty of opportunities to apply their knowledge independently and 
creatively. Clear mark schemes encourage students to develop ideas, to use language to 
persuade and analyse, and to give critical responses in their writing. 
Clear and coherent structure – our qualification has a straightforward structure with four 
engaging themes. The four themes are studied alongside two works (either two literary texts 
or one literary text and one film) and are assessed through three externally-examined 
papers.  
Manageable content – we have worked closely with teachers and students to ensure that 
our content is manageable and appropriate so that you and your students can be confident 
that you have enough time to cover what you need to cover at the appropriate depth. 
Continuous progression – our content builds on the understanding developed at  
Key Stage 4 and gives students the opportunity to learn and apply important transferable 
skills in critical thinking and analysis, enabling them to make a smooth transition to the next 
level of study. However, students do not need to have studied GCSE Persian to follow this 
course. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
3 
Supporting you in planning and implementing 
this qualification 
Our Getting Started Guide, available on our website, gives you an overview of this new  
A Level qualification to help you get to grips with the changes to content and assessment 
and to help you understand what these changes mean for you and your students. 
Teaching and learning 
There will be lots of free teaching and learning support to help you deliver the new 
qualification, including: 
● support with teaching literature and film 
● support for the independent research. 
ResultsPlus 
ResultsPlus provides the most detailed analysis available of your students’ exam 
performance. It can help you identify the topics and skills where further learning would 
benefit your students. 
Get help and support 
Our subject advisor service and our online community will ensure that you receive help and 
guidance from us, and that you can share ideas and information with other teachers. You can 
sign up to receive e-newsletters to keep up to date with qualification updates and product 
and service news. 
Learn more at qualifications.pearson.com 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) 
 – Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
4 
Qualification at a glance 
Content and assessment overview 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) 
consists of three externally-examined papers that assess listening, reading and writing skills. 
These assessments will be set and marked by Pearson. 
Students must complete all assessments in May/June in any single year.  
 
Paper 1: Translation into English, reading comprehension and writing  
(research question) in Persian  (*Paper code: 9PN0/01) 
Written examination: 2 hours 30 minutes 
40% of the qualification 
80 marks 
Content overview 
Section A draws on vocabulary and structures from any one of the sub-themes within the 
four themes listed on pages 8–10. 
Section B draws on vocabulary and structures across all sub-themes from within the four 
themes listed on pages 8–10.  
Section C is based on independent research selected and carried out by the student.  
The research must be based on one of the research subjects listed on pages 8–10. All 
aspects of the chosen research subject must be studied. Students use information from their 
research findings and from an unseen written text to answer the question. 
Assessment overview 
During the examination, students are not allowed access to a dictionary or to any 
documentation related to their research. 
The examination is made up of: 
Section A: Translation into English (20 marks) 
An unseen passage to be translated from Persian into English. 
Section B: Reading (20 marks) 
A reading assessment based on a variety of text types and genres. Students must respond to 
a series of comprehension questions. 
Section C: Writing (research question) (40 marks) 
A reading and writing question based on an aspect of the chosen research subject. Students 
read a text and then answer a question, incorporating information and ideas from both the 
text and their research findings. 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
5 
Paper 2: Translation into Persian and written response to works  
 (*Paper code: 9PN0/02) 
Written examination: 2 hours and 40 minutes 
30% of the qualification 
110 marks 
Content overview 
Section A draws on vocabulary and structures from any one of the sub-themes within the 
four themes listed on pages 8–10.  
Sections B and C draw on the study of two discrete Persian works: either two literary texts or 
one literary text and one film. The works must be taken from the list provided in  
Appendix 1: Prescribed literary texts and films. The literary texts listed include novels and 
non-fiction. All films are feature length. 
Assessment overview 
This paper includes a translation exercise and two essays on either two literary texts or on 
one literary text and one film (students must not answer questions on two films). 
During the examination, students are not allowed access to a dictionary or to any 
documentation relating to the works. 
Section A: Translation into Persian (20 marks) 
Students translate an unseen passage from English into Persian. 
Section B: Written response to works (literary texts) (45 marks) 
Students must write an extended response on either one or two of the literary texts listed in 
Appendix 1: Prescribed literary texts and films. 
Students select one question from a choice of two for each of their chosen literary text(s).  
If they answer questions on two literary texts, then they do not complete Section C. 
Section C: Written response to works (films) (45 marks) 
Students who answer only one question from a literary text in Section B must write an 
extended response on one of the films listed in Appendix 1: Prescribed literary texts  
and films. 
Students select one question from a choice of two on their chosen film. 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) 
 – Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
6 
Paper 3: Listening, reading and writing in Persian (*Paper code: 9PN0/03) 
Written examination: 2 hours and 15 minutes 
30% of the qualification 
60 marks 
Content overview 
Section A draws on vocabulary and structures across all sub-themes within the four themes 
listed on pages 8–10.  
Section B draws on vocabulary and structures from any one of the sub-themes within the 
four themes listed on pages 8–10. There is one unseen listening source and one unseen 
written source to which students must respond. 
Assessment overview 
This paper includes listening comprehension and a question that assesses listening, reading 
and writing skills together. 
During the examination, students are not allowed access to a dictionary. 
Section A: Listening comprehension (30 marks) 
A listening assessment based on a recording that features male and female Persian speakers. 
Students will respond to comprehension questions that are based on a variety of contexts 
and sources. 
The listening audio files for the sample assessment materials are available on the  
Pearson website. 
Section B: Listening, reading and writing question (30 marks) 
Students summarise a listening source and a text that are based on the same sub-theme. 
They then evaluate the points of view in both sources, stating which views they agree with 
and why. 
 
*See Appendix 6: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to this 
qualification. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
7 
2 Subject content and assessment 
information 
Qualification aims and objectives 
The aims and objectives of this qualification are to enable students to: 
● enhance their linguistic skills and promote and develop their capacity for critical thinking 
on the basis of their knowledge and understanding of the language, culture and society of 
Iran and Afghanistan  
● develop control of the language system to convey meaning, using written skills, including 
an extended range of vocabulary, for both practical and intellectual purposes as 
increasingly confident, accurate and independent users of Persian 
● develop their ability to understand language in spoken and written form and to interact 
effectively with users of Persian in writing  
● develop language skills and strategies, including comprehension strategies such as using 
contextual clues and cues, and communication strategies to build fluency and confidence 
in writing 
● develop speaking skills as part of their courses of study, although there will be no 
assessment of those skills 
● engage critically with intellectually stimulating texts, films and other materials in the 
original language, developing an appreciation of sophisticated and creative uses of Persian 
and understanding them within their cultural and social context 
● develop knowledge about matters central to the society and culture, past and present, of 
Iran and Afghanistan 
● translate texts from English into Persian, and from Persian into English 
● foster their ability to learn other languages 
● equip themselves with transferable skills such as autonomy, resourcefulness, creativity, 
critical thinking, and linguistic, cultural and cognitive flexibility that will enable them to 
proceed to further study or employment 
● develop their capacity for critical and analytical thinking through the language of study 
● develop as independent researchers through the language of study. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) 
 – Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
8 
Themes, sub-themes and research subjects 
Papers 1, 2 and 3 will be based on content from the following four themes. 
The four themes address a range of content related to society past and present, as well as 
aspects of the political and artistic culture of Iran and Afghanistan. 
Themes 1, 3 and 4 focus on aspects of the society of Iran only. Theme 2 focuses on the 
artistic culture and politics in Iran and Afghanistan. 
Each theme is broken into two sub-themes and a research subject (highlighted in bold).  
Each sub-theme and research subject is divided into a series of aspects. 
Students are required to select only one research subject for Paper 1 and must base their 
research on one country only. For their research, students must cover all three aspects of 
the research subject. For Themes 1, 3 and 4, students must focus on Iran only; for Theme 2, 
students must focus on either Iran or Afghanistan. Teachers should consider cultural 
sensitivities when giving guidance to students on selecting an appropriate research subject. 
See pages 13–14 for further guidance on independent research. 
 
ﻣوﺿوع ۱ :رات در ﺟﺎﻣﻌﮫﺗﻐﯾﯾ  ﻣﻌﺎﺻر  
 
Theme 1 is set in the context of Iran. This theme covers society past and present. If the 
research subject is chosen from this Theme, it must focus on Iran only. 
 
• ﺗﻐﯿﯿﺮات در ﺳﺎﺧﺘﺎر ﺧﺎﻧﻮاده 
ھﺎی ﭘﯾﺷﯾن ؛ ﺟﺎﯾﮕﺎه زﻧﺎن و ﻣردان در رواﺑط؛ ﻧﻘش ﻧﺳلﺗﻐﯾﯾر ﻧﮕرش ﻧﺳﺑت ﺑﮫ ازدواج و 
ﺧﺎﻧواده. 
• آﻣوزش و ﭘرورش 
ﻓرار ﻣﻐزھﺎھﺎی دوﻟﺗﯽ؛ ﮔﺳﺗرش ﺗﺣﺻﯾﻼت داﻧﺷﮕﺎھﯽ ﺧﺻوﺻﯽ و ﭘوﻟﯽ؛ دﺑﯾرﺳﺗﺎن .
ﻣوﺿوع ﺗﺣﻘﯾق  
• ھﺎی ﮐﺎری ﺑرای ﺟواﻧﺎنﻓرﺻت 
ﮔذارﺗﻐﯾﯾر و  ھﺎی ﺟدﯾد؛  ﻣﮭﺎﺟرت از ﻣﻧﺎطق روﺳﺗﺎﯾﯽ و روی ھﺎی ﺳﻧﺗﯽ ﺑﮫ ﺷﻐلاز ﺣرﻓﮫ
آوردن ﺑﮫ ﮐﺎرھﺎی ﺷﮭری و اﺛرات آن؛ ﻣﺷﮑل ﺑﯾﮑﺎری. 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
9 
 
: رﺳﺎﻧﮫ ھﺎ و ﻓرھﻧﮓ۲ﻣوﺿوع 
 
Theme 2 is set in the context of Iran and Afghanistan. This theme covers artistic culture past 
and present (music and festivals and traditions) and political culture (media). If the research 
subject is chosen from this theme, it must focus on either Iran or Afghanistan. 
 
• ﻣﻮﺳﯿﻘﯽ 
ﺗﻐﯾﯾرات و ﺗﺣوﻻت  ھﺎی ﻓرھﻧﮓﺗﺄﺛﯾر ؛ ﻣوﺳﯾﻘﯽ ھﺎی ﻣﺷﮭور؛ در ﻣوﺳﯾﻘﯽ و آﻻت ﻣوﺳﯾﻘﯽ
ﻣوﺳﯾﻘﯽ.دﯾﮕر ﺑر  
• ھﺎھﺎ و ﺳﻧتﺟﺷﻧواره 
ھﺎ و روﯾﮑردھﺎ درﺑﺎره ﺟﺷﻧوارهﺗﻐﯾﯾرھﺎی ﻣﻠﯽ و ﻓﺻﻠﯽ؛  آداب و رﺳوم ﺑﺎﺳﺗﺎﻧﯽ ؛ ﺟﺷﻧواره
رﺳوم. 
 
 ﻣوﺿوع ﺗﺣﻘﯾق 
• ھﺎی اﺟﺗﻣﺎﻋﯽ و اﯾﻧﺗرﻧﺗﯽﺗوﺳﻌﮫ رﺳﺎﻧﮫ 
ﻧﻣﺎﯾش ﮔﺳﺗرش ھﺎی اﺟﺗﻣﺎﻋﯽ و آﻧﻼﯾن در ﺷﯾوه زﻧدﮔﯽ؛ ھﺎی ﻏرﺑﯽ؛ ﺗﺄﺛﯾر رﺳﺎﻧﮫارزش 
و اﻧﺗﻘﺎل اﺧﺑﺎردﺳﺗرﺳﯽ ﺑﮫ اطﻼﻋﺎت  .
 
 
 
ی ﻓﺎرﺳﯽ زﺑﺎنھﺎی ﮔوﻧﺎﮔون ﺟﺎﻣﻌﮫ: وﺿﻌﯾت و ﺟﻧﺑﮫ۳ﻣوﺿوع  
 
Theme 3 is set in the context of Iran. This theme covers society past and present. If the 
research subject is chosen from this Theme, it must focus on Iran only. 
 
• ﺷرﮐت در ﻣﺳﺎﺋل زﯾﺳت ﻣﺣﯾطﯽ 
دﮔﯽ و ﺗﺄﺛﯾر ﺗﻐﯾﯾر ﻧﮕرش ﻧﺳﺑت ﺑﮫ ﻣﺳﺎﺋل زﯾﺳت ﻣﺣﯾطﯽ؛ ﭘذﯾرﻓﺗن اﻧواع ﻣﺧﺗﻠف اﻧرژی؛ آﻟو
آن ﺑر ﺟﺎﻣﻌﮫ اﯾران 
• ﺛﯾر آن ﺑر ﺟﺎﻣﻌﮫﺄﮔردﺷﮕری و ﺗ 
ھﺎی ﺛﺑت ﺷده ﺗوﺳط ﯾوﻧﺳﮑو و اھﻣﯾت ھﺎی ﮔردﺷﮕری ﻓرھﻧﮕﯽ و طﺑﯾﻌﯽ؛ ﺳﺎﯾتﺟﺎذﺑﮫ 
دوﻟتھﺎ؛ ﺗﺄﺛﯾر ﮔردﺷﮕری ﺑر ﺟﺎﻣﻌﮫ؛ ﻧﻘش ﺣﻔظ آن. 
ﻣوﺿوع ﺗﺣﻘﯾق 
• اﻧﺗظﺎرات زﻧﺎن در ﺟﺎﻣﻌﮫ 
دﺳﺗرﺳﯽ ﺑﮫ آﻣوزش؛ ﺣرﮐت ﺑﮫ ﺳوی ﺑراﺑری، ﻣﺷﺎرﮐت زﻧﺎن در ﭘﯾﺷﺑرد ھﻧر .
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) 
 – Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
10 
 
٤ﻣوﺿوع ﺗﺄﺛﯾرات ﺳﯾﺎﺳﯽ و ھﻧری ﺑر ﺟﺎﻣﻌﮫ در ﮔذﺷﺗﮫ و اﻣروز  
 
Theme 4 is set in the context of Iran. This theme covers political culture (war and migration) 
and artistic culture (changing approaches to art) past and present. If the research subject is 
chosen from this Theme, it must focus on Iran only. 
 
• ﺟﻨﮓ اﯾﺮان و ﻋﺮاق در ﺳﺎل ھﺎی ۱۰۸۹  -۸۸۹۱  
؛ﺟﻧﮓ و ﺗﺄﺛﯾر آن ﺑر ﺟﺎﻣﻌﮫ و ﻣردم  ﺗﺄﺛﯾر آن ﺑر ادﺑﯾﺎت و ﻓﯾﻠم؛ ﺗﺄﺛﯾر ﻣﮭﺎﺟرت ﺑر ﺟﺎﻣﻌﮫ و 
اﻗﺗﺻﺎد .
• ﺗﻐﯾﯾر ﻧﮕرش ﺑﮫ ھﻧر 
ی ﻣﻌﻣﺎری ﻣدرنﺗوﺳﻌﮫﺻﻧﺎﯾﻊ دﺳﺗﯽ ﻣدرن و ﺑﺎﺳﺗﺎﻧﯽ؛ ﺗﺄﺛﯾر ھﻧر اﺳﻼﻣﯽ ؛  .
 
ﻣوﺿوع ﺗﺣﻘﯾق 
• ھﺎی ھﻧر ﻣﻌﺎﺻر اﯾرانﺟﻧﺑﮫ 
آﺛﺎر و اھﻣﯾت ھﻧری ﺳﻘﺎﺧﺎﻧﮫ )؛ آﺛﺎر و ﺗﺄﺛﯾر ﻣﺣﻣد ﻏﻔﺎری )ﮐﻣﺎل اﻟﻣﻠﮏ( - ۷۹۱۰۰۵۹۱(؛ 
ﺗﺄﺛﯾر ھﻧر اروﭘﺎﯾﯽ. 
  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
11 
Paper 1: Translation into English, reading 
comprehension and writing (research question) 
in Persian 
Content 
Students will be assessed on their ability to translate accurately from Persian into English, on 
their understanding of written Persian from a variety of types of authentic texts, and on their 
knowledge and understanding of culture and society through research. 
Texts vary in length and include an extended passage. All written materials are culturally 
relevant to Iran and Afghanistan (depending on where they are covered within the themes) 
and are drawn from the four themes (listed on pages 8–10). 
Students should be able to: 
● translate from Persian into English 
● understand main points and detail from written material 
● infer meaning from complex written material 
● assimilate and use information from written sources 
● develop research skills, demonstrating the ability to initiate and conduct individual 
research using a range of authentic sources in Persian 
● use information from research findings and an unseen text to put forward an argument, 
draw conclusions and demonstrate knowledge and understanding of the research subject. 
Although speaking skills are not directly assessed in the qualification, students should be 
encouraged to develop their speaking skills in Persian during their course of study. 
Translation into English 
The content of the translation will be taken from any one of the sub-themes within the four 
themes. 
Reading 
The reading section will be made up of texts containing both factual and abstract content and 
will be authentic or adapted from authentic sources. The texts will include contemporary, 
historical, literary, fiction and non-fiction sources, written for different purposes and 
audiences. 
Writing (research question) 
This section comprises an unseen text based on the research subject and a question related 
to the text. Students must use their research findings, as well as information in the text, to 
answer the question. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) 
 – Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
12 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2020. 
● The total assessment time is 2 hours and 30 minutes. Recommended timings for each 
section are given below. 
● The assessment is out of 80 marks. 
● There are three sections in the paper. They cover the assessment of translation, reading, 
and writing skills in Persian, as well as knowledge and understanding of culture and 
society. 
● Students must answer all questions in Section A and in Section B, and one question on 
their chosen research subject in Section C. 
● During the examination, students are not allowed access to a dictionary or to any 
documentation related to their research. 
● For Section A (translation into English), 20 minutes (recommended timing), 20 marks: 
o students are given one unseen text in Persian and must translate it into English. 
● For Section B (reading), 45 minutes (recommended timing), 20 marks: 
o students respond to four questions based on the texts provided 
o questions are multiple choice and open response. 
● For Section C (writing), 1 hour and 25 minutes (recommended timing), 40 marks: 
o students are required to select only one research subject prior to the examination and 
must base their research on one country only.   
o students must research Iran only, if they choose the research subject from Themes 1, 3 
or 4. Students who choose the research subject from Theme 2 must base their research 
on either Iran or Afghanistan 
o in the examination, for their research subject, students read one unseen text in Persian 
and then respond to a statement based on the research subject; they must use 
information from the unseen text and their research findings in their response (as 
students must only research one country, the unseen text for Theme 2 will be general 
in nature and equally relevant to both countries (Iran and Afghanistan)) 
o students are expected to critically analyse the statement and demonstrate knowledge 
and understanding of the research subject. They do this by presenting ideas, arguments 
and conclusions that are supported by relevant information, examples and references 
from their research findings and from the unseen text. They must use a range of 
language accurately and focus on the question throughout their response 
o students should write approximately 300–350 words in their answer. 
● All questions in Sections B and C are set in Persian and must be answered in Persian. 
The recommended timings have been set to enable students to complete each section in 
sufficient time. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
13 
Guidance on the independent research  
For the purposes of the assessment, independent research means research carried out 
without the help or instruction of others, including teachers. 
The independent research must relate to the Persian-speaking cultural and/or social context. 
Students must base their research on all aspects of one of the prescribed research subjects 
listed on pages 8 and 10. Students must base their response on one country only (see  
pages 8 to 10). Students who choose Themes 1, 3 or 4 must base their response on Iran 
only. However if students choose Theme 2, they must base their response on either Iran or 
Afghanistan. Correspondingly, the student’s response in the examination must only refer to 
that country. If students do refer to more than one country, they are likely to disadvantage 
themselves as they will waste time writing content that will not gain them any marks. 
Students should therefore be discouraged from doing this (see the mark grid ‘Knowledge and 
understanding of society and culture,’). 
The independent research must not relate to or make reference to any of the literary works 
or films studied for Paper 2. The independent research must: 
● allow students to gather evidence independently from at least two authentic sources in the 
assessed language. Authentic sources include newspaper and magazine articles, online 
written sources, journals, literary texts, films, television, radio, online audio-visual 
material and interviews. The types of evidence that show knowledge and understanding of 
society and culture (and research) are outlined in information relating to indicative content 
on page 16 
● enable students to contextualise and evaluate their findings independently. 
The table below gives guidance on the process that could be followed. 
 
Stage Description 
1 Pre-independent 
research 
● Teacher instruction on how to conduct research, for example the 
teacher gives advice on suitable resources and how to analyse 
information. 
● Initial conversations with the teacher, explaining the content of the 
research subject as outlined in this specification. 
● The teacher should ensure that students focus their research on one 
country. 
● The teacher should ensure that if students choose the research 
subject from Themes 1, 3 or 4, that they focus on Iran only and that 
if they choose Theme 2, they may focus on either Iran or 
Afghanistan. 
● The teacher should consider cultural sensitivities when giving 
guidance to students on selecting an appropriate research subject 
and for Theme 2 which of the two countries students should choose. 
2 Independent 
research 
● The student conducts research to find and select appropriate 
sources. 
● The teacher monitors the research by giving students general 
feedback. 
● Students evaluate their findings and prepare for the assessment. 
 
It is recommended that students decide which research subject they wish to research as 
early as possible in the academic year. However, learning hours for the independent research 
are not specified because the process of information collation and investigation are 
undertaken independently.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) 
 – Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
14 
Teachers can: 
● give guidance on how to develop research skills (including methodology and analytical 
tools) 
● give guidance on the content of the research subjects as outlined in this specification 
● comment on the availability of resources and time constraints 
● advise on and direct students to the Assessment Objectives. 
Teachers must: 
● explain what ‘independence’ means (see definition in Guidance on the independent 
research on page 13) 
● confirm that the student’s research meets all aspects of the research subject and that it 
has the potential to meet the requirements of the assessment criteria 
● ensure that in their research students do not intend to use any of the literary works or 
films they have studied for Paper 2 
● monitor the different research subjects being undertaken in a centre to ensure that 
independence is being maintained. If more than one student chooses the same research 
subject, the teacher must ensure that each student is working independently 
● ensure that if the research subject is chosen from Theme 2 that students focus on either 
Iran or Afghanistan. 
Teachers must not: 
● teach the content of the research subjects to students or provide sources. 
Students must: 
● initiate and conduct their own research and develop their research skills when 
investigating their research subject. 
If malpractice is found to have taken place, a penalty may be applied, dependent on the 
circumstances and severity of the malpractice. 
For full details on malpractice, please see the Malpractice section in this specification and the 
JCQ document Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and Assessments 2017–18. 
Synoptic assessment  
Synoptic assessment requires students to work across different parts of a qualification and to 
show their accumulated knowledge and understanding of a topic or subject area. 
Synoptic assessment enables students to show their ability to combine their skills, knowledge 
and understanding with breadth and depth of the subject.  
This paper assesses synopticity. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and marking criteria (including guidance on how the criteria are applied) can 
be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and 
writing) Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Marking guidance 
Marking guidance has been written to accompany the SAMs document and is included with 
the SAMs document. Please note that this guidance is for the use of the Pearson-appointed 
external examiners. It is included in this specification for reference to aid understanding of 
how the assessment criteria will be applied. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
15 
Marking guidance for Paper 1: Translation into English, 
reading comprehension and writing (research question) in 
Persian 
This marking guidance is for the use of Pearson-appointed external examiners. The guidance 
has been included for teacher reference to aid understanding of how the assessment criteria 
will be applied. 
Section A – Question 1 (translation into English) 
This question is marked using a points-based mark scheme in which 1 mark is given for each 
correct individual section of language. Please see the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE 
in Persian (listening, reading and writing) Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document for 
an example of how the translation will be marked. 
Section B – Questions 2 to 5 (reading comprehension) 
A sample paper and mark scheme for this section can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 
3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) Sample Assessment Materials 
(SAMs) document. 
Section C – Writing (research question)  
There are three levels-based mark grids to be applied to this question. These are: 
● knowledge and understanding of society and culture (via research) (AO4)  
● understand and respond to written language in writing (AO2)  
● accuracy and range of language (AO3). 
General guidance on using levels-based mark schemes 
Step 1: Decide on a marking level 
● First of all, the examiner will consider the answer as a whole and then decide which 
descriptors most closely match the answer and place it in that level. The descriptors for 
each level indicate the different features that will be seen in the student’s answer for that 
level. 
● When assigning a level, the examiner will look at the overall quality of the answer and not 
focus disproportionately on small and specific parts of the answer where the student has 
not performed quite as well as the rest. If the answer covers different aspects of different 
levels of the mark scheme, the examiner will use a ‘best fit’ approach for defining the level. 
They will then use the variability of the response to help decide the mark within the level. 
For example, if the response is predominantly level 13–16 with a small amount of  
level 17–20 material, it would be placed in level 13–16 but be awarded a mark at the top 
of the level because of the level 17–20 content. 
Step 2: Decide on a mark 
● Once the examiner has decided on a level they will need to decide on a mark within the 
level. 
● They will decide on the mark to award based on the quality of the answer; they will award 
a mark towards the top or bottom of that level, depending on how the student has 
evidenced each of the descriptor bullet points. 
● The examiner will modify the mark based on how securely the trait descriptors are met at 
that level. 
● They will need to go back through the answer as they apply the mark scheme to clarify 
points and assure themselves that the level and the mark are appropriate. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) 
 – Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
16 
Knowledge and understanding of society and culture  
(AO4 – 20 marks) 
This mark grid assesses the content of the student’s answer in relation to the knowledge and 
understanding of culture and society that they have demonstrated based on their research. 
The mark grid also assesses their ability to critically analyse by sustaining a line of argument 
and drawing conclusions on aspects of culture and society, based on the question related to 
the research subject. Students must base their response on one country only, (see  
pages 8 to 10. Students who choose Themes 1, 3 or 4 must base their response on Iran only. 
However if students choose Theme 2, they must base their response on either Iran or 
Afghanistan.   
If students refer to more than one country for Themes 1, 3 or 4, examiners will mark content 
based on Iran only.  
If students refer to more than one country for Theme 2, examiners will mark positively by 
awarding marks for content based on the country that will gain the highest mark.  
If students do refer to more than one country in their response, they are likely to 
disadvantage themselves as they will waste time writing content that will not gain them any 
marks.   
Understand and respond to written language (AO2 – 10 marks) 
This grid assesses students’ understanding of the unseen text through their ability to use 
relevant information from it to contribute to the ideas, arguments and conclusions presented 
on society and culture.  
The two mark grids for AO4 and AO2 are presented side by side. This is because of the 
connection between the information that students are producing based on knowledge and 
understanding of society and culture, and the information they are using from the unseen 
text to contribute to it.  
Indicative content 
● When deciding on how to reward the answer for content, examiners will consult both of 
these mark grids as well as the indicative content associated with each question, which 
can be found in the document Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, 
reading and writing) Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs). Indicative content contains 
points that students are likely to use to construct their answer. It is possible for an answer 
to be constructed without mentioning some or all of these points, as long as students 
provide alternative responses that fulfil the requirements of the question. 
● The indicative content shows that students are expected to place more emphasis on 
knowledge and understanding of society and culture (AO4) than on the text (understand 
and respond in writing to written language – AO2). This emphasis is reflected in the 
greater number of marks available for AO4 (20 marks) than for AO2 (10 marks). 
● Students can demonstrate their knowledge and understanding of society and culture 
(research) by providing relevant ideas/information/references/examples related to aspects 
such as: 
o lifestyle/customs/events both current and historical 
o important figures both current and historical 
o public opinion, feelings, reactions and behaviour. 
This list is not exhaustive. Other aspects are illustrated in the indicative content in the 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) Sample 
Assessment Materials (SAMs). 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
17 
Knowledge and understanding of 
society and culture (AO4) 
Understand and respond to written 
language (AO2) 
Marks Description Marks Description 
0 No rewardable material. 0 No rewardable material 
1–4 ● Limited, straightforward, 
predictable ideas expressed on 
culture and society; limited 
information/examples/reference
s from the one country 
researched to support ideas; 
limited focus on the research 
subject. 
● Limited evidence of critical 
analysis of culture and society; 
points of view have little 
justification; limited/brief 
conclusions on the one country 
researched that are frequently 
contradictory; frequently relies 
on description rather than 
analysis. 
1–2 ● Limited use of relevant 
information/examples/references 
from the text to contribute to 
ideas, arguments and conclusions 
about society and culture from 
the one country researched; 
information used is frequently 
contradictory/irrelevant. 
5-8 ● Occasionally relevant, 
straightforward ideas expressed 
about culture and society, 
mostly generalised, occasionally 
supported by information/ 
examples/references from the 
one country researched; some 
loss of focus on the research 
subject. 
● Occasional evidence of critical 
analysis of culture and society; 
points of view are given with 
occasional justification, 
arguments may be made but 
not developed, occasionally 
leading to straightforward 
conclusions on the one country 
researched that may include 
contradictions; some reliance on 
description rather than analysis.  
3-4 ● Occasionally uses relevant 
information/examples/references 
from the text to contribute to 
ideas, arguments and conclusions 
about society and culture from 
the one country researched; 
sometimes information used is 
contradictory/irrelevant. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) 
 – Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
18 
Knowledge and understanding of 
society and culture (AO4) 
Understand and respond to written 
language (AO2) 
Marks Description Marks Description 
9–12 ● Relevant, straightforward ideas 
expressed about culture and 
society, sometimes supported 
by information/examples/ 
references from the one country 
researched; occasional loss of 
focus on the research subject. 
● Some critical analysis of culture 
and society is evident, with 
straightforward arguments and 
points of view which are 
sometimes developed and 
justified, sometimes drawing 
straightforward conclusions on 
the one country researched; 
occasionally relies on description 
rather than analysis.  
5–6 ● Sometimes uses relevant 
information/examples/references 
from the text to contribute to 
ideas, arguments and conclusions 
about society and culture from 
the one country researched; 
occasionally information used is 
contradictory/irrelevant. 
13–16 ● Relevant, occasionally 
perceptive ideas expressed 
about culture and society, 
frequently supported by 
pertinent information/  
examples/reference from the 
one country researched; focus 
predominantly maintained on 
the research subject. 
● Critical analysis of culture and 
society demonstrated by 
frequently developed and 
justified arguments and 
viewpoints, often drawing 
convincing conclusions on the 
one country researched.  
7–8 ● Mostly uses relevant 
information/examples/references 
from the text to contribute to 
ideas, arguments and conclusions 
about society and culture the one 
country researched. 
17-20 ● Relevant, perceptive ideas 
expressed about culture and 
society, consistently supported 
by pertinent 
information/examples/ 
references from the one country 
researched; focused on the 
research subject throughout. 
● Critical analysis of culture and 
society demonstrated by 
consistently developed and 
justified arguments and 
viewpoints, drawing convincing 
conclusions on the one country 
researched. 
9-10 ● Consistently uses relevant 
information/examples/references 
from the text to contribute to 
ideas, arguments and conclusions 
about society and culture from 
the one country researched. 
 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
19 
Additional guidance 
Perceptive: demonstrates an in-depth understanding by making connections between ideas 
and information; goes beyond the standard, predictable response; shows insight/originality. 
Ideas include thoughts, feelings, impressions and opinions. 
Straightforward ideas, arguments, conclusions are deemed to be those that give the 
standard, predictable response. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) 
 – Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
20 
Accuracy and range of language mark grid (AO3) 
This mark grid assesses students’ ability to use a range of grammatical structures and 
vocabulary accurately to produce articulate communication with a range of expression.  
 
Marks Description 
0 No rewardable language 
1–2 ● Limited variation of straightforward grammatical structures and vocabulary, 
with much repetition; repetitive expression, writing is often restricted  
and stilted. 
● Limited sequences of accurate language, resulting in lapses in coherence; 
errors occur that often prevent meaning being conveyed. 
3–4 ● Occasional variation in the use of mostly straightforward grammatical 
structures and vocabulary, infrequent use of complex language; expression is 
frequently repetitive, writing is sometimes stilted. 
● Some accurate sequences of language, resulting in some coherent writing; 
errors occur that sometimes hinder clarity of communication and occasionally 
prevent meaning being conveyed. 
5–6 ● Some variation in the use of grammatical structures and vocabulary, some 
recurrent examples of complex language; variation of expression but this is 
not sustained; sections of articulate writing with occasionally stilted phrasing. 
● Frequent sequences of accurate language, resulting in generally coherent 
writing; errors occur that occasionally hinder clarity of communication. 
7–8 ● Frequent variation in use of grammatical structures and vocabulary, including 
different types of complex language; regular variation of expression, writing is 
articulate throughout the majority of the response. 
● Accurate language throughout most of the response, resulting in mostly 
coherent writing; errors occur that rarely hinder clarity of communication. 
9–10 ● Consistent variation in use of grammatical structures and vocabulary, 
consistent variation in use of complex language; conveys ideas in a variety of 
ways, consistently articulate writing. 
● Accurate language throughout, resulting in consistently coherent writing; any 
errors do not hinder clarity of the communication. 
Additional guidance 
Complex language is considered to include the following: 
● all grammar and structures included in the grammar list that are specific to A Level 
● conceptually challenging tenses such as the pluperfect, future  
● passive voice 
● subjunctive mood 
● use of subordination 
● using extended sentences to express abstract ideas/convey justified arguments that 
require a range of lexis and structures, for example conjunctions, pronouns, relative 
clauses 
● using synonyms and a variety of expressions to say things in different ways. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
21 
Variation in use of grammatical structures/varied use of vocabulary: the traits in the 
mark grid differentiate between the variation of grammatical structures and vocabulary used 
by students. You should judge in which mark level to place students and which mark to 
award, based on the effect that the variety of grammatical structures and vocabulary has on 
the quality of the communication; the wider the variety, the more articulate the 
communication will become (see definition of articulate below). 
Examples of a variety of grammatical structures and vocabulary are: a selection of different 
verbs, tenses, adjectives, vocabulary and complex language (see definition above) for a 
variety of purposes, such as to present and justify points of view, develop arguments, draw 
conclusions based on understanding and evaluate issues. 
Articulate: articulate communication is fluent, effective and coherent as students  
control/manipulate the language to express themselves with ease for a number of different 
purposes. The more articulate the writing, the easier and more quickly the reader can 
progress through the writing without having to re-read to understand the message. If 
students are restricted to what they can express, they may not be able to use languages for 
all purposes, for example to justify arguments. The writing will become more difficult to read 
quickly and with ease as the reader has to stop and re-read to understand the message. 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top level as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
• errors that do not affect meaning, such as using the indefinite article in the wrong place, 
for example ﮐﺘﺎﺑﯽ ﺧﻮب ﮐﮫ ﺧﻮاﻧﺪمinstead of ﮐﺘﺎب ﺧﻮﺑﯽ ﮐﮫ ﺧﻮاﻧﺪم  
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, wrong case endings 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● mother-tongue interference. 
 
NB: these are provided as examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) 
 – Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
22 
Paper 2: Translation into Persian and written 
response to works  
Content 
Students should be able to: 
● manipulate language accurately through translating an unseen passage from English  
into Persian 
● develop a detailed understanding and appreciation of the works studied, by writing critical 
and analytical responses in the language of study to the works, taken from the prescribed 
list provided (see Appendix 1: Prescribed literary texts and films) 
● produce responses that relate to features such as the form and the technique of 
presentation; key themes concepts and issues; characterisation; structure of the plot and 
the social and cultural setting 
● present viewpoints, develop arguments, persuade, analyse and evaluate. 
Although speaking skills are not directly assessed in this qualification, students should be 
encouraged to develop their speaking skills in Persian during their course of study. 
Translation into Persian 
The content of the translation will be taken from any one the sub-themes within the four 
themes. 
Written response to works 
Students must study two discrete Persian works: either two literary texts, or one literary text 
and one film. The works must be taken from the list in Appendix 1: Prescribed literary texts 
and films. The literary texts include novels and non-fiction. All films are feature length.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
23 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2020. 
● The total assessment time is 2 hours and 40 minutes. Recommended timings for each 
section are given below. 
● The assessment is out of 110 marks. 
● There are three sections to this paper, Section A (translation into Persian), Section B  
and Section C (written response to works). 
● For Section A (translation into Persian), 30 minutes (recommended timing), 20 marks: 
o students are given one unseen text in English and must translate it into Persian. 
● For Sections B and C (written response to works), 2 hours and 10 minutes, 90 marks: 
o students must write two essays selected from Section B (literary texts) or one selected 
from Section B (literary texts) and one from the Section C (films) 
o there will be a choice of two questions for each literary text and film. As a guide, we 
advise students to write approximately 300–350 words for each essay in order to give a 
detailed analysis of the works, although the whole essay will be marked regardless  
of length 
o students should justify their points of view, arguments and conclusions with evidence 
from the works 
o students are expected to provide a critical and analytical response by selecting relevant 
material from the works, presenting and justifying points of view, developing 
arguments, drawing conclusions based on understanding and evaluating different 
aspects of the works studied 
o no credit will be given for essays on literary texts based on film versions adapted from 
the literary texts. Evidence given in the essay to justify viewpoints and arguments 
must be based on the original literary text. 
● All questions will be set in Persian and must be answered in Persian. 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted. 
● Students must not take any documentation relating to the works into the examination. 
● The recommended timings have been given to enable students to complete each section in 
sufficient time. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and marking criteria (including guidance on how these criteria are applied) 
for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian 
(listening, reading and writing) Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Marking guidance 
Marking guidance has been written to accompany the SAMs document and is included with 
the SAMs document. Please note that this guidance is for the use of the Pearson-appointed 
external examiners. It is included in this specification for reference to aid understanding of 
how the assessment criteria will be applied. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) 
 – Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
24 
Marking guidance for Paper 2: Translation into Persian and 
written response to works  
This marking guidance is for the use of Pearson-appointed external examiners. The guidance 
has been included for teacher reference to aid understanding of how the assessment criteria 
will be applied. 
Section A – Question 1 (translation into Persian) 
This question is marked using a points-based mark scheme in which 1 mark is given for each 
correct individual section of language. Please see the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE 
in Persian (listening, reading and writing) Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document for 
an example of how the translation will be marked. 
Sections B and C – Questions 2 to 7 (written response to works) 
Included in Sections B and C, Written response to works, are three levels-based mark grids 
to be applied to each individual essay. The mark grids are: 
● Critical and analytical response (AO4) 
● Range of grammatical structures and vocabulary (AO3) 
● Accuracy of language (AO3). 
General guidance on using levels-based mark schemes 
Step 1: Decide on a marking level 
● First of all, the examiner will consider the answer as a whole and then decide which 
descriptors most closely match the answer and place it in that level. The descriptors for 
each level indicate the different features that will be seen in the student’s answer for that 
level. 
● When assigning a level, the examiner will look at the overall quality of the answer and not 
focus disproportionately on small and specific parts of the answer where the student has 
not performed quite as well as the rest. If the answer covers different aspects of different 
levels of the mark scheme, the examiner will use a ‘best fit’ approach for defining the level. 
They will then use the variability of the response to help decide the mark within the level. 
For example, if the response is predominantly level 13–16 with a small amount of level 
17–20 material, it would be placed in level 13–16 but be awarded a mark at the top of the 
level because of the level 17–20 content. 
Step 2: Decide on a mark 
● Once the examiner has decided on a level they will need to decide on a mark within the 
level. 
● They will decide on the mark to award based on the quality of the answer; they will award 
a mark towards the top or bottom of that level, depending on how the student has 
evidenced each of the descriptor bullet points. 
● The examiner will modify the mark based on how securely the trait descriptors are met at 
that level. 
● They will need to go back through the answer as they apply the mark scheme to clarify 
points and assure themselves that the level and the mark are appropriate. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
25 
Sections B and C – Questions 2 to 7 (written response to works) 
Critical and analytical response (AO4) 
● This mark grid assesses students’ ability to respond critically and analytically to the aspect 
of the literary text or film outlined in the question. To provide a critical and analytical 
response, students should select relevant material, present and justify points of view, 
develop arguments, draw conclusions based on understanding and evaluate issues, 
themes and cultural and social contexts. 
● This grid should be applied twice, once for each essay individually. 
● When deciding how to reward an answer, examiners will consult this mark grid as well as 
the indicative content associated with each question, which can be found in the document 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) Sample 
Assessment Materials (SAMs). Indicative content contains points that students are likely to 
use to construct their answer. It is possible for an answer to be constructed without 
mentioning some or all of these points, as long as students provide alternative responses 
that fulfil the requirements of the question.  
● The recommended word count for each essay is 300–350 words but the whole essay will 
be marked regardless of length. 
 
Marks Description 
0 No rewardable material. 
1–4 ● Points of view relating to issues/themes/cultural or social contexts are presented 
with simplistic justification limited interpretation with frequent misunderstanding 
or confusion; any evidence from the work is descriptive. 
● Limited ability to form arguments or draw conclusions. 
● Response relates to the work but limited focus on the question. 
5–8 ● Response relates to the work but often loses focus on the question. 
● Points of view relating to issues/themes/cultural or social contexts are presented, 
with attempts made at interpretation, but they occasionally show 
misunderstanding or confusion; evidence selected from the work for justification is 
occasionally appropriate but often descriptive. 
● Arguments are made but with inconsistencies; conclusions are drawn but do not 
fully link to arguments. 
9–12 ● Critical analysis of issues/themes/cultural or social contexts is evident in relation 
to particular aspects of the question, with some appropriate interpretations and 
points of view, sometimes justified by appropriately selected evidence from 
the work. 
● Logical arguments are followed through on particular aspects of the question, 
occasionally detailed and with linked conclusions; some points are made without 
exploration. 
● Response is relevant to particular aspects of the question, occasional loss  
of focus. 
13–16 ● Critical analysis of issues/themes/cultural or social contexts is frequently 
demonstrated, with some convincing interpretations and points of view, 
predominantly justified with appropriately selected evidence from the work. 
● Generally detailed, logical arguments are made, with some persuasive conclusions 
that mostly link together. 
● Predominantly relevant response to the question. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) 
 – Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
26 
Marks Description 
17–20 ● Critical analysis of issues/themes/cultural or social contexts is demonstrated 
through convincing interpretations and points of view, consistently justified with 
appropriately selected evidence from the work. 
● Detailed, logical arguments and conclusions are made that consistently 
link together. 
● Relevant response to the question throughout. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
27 
Range of grammatical structures and vocabulary (AO3) 
This mark grid assesses students’ ability to use a range of grammatical structures and 
vocabulary in order to produce articulate written communication with a range of expression. 
This grid will be applied twice, once for each essay individually. 
Marks Description 
0 No rewardable language. 
1–3 ● Limited variation of straightforward grammatical structures with much 
repetition, producing writing that is often restricted and stilted. 
● Limited variation of vocabulary resulting in repetitive expression. 
● Limited use of terminology appropriate to literary and cinematic analysis. 
4–6 ● Occasional variation in use of mostly straightforward grammatical structures, 
infrequent use of complex language, producing writing that is  
sometimes stilted. 
● Vocabulary is mostly high frequency with occasional variation, expression is 
frequently repetitive. 
● Occasional use of terminology appropriate for literary and cinematic analysis. 
7–9 ● Some variation in the use of grammatical structures, including some recurrent 
examples of complex language; sections of articulate writing with occasionally 
stilted phrasing. 
● Some variation in use of vocabulary, resulting in variation of expression but this 
is not sustained. 
● Some use of terminology appropriate for literary and cinematic analysis. 
10–12 ● Frequent variation in use of grammatical structures, including different types of 
complex language, producing writing that is articulate throughout the majority 
of the response. 
● Frequent variation in use of vocabulary, resulting in regular variation of 
expression. 
● Frequent use of terminology appropriate for literary and cinematic analysis. 
13–15 ● Consistent variation in use of grammatical structures, consistent variation in use 
of complex language, producing consistently articulate writing. 
● Consistent variation in use of vocabulary, allowing ideas to be conveyed in a 
variety of different ways. 
● Consistent use of terminology appropriate for literary and cinematic analysis. 
Additional guidance 
Variation of vocabulary and grammatical structures: the traits in the mark grid 
differentiate between the variation of grammatical structures and vocabulary used by 
students. You must judge in which mark level to place students and which mark to award, 
based on the effect that the variety of grammatical structures and vocabulary has on the 
quality of the communication; the wider the variety, the more articulate the communication 
will become (see definition of articulate below). 
Examples of a variety of grammatical structures and vocabulary are: a selection of different 
verbs, tenses, adjectives, vocabulary (including to express literary and cinematic analysis – 
(see further detail below), complex language (see definition below) for a variety of purposes, 
including to present and justify points of view, develop arguments, draw conclusions based 
on understanding. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) 
 – Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
28 
Articulate: articulate communication is fluent, effective and coherent as students 
control/manipulate the language to say what they want to say rather than what they can say, 
for a number of different purposes. If students are restricted to what they can say, they may 
not be able to express themselves for all purposes, for example to develop arguments. 
Terminology for literary and cinematic analysis: vocabulary for critical analysis 
according to the work being studied, for example ‘plot’, ‘character’; figures of speech such as 
‘metaphor’, ‘similes’; to describe theme and style such as, ‘camera technique’, ‘hand-held 
camera’, ‘use of black and white’, ‘first person narrative.’ 
Complex language is considered to include the following: 
● all grammar and structures included in the grammar list that are specific to A Level 
● conceptually challenging tenses such as the pluperfect and future 
● passive voice 
● subjunctive mood 
● use of subordination 
● using extended sentences to express abstract ideas/convey justified arguments that 
require a range of lexis and structures, for example conjunctions, pronouns and  
relative clauses 
● using synonyms and a variety of expressions to say things in different ways. 
Straightforward language is considered to be: 
● simple sentences with limited linking of sentences and clauses 
● high-frequency grammatical structures and vocabulary. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
29 
Accuracy of language (AO3) 
This mark grid assesses students’ ability to apply grammar and syntax accurately. 
This grid will be applied twice, once for each essay individually. 
Marks Description 
0 No rewardable language. 
1–2 ● Limited sequences of accurate language, resulting in lapses in coherence. 
● Errors occur that often prevent meaning being conveyed. 
3–4 ● Some accurate sequences of language, resulting in some coherent writing. 
● Errors occur that sometimes hinder clarity of communication and occasionally 
prevent meaning being conveyed. 
5–6 ● Frequent sequences of accurate language, resulting in generally coherent 
writing. 
● Errors occur that occasionally hinder clarity of communication. 
7–8 ● Accurate language throughout most of the response, resulting in mostly 
coherent writing. 
● Errors occur that rarely hinder clarity of communication. 
9–10 ● Accurate language throughout, resulting in consistently coherent writing. 
● Any errors do not hinder clarity of communication. 
Additional guidance 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top level as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
• errors that do not affect meaning, such as using the indefinite article in the wrong place, 
for example ﮐﺗﺎﺑﯽ ﺧوب ﮐﮫ ﺧواﻧدمinstead of ﮐﺗﺎب ﺧوﺑﯽ ﮐﮫ ﺧواﻧدم  
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, wrong case endings 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of  
the writing. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● mother-tongue interference. 
 
NB: these are provided as examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) 
 – Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
30 
Paper 3: Listening, reading and writing in Persian 
Content 
Students will be assessed on their understanding of spoken Persian from a variety of 
authentic listening sources, as well as on their ability to summarise and evaluate viewpoints 
in spoken and written material. 
Recordings vary in length and include an extended passage. All spoken and written materials 
are culturally relevant to Iran and Afghanistan for Section A are drawn from across the four 
themes (listed on pages 8–10). Materials for Section B will be drawn from any one of the  
sub-themes from the four themes. 
Students should be able to: 
● listen, and respond in writing to spoken passages, including an extended passage from a 
range of different contexts and sources, understand main points, gist and detail from 
spoken and written material 
● infer meaning from complex spoken material 
● assimilate and use information from spoken and written sources  
● summarise information from spoken and written sources, reporting key points and subject 
matter in writing 
● identify main ideas, and summarise different points of view, drawn from spoken and 
written sources 
● evaluate points of view and draw conclusions in writing 
● apply listening, reading and writing skills in combination. 
Although speaking skills are not directly assessed in the qualification, students should be 
encouraged to develop their speaking skills in Persian during their course of study.  
Section A (listening comprehension) 
The listening section will be made up of spoken passages covering different registers and 
types, including authentic communication involving one or more male and female speakers. 
Sources will include material from online media. 
Section B (listening, reading and writing question) 
This section comprises a listening source and a reading text. Students must summarise the 
different points of view in each source. They must then answer a question that requires them 
to evaluate the viewpoints in both sources and draw conclusions. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
31 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2020. 
● The total assessment time is 2 hours and 15 minutes. Recommended timings for each 
section are given below. 
● The assessment is out of 60 marks. 
● There are two sections in the paper. They cover the assessment of listening, reading and 
writing skills in Persian.  
● Students must answer all questions in both sections (A and B). 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted. 
● For Section A (listening), 45 minutes (recommended timing), 30 marks: 
o there are four questions in this section made up of multiple-choice and  
open-response questions, including questions testing summary skills  
o students will listen to a recording featuring Persian-language speakers who will speak at 
a speed appropriate for the expected understanding at this level 
o recordings will be issued as a CD or in MP3 audio format. The MP3 sound files must be 
accessed via a secure download from the Pearson website. The listening audio files are 
also available on our website 
o students will have individual control of the recording and may stop, revisit and replay 
sections of the recording as they wish. 
● For Section B (listening, reading and writing question), 1 hour and 30 minutes 
(recommended timing), 30 marks: 
o students listen to a recording and read a written text 
o students summarise the different points of view in both sources 
o students answer a question in writing, which requires them to evaluate the viewpoints 
in the recording and in the text and draw conclusions 
o the question is an open-response question 
o Students should write approximately 200–250 words for their response to  
Question 5(c). 
● All questions in Sections A and B are set in Persian and must be answered in Persian. 
Recommended timings have been given for each section to enable students to complete each 
one in sufficient time to access the full range of assessment criteria. 
Synoptic assessment 
Synoptic assessment requires students to work across different parts of a qualification and to 
show their accumulated knowledge and understanding of a topic or subject area. 
Synoptic assessment enables students to show their ability to combine their skills, knowledge 
and understanding with breadth and depth of the subject.  
This paper assesses synopticity. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and marking criteria (including guidance on how the criteria are applied) for 
this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, 
reading and writing) Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) 
 – Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
32 
Marking guidance for Paper 3: Listening, reading and writing 
in Persian 
Marking guidance has been written to accompany the SAMs document and is included with 
the SAMs document. Please note that this guidance is for the use of the Pearson-appointed 
external examiners. It is included in this specification to aid understanding of how the 
assessment criteria will be applied. 
Section A – Questions 1 to 4 
A points-based mark scheme for this section can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 
Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) Sample Assessment Materials 
(SAMs) document. 
Section B – Listening, reading and writing  
A points-based mark scheme for Questions 5(a) and 5(b) can be found in the Pearson 
Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) Sample Assessment 
Materials (SAMs) document. 
There are three levels-based mark grids applied to Question 5(c). The mark grids are: 
● understand and respond to spoken language (AO1) 
● understand and respond to spoken/written language (AO2) 
● accuracy and range of language (AO3). 
General guidance on using levels-based mark schemes 
Step 1: Decide on a marking level 
● First of all, the examiner will consider the answer as a whole and then decide which 
descriptors most closely match the answer and place it in that level. The descriptors for 
each level indicate the different features that will be seen in the student’s answer for that 
level. 
● When assigning a level, the examiner will look at the overall quality of the answer and not 
focus disproportionately on small and specific parts of the answer where the student has 
not performed quite as well as the rest or indeed has performed temporarily better. If the 
answer covers different aspects of different levels of the mark scheme, they will use a 
‘best fit’ approach for defining the level. They will then use the variability of the response 
to help decide the mark within the level. For example if the response is predominantly 
level 3–4 with a small amount of level 5–6 material, it would be placed in level 3–4 but be 
awarded a mark at the top of the level because of the level 5–6 content. 
Step 2: Decide on a mark 
● Once the examiner has decided on a level they will then need to decide on a mark within 
the level. 
● The examiner will decide the mark to award based on the quality of the answer; they will 
award a mark towards the top or bottom of that level depending on how the student has 
evidenced each of the descriptor bullet points. 
● The examiner will modify the mark based on how securely the trait descriptors are met at 
that level. 
● The examiner will need to go back through the answer as they apply the mark scheme to 
clarify points and to assure that the level and the mark are appropriate. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
33 
Understand and respond to spoken language (AO1 – 6 marks) 
This mark grid assesses students’ understanding of spoken language and how well they use 
information from it to evaluate and draw conclusions. 
Understand and respond to written language (AO2 – 6 marks) 
This mark grid assesses students’ understanding of written language and how well they use 
information from it to evaluate and draw conclusions. 
The two mark grids for AO1 and AO2 are presented side by side. This is because of the 
interconnection of the task in that students need to compare information that they hear to 
the information that they read. They need to do this in order to weigh up the views in both 
sources to be able to write their evaluation and come to cohesive conclusions. 
Indicative content 
● When deciding how to reward an answer, examiners will consult this mark grid as well as 
the indicative content associated with the question, which can be found in the document 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) Sample 
Assessment Materials (SAMs). Indicative content contains points that students are likely to 
use to construct their answer. It is possible for an answer to be constructed without 
mentioning some or all of these points, as long as students provide alternative responses 
that fulfil the requirements of the question.  
● The recommended word count for Question 5(c) is 200–250 words but the whole response 
will be marked regardless of length. 
 
Understand and respond to spoken 
language (AO1) 
Understand and respond to written 
language (AO2) 
Marks Description Marks Description 
0 No rewardable material 0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Occasionally relevant judgement 
expressed on the viewpoints in 
the spoken source; often strays 
into description of content without 
evaluation. 
● Limited conclusions drawn on 
spoken source, sometimes 
inconsistent with evaluation of 
viewpoints. 
1–2 ● Occasionally relevant 
judgement expressed on the 
viewpoints in the written 
source; often strays into 
description of content without 
evaluation.  
● Limited conclusions drawn on 
written source, sometimes 
inconsistent with evaluation of 
viewpoints.  
3–4 ● Expresses some relevant 
judgements on the viewpoints in 
the spoken source, some of which 
are substantiated; occasionally 
strays into description of content 
without evaluation. 
● Draws straightforward conclusions 
on spoken source, occasionally 
inconsistency with evaluation of 
viewpoints. 
3–4 ● Expresses some relevant 
judgements on the viewpoints 
in the written source, some of 
which are substantiated; 
occasionally strays into 
description of content without 
evaluation.  
● Draws straightforward 
conclusions on written source, 
occasionally inconsistency with 
evaluation of viewpoints. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) 
 – Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
34 
Understand and respond to spoken 
language (AO1) 
Understand and respond to written 
language (AO2) 
Marks Description Marks Description 
5–6 ● Expresses relevant and 
substantiated judgements on the 
viewpoints in the spoken source, 
showing clear evaluation. 
● Draws convincing conclusions on 
spoken source, consistent with 
evaluation of viewpoints.  
5–6 ● Expresses relevant and 
substantiated judgements on 
the viewpoints in the written 
source, showing clear 
evaluation.  
● Draws convincing conclusions 
on written source, consistent 
with evaluation of viewpoints. 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
35 
Accuracy and range of language mark grid (AO3) 
This mark grid assesses students’ ability to use a range of grammatical structures and 
vocabulary accurately to produce articulate communication with a range of expression.  
 
Marks Description 
0 No rewardable language 
1–2 ● Limited variation of straightforward grammatical structures and vocabulary with 
much repetition; repetitive expression, writing is often restricted and stilted. 
● Limited sequences of accurate language, resulting in lapses in coherence; errors 
occur that often prevent meaning being conveyed. 
3–4 ● Occasional variation in the use of mostly straightforward grammatical structures 
and vocabulary, infrequent use of complex language; expression is frequently 
repetitive, writing is sometimes stilted. 
● Some accurate sequences of language, resulting in some coherent writing; errors 
occur that sometimes hinder clarity of communication and occasionally prevent 
meaning being conveyed. 
5–6 ● Some variation in the use of grammatical structures and vocabulary, some 
recurrent examples of complex language; variation of expression but this is not 
sustained; sections of articulate writing with occasionally stilted phrasing. 
● Frequent sequences of accurate language, resulting in generally coherent writing; 
errors occur that occasionally hinder clarity of communication. 
7–8 ● Frequent variation in use of grammatical structures and vocabulary, including 
different types of complex language; regular variation of expression, writing is 
articulate throughout the majority of the response. 
● Accurate language throughout most of the response, resulting in mostly coherent 
writing; errors occur that rarely hinder clarity of communication. 
9–10 ● Consistent variation in use of grammatical structures and vocabulary, consistent 
variation in use of complex language; conveys ideas in a variety of ways, 
consistently articulate writing. 
● Accurate language throughout, resulting in consistently coherent writing; any 
errors do not hinder clarity of the communication. 
Additional guidance 
Complex language is considered to include the following: 
● all grammar and structures included in the grammar list that are specific to A Level 
● conceptually challenging tenses such as the pluperfect and future 
● passive voice 
● subjunctive mood 
● use of subordination 
● using extended sentences to express abstract ideas/convey justified arguments that 
require a range of lexis and structures, for example conjunctions, pronouns and relative 
clauses 
● using synonyms and a variety of expressions to say things in different ways. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) 
 – Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
36 
Variation in use of grammatical structures/varied use of vocabulary: the traits in the 
mark grid differentiate between the variation of grammatical structures and vocabulary used 
by students. You should judge in which mark level to place students and which mark to 
award, based on the effect that the variety of grammatical structures and vocabulary has on 
the quality of the communication; the wider the variety, the more articulate the 
communication will become, (see definition of articulate below).  
Examples of a variety of grammatical structures and vocabulary are: a selection of different 
verbs, tenses, adjectives, vocabulary and complex language (see definition above) for a 
variety of purposes such as to present and justify points of view, develop arguments, draw 
conclusions based on understanding and evaluating issues. 
Articulate: articulate communication is fluent, effective and coherent as students 
control/manipulate the language to express themselves with ease for a number of different 
purposes. The more articulate the writing, the easier the reader can progress through the 
writing without having to re-read to understand the message. If students are restricted to 
what they can express, they may not be able to use languages for all purposes, for example 
to justify arguments/interest the reader. The writing will become more difficult to read with 
ease as the reader has to stop and re-read to understand the message.  
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top level as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, such as using the indefinite article in the wrong place, 
for example ﮐﺘﺎﺑﯽ ﺧﻮب ﮐﮫ ﺧﻮاﻧﺪمinstead of ﮐﺘﺎب ﺧﻮﺑﯽ ﮐﮫ ﺧﻮاﻧﺪم  
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, wrong case endings 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● mother-tongue interference. 
 
NB: these are provided as examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
37 
Assessment Objectives 
 
Students must: 
% in GCE  
A Level 
AO1 Understand and respond in writing to spoken language drawn 
from a variety of sources. 
20 
AO2 Understand and respond in writing to written language drawn 
from a variety of sources. 
30 
AO3 Manipulate the language accurately, in written forms, using a 
range of lexis and structure. 
30 
AO4 Show knowledge and understanding of, and respond critically and 
analytically to, different aspects of the culture and society of the 
countries where the language is spoken. 
20 
Total 100% 
 
 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
Paper 
Assessment Objectives Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives AO1 % AO2 % AO3 % AO4 % 
Paper 1: Translation into 
English, reading 
comprehension and writing 
(research question) in Persian 
- 25 5 10 40% 
Paper 2: Translation into 
Persian and written response 
to works  
- - 20 10 30% 
Paper 3: Listening, reading 
and writing in Persian 
20 5 5 - 30% 
Total for GCE A Level 20 30 30 20 100% 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) 
 – Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
38 
3 Administration and general information 
Entries 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for this qualification can be found in 
our UK Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations officers and is 
available on our website. 
Discount code and performance tables 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more than one GCE qualification with 
the same discount code will have only one of the grades they achieve counted for the 
purpose of the school and college performance tables. 
Students should be advised that if they take two GCE qualifications with the same discount 
code, the colleges, universities and employers to which they wish to progress are likely to 
take the view that this achievement is equivalent to only one GCE. The same view may be 
taken if students take two GCE qualifications that have different discount codes but which 
have significant overlap of content. Before embarking on their programmes, students or their 
advisers who have any doubts about their subject combinations should check with the 
institution to which they wish to progress. 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, 
special consideration and malpractice 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our Equality Policy requires all students to 
have equal opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our qualifications 
to be awarded in a way that is fair to every student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the Equality Act 2010) are not, 
when they are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in comparison to 
students who do not share that characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification and that 
this achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their peers. 
Language of assessment 
The language of assessment for this qualification is Persian. All student work must be in 
Persian, except the translation in Paper 1 (Section A), which requires a response in English. 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with special 
educational needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to: 
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the assessment. 
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an individual 
student with a disability, without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding bodies comply with the duty under the 
Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
39 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students will 
then know what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for assessment. 
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable adjustments 
where a person with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in undertaking an 
assessment. The awarding organisation is required to take reasonable steps to overcome 
that disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be unique to that individual and, 
therefore, might not be in the list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of factors, 
including: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding 
organisation, or affects timeframes or the security or integrity of the assessment. This is 
because the adjustment is not ‘reasonable’. 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student's mark or grade to 
reflect temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the 
examination/assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a material 
effect on a student’s ability to take an assessment or demonstrate their level of attainment in 
an assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to apply for access arrangements 
and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special 
consideration, please refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk 
Malpractice 
Student malpractice 
Student malpractice refers to any act by a student that compromises or seeks to compromise 
the process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the qualifications or the 
validity of results/certificates. 
Student malpractice in examinations must be reported to Pearson using a JCQ Form M1 
(available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to Investigations Team, Pearson, 190 High Holborn, 
London, WC1V 7BH. Please provide as much information and supporting documentation as 
possible. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice constitutes staff or centre malpractice. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) 
 – Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
40 
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and maladministration of 
our qualifications. As with student malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is any act that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the 
integrity of the qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported 
immediately, before any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson on a JCQ Form 
M2a (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form, supporting 
documentation and as much information as possible can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to Investigations Team, Pearson, 190 High Holborn, 
London, WC1V 7BH. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies with 
Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the document 
General and Vocational Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments Policies and Procedures, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice. 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to comply with the requirements of 
Ofqual's General Conditions of Recognition. 
The raw marks for all papers in this qualification will be scaled by Pearson to represent the 
relative weighting of 40% for Paper 1, and 30% for Papers 2 and 3. 
 
Paper Weighting Raw marks Scaling factor Scaling mark 
1 40% 80 1.850 148 
2 30% 110 1.009 110.99 
3 30% 60 1.850 111 
 
This A Level qualification will be graded and certificated on a six-grade scale from A* to E 
using the total subject mark. Individual papers are not graded. 
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum judged by Pearson to be of 
sufficient standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U result. 
The first certification opportunity for this qualification will be 2020. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
41 
Student recruitment and progression 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this qualification. 
Students who would benefit most from studying this qualification are likely to have a Level 2 
qualification such as a GCSE in Persian. However, students do not need to have studied a 
GCSE in Persian to follow this course. 
Progression 
This qualification offers a suitable progression route from GCSE, focusing on the 
development of three language skills: listening, reading and writing. Grammar and the 
mastering of linguistic features are key elements of this qualification, as is the inclusion of 
authentic written and spoken sources, responding through writing to literature and film, and 
independent research. 
Students are expected to be able to develop knowledge and understanding of society past 
and present, and of the political and artistic culture of Iran and Afghanistan. They should be 
able to express and justify their own opinions, develop arguments and persuade in writing, 
building on the fluency developed at Key Stage 4.  
The skill of translation will be developed from those skills practised at Key Stages 3 and 4.  
The range of topics promotes a clear progression in grammar, vocabulary and cultural 
knowledge and understanding from Key Stage 4 and will increase linguistic and cognitive 
demand. The grammar list illustrates the level required for this qualification.  
This qualification offers a suitable progression route to further study at university level.  
In addition, the study of one language at GCE can facilitate and help promote the learning of 
other languages. The qualification may also add to an individual’s employability profile, 
particularly for UK organisations trading overseas as well as with international companies 
based in the UK and globally. Students can progress to a wide range of careers in areas such 
as journalism and media, education, science, medicine, the civil service, sales, marketing, 
retail, and charities. 
Students will be able to apply their knowledge, skills and understanding to authentic, real-life 
contexts. They will develop transferable skills that support the study of other GCE subjects, 
higher-education study and the transition to employment, together with an understanding 
and appreciation of Persian-speaking countries and their cultures. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) 
 – Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
42 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
43 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Prescribed literary texts and films 45 
Appendix 2: Grammar list 46 
Appendix 3: The context for the development of this qualification 48 
Appendix 4: Transferable skills 50 
Appendix 5: Level 3 Extended Project qualification 51 
Appendix 6: Codes 53 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) 
 – Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
44 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
45 
Appendix 1: Prescribed literary texts 
and films  
For Paper 2, students are required to study two works from the list below. The works can be 
either two literary texts or one literary text and one film. Teachers should select works that 
are appropriate for their students.  
Literary texts 
• ﮐﻧﯾم،ﻋﺎدت ﻣﯽ زوﯾﺎ ﭘﯾرزاد، 2004 )novel (  
• ،ی ﻧﯿﮏ اﺧﺘﺮﺧﺎﻧﻮاده  اﯾﺮج ﭘﺰﺷﮑﺰاد،  2001  )play(  
• روح، ﺳﺗﺎلﮐﺎرت ﭘُ ، اﻧﮕﯾز ﺷرﯾﻔﯾﺎن2008 )novel (  
Films 
 
• ، اﺻﻐﺮ ﻓﺮھﺎدی، ﺟﺪاﯾﯽ ﺳﯿﻤﯿﻦ از ﻧﺎدر2011 
• ، آﻓﺴﺎﯾﺪ، ﺟﻌﻔﺮ ﭘﻨﺎھﯽ2006 
• ، ﺗﮭﻤﯿﻨﮫ ﻣﯿﻼﻧﯽ، ﺳﻮﭘﺮاﺳﺘﺎر2009 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) 
 – Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
46 
Appendix 2: Grammar list 
Students at A Level are expected to have studied the grammatical system and structures of 
the language during their course. Knowledge of the grammar and structures specified for 
GCSE is assumed. 
In the examination, students will be required to use, actively and accurately, grammar and 
structures appropriate to the tasks set, drawn from the following lists. The mention of an 
item in the lists implies knowledge of both its forms and its functions at an appropriate level 
of accuracy and complexity. 
The examples in italics in parentheses are indicative, that is they serve to illustrate the part 
of speech or structure that students must know and hence do not represent an exhaustive 
specification of the required grammatical knowledge.  
Nouns 
● Compound 
● Formation with prefixes and suffixes  
● Collective 
● Plurals 
● Definite (articles) 
● Indefinite (articles) 
● Gerund 
Pronouns 
● Relative 
● Possessive 
● Demonstrative 
● Interrogative 
● Reflexive/emphatic 
Adjectives 
● Numerals: cardinal, ordinal, distributives and fractions 
● Comparative and superlative 
● Used as adverbs 
● Used as nouns 
● Past participle 
● Present participle 
Adverbs 
● Position of different adverbs( adverb of time, place, interrogative) in sentences 
Verbs 
● Past stem 
● Present stem 
● Simple 
● Compound 
● Auxiliary 
● Intransitive 
● Transitive 
• Impersonal expressions  ﺗوان ﮔرﻓت / ﺑﺎﯾد رﻓت/ﻣﯽ    
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
47 
Tenses 
● Past simple 
● Past continuous 
● Past perfect 
● Present simple 
● Present continuous 
● Present perfect 
● Subjunctive 
● Future 
Conditionals 
● Past 
● Present 
Imperative 
● Addressed to second person plural  ﺑﮕﯾرﯾد   
● Addressed to first person singular   ﺑﮕﯾر   
Prepositions 
• Verbal prepositions   آﻣوﺧﺗنﺑﮫ / آﻣوﺧﺗن از / ﺗرﺳﯾدن از / ﺟﻧﮕﯾدن ﺑﺎ  
Reported speech 
• Direct  روﯾم. ﻋﻠﯽ ﮔﻔت: "ﺑﮫ ﺳﯾﻧﻣﺎ ﻣﯽ   
• Indirect  روﻧد.ﺧواھد ﺑداﻧد آﯾﺎ ﺣﺳن ﺑﺎ ﺑرادرش ﺑﮫ ﺳﯾﻧﻣﺎ ﻣﯽﻋﻠﯽ ﻣﯽ  
Voice 
• Active 
• Passive  ی ﻏذا ﺧورده ﺷد.ھﻣﮫ  
Conjunctions 
● Common conjunctionsﮐﮫ، اﮔر، ﭼون 
● Interjectionای، آی 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) 
 – Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
48 
Appendix 3: The context for the 
development of this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] and our 
ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
● reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with those 
taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
● consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including higher-education 
academics and teachers to ensure this qualification is suitable for a UK context 
● reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in their 
documents GCE Qualification Level Conditions and Requirements and GCSE/GCE Subject 
Level Conditions and Requirements for Modern Foreign Languages, published in April 2016. 
 
  
                                                
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification Principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
● demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning and 
measuring higher-order skills 
● rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and valid 
assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in end users of the knowledge, skills 
and competencies of certified students 
● inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students develop at 
different rates and have different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
● empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills, see Appendix 4. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
49 
 
 
 
 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
May 2014 
“The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important change to the 
education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications will assist them in 
helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an ‘Expert 
Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or because of 
our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the world as diverse as 
Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification development 
process that has included: 
● establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-specific 
expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
● subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future oriented. The 
design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, meaning learner outcomes 
have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a learner’s 
success in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident that we have 
supported the development of qualifications that are outstanding for their coherence, 
thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as representing world-class best 
practice.”    
  
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Lee Sing Kong 
Director, National Institute of Education, 
Singapore 
  
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
  
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
All titles correct as of May 2014. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) 
 – Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
50 
Appendix 4: Transferable skills 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher-education institutions and employers have consistently flagged the 
need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable them to respond with 
confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines skills, or 
competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that can be learned and 
that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform an activity or task and can be 
built upon and extended through learning.’[1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected and 
evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this process, we 
identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the most evidence-based and 
robust skills framework. We adapted the framework slightly to include the Program for 
International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT Literacy and Collaborative Problem Solving 
(CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves the following[2]. 
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve general 
cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and communicate[3]. 
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, speaking communication, written communication, 
assertive communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, service 
orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared understanding, 
taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team organisation. 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work stress, 
adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, and physical 
adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual teams, 
work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and able to acquire 
new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher education, 
as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the teaching and learning of 
this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning materials, developed with 
stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
  
                                                
[1]  OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012) 
[2]  Koenig J A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop  
(National Academies Press, 2011) 
[3]  PISA – The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy (2011) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
51 
Appendix 5: Level 3 Extended Project 
qualification 
What is the Extended Project? 
The Extended Project is a standalone qualification that can be taken alongside GCEs. It 
supports the development of independent learning skills and helps to prepare students for 
their next step – whether that be higher education or employment. The qualification: 
● is recognised by higher education for the skills it develops 
● is worth half of an Advanced GCE qualification at grades A*–E 
● carries UCAS points for university entry. 
The Extended Project encourages students to develop skills in the following areas: research, 
critical thinking, extended writing and project management. Students identify and agree a 
topic area of their choice for in-depth study (which may or may not be related to a GCE 
subject they are already studying), guided by their teacher. 
Students can choose from one of four approaches to produce: 
● a dissertation (for example an investigation based on predominantly secondary research) 
● an investigation/field study (for example a practical experiment) 
● a performance (for example in music, drama or sport) 
● an artefact (for example creating a sculpture in response to a client brief or solving an  
engineering problem). 
The qualification is coursework based and students are assessed, in English, on the skills of 
managing, planning and evaluating their project. Students will research their topic, develop 
skills to review and evaluate the information, and then present the final outcome of their 
project. 
The Extended Project has 120 guided learning hours (GLH) consisting of a 40-GLH taught 
element that includes teaching the technical skills (for example research skills) and  
an 80-GLH guided element that includes mentoring students through the project work.  
The qualification is 100% internally assessed and externally moderated. 
How to link the Extended Project with languages 
The Extended Project creates the opportunity to develop transferable skills for progression to 
higher education and to the workplace, through the exploration of either an area of personal 
interest or a topic of interest from within the language qualification content. The project 
must be written in English. 
Through the Extended Project, students will develop skills that support their study of Persian, 
including: 
● conducting, organising and using research 
● independent reading in the subject area 
● planning, project management and time management 
● defining a hypothesis to be tested in investigations or developing a design brief 
● collecting, handling and interpreting data and evidence 
● evaluating arguments and processes, including arguments in favour of alternative 
interpretations of data and evaluation of experimental methodology 
● critical thinking. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) 
 – Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
52 
In the context of the Extended Project, critical thinking refers to the ability to identify and 
develop arguments for a point of view or hypothesis and to consider and respond to 
alternative arguments. This supports the development of evaluative skills through evaluating 
different arguments and using qualitative and quantitative evidence to support informed 
judgements and propose evidence-based solutions to issues. 
Types of Extended Project related to languages 
Students may produce a dissertation on any topic that can be researched and debated, for 
example a controversial issue such as ‘equal rights for all’, ‘the role of the church’ or 
‘hooliganism in sport ’. 
A dissertation might involve an investigation such as: 
● the impact of English language on the Persian music industry 
● the success of different types of schools in Iran. 
The dissertation uses secondary research sources to provide a reasoned defence or a point of 
view, with consideration of counter-arguments. 
An alternative might be an investigative project or field study involving the collection of data 
from primary research, for example: 
● the impact of the revolution on Persian society 
● a statistical survey of changing attitudes towards technology among young people in Iran. 
A field study might consider an issue that lends itself to primary research, for example an 
investigation on the impact of foreign policy in Iranian politics. 
Using the Extended Project to support breadth and depth 
In the Extended Project, students are assessed on the quality of the work they produce and 
the skills they develop and demonstrate through completing the project. Students should 
demonstrate that they have extended themselves in some significant way beyond what they 
have been studying in Persian. Students can demonstrate extension in one or more 
dimensions: 
● deepening understanding – where a student explores a topic in greater depth than in 
the specification content. This could be an in-depth exploration of one aspect of the 
themes 
● broadening skills – where a student learns a new skill. This might be learning how to 
design a website or learning about a new statistical technique that can be used in the 
analysis of either primary or secondary data collected by the student 
● widening perspectives – where the student’s project spans different subjects. A student 
studying Persian with business may wish to research the impact of tourism on a particular 
region or locality. A student studying Persian with history may wish to analyse the impact 
of the revolution on today’s society. 
Information to support the delivery and assessment of the Extended Project, including the 
specification for it, can be found on our website. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Persian (listening, reading and writing) –  
Specification – Issue 1 – June 2018  © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
53 
Appendix 6: Codes 
 
Type of code Use of code Code 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for performance 
tables is assigned a discount code that 
indicates the subject area to which it 
belongs. 
Discount codes are published by the DfE. 
Please see the GOV.UK 
website* 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an 
Ofqual Regulated Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) code. 
The RQF code is known as a Qualification 
Number (QN). This is the code that 
features in the DfE Section 96 and on the 
LARA as being eligible for 16–18 and 19+ 
funding, and is to be used for all 
qualification funding purposes. The QN will 
appear on students’ final certification 
documentation. 
The QN for this 
qualification is: 
603/3308/X 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to 
enter students for a qualification. Centres 
will need to use the entry codes only when 
claiming students’ qualifications. 
A Level – 9PN0 
Paper codes These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be 
entered for individual papers. 
Paper 1: 9PN0/01 
Paper 2: 9PN0/02 
Paper 3: 9PN0/03 
 
*www.gov.uk/government/publications/2018-performance-tables-discount-code 
 
 
 
Sb060618Z:\LT\PD\GCE 2017\AL PERSIAN SPEC TYPESETTING.DOCX.1–58/1 

 
 
Edexcel, BTEC and LCCI qualifications 
Edexcel, BTEC and LCCI qualifications are awarded by Pearson, the UK’s largest awarding 
body offering academic and vocational qualifications that are globally recognised and 
benchmarked. For further information, please visit our qualification website at 
qualifications.pearson.com. Alternatively, you can get in touch with us using the details on 
our contact us page at qualifications.pearson.com/contactus 
About Pearson 
Pearson is the world's leading learning company, with 35,000 employees in more than  
70 countries working to help people of all ages to make measurable progress in their lives 
through learning. We put the learner at the centre of everything we do, because wherever 
learning flourishes, so do people. Find out more about how we can help you and your 
learners at qualifications.pearson.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References to third party material made in this specification are made in good faith. Pearson 
does not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may 
be subject to change, or any opinions expressed therein. (Material may include literary texts, 
journals, magazines and other publications and websites.) 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
 
ISBN 978 1 446 94709 8 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2018 
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office:  80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121
