This draft qualification has not yet been accredited by Ofqual. It is published to enable teachers to have early sight of our 
proposed approach to Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9 - 1) in Music (1MU0). Further changes may be required 
and no assurance can be given at this time that the proposed qualification will be made available in its current form, or 
that it will be accredited in time for first teaching in September 2016 and first award in 2018.
Specification 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Art, Craft and Design (9AD0)  Fine Art (9FA0) 
Graphic Communication (9GC0)  Textile Design (9TE0) 
Three-dimensional Design (9TD0) Photography (9PY0) 
First teaching from September 2015 
First certification from 2017 Issue 6 
A Level 
Art and 
Design 
 
 
About Pearson 
We are the world’s leading learning company operating in countries all around the 
world. We provide content, assessment and digital services to learners, educational 
institutions, employers, governments and other partners globally. We are 
committed to helping equip learners with the skills they need to enhance their 
employability prospects and to succeed in the changing world of work. We believe 
that wherever learning flourishes so do people.  
This specification is Issue 6. Key changes are summarised on the next page. We will 
inform centres of any changes to this issue. The latest issue can be found on our 
website. 
References to third party materials made in this specification are made in good 
faith. Pearson does not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of 
materials, which may be subject to change, or any opinions expressed therein. 
(Materials may include textbooks, journals, magazines and other publications and 
websites.) 
 
 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
 
ISBN 978 1 446 92991 9 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2024 
 
 
Summary of Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE  
in Art and Design specification Issue 6 changes  
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this current 
issue  
Page 
number  
Page 57 of the specification has been removed and replaced with the 
following text and a link out to the candidate authentication form. 
 
Appendix 1: Art and Design Authentication Sheet 
Students must sign an authentication sheet to confirm that the work 
submitted has been carried out without assistance other than that which is 
acceptable under the scheme of assessment. Teachers and centres must be 
satisfied that the work is the student’s own, and both teachers and students 
must sign the authentication sheet to this effect. 
Each component submitted for assessment must be accompanied by the 
completed assessment grid and a signed copy of the authentication sheet. 
Please download the authentication form from our website
. 
 
57 
 
Earlier issues 2, 3 and 4 show previous changes. 
If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, contact us via our 
website at: qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/contact-us.html. 

 
Introduction 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design is designed for use in schools 
and colleges. It is part of a suite of GCE qualifications offered by Pearson. 
Purpose of the specification 
This specification sets out: 
• the objectives of the qualification 
• any other qualifications that a student must have completed before taking the qualification 
• any prior knowledge and skills that the student is required to have before taking the 
qualification 
• any other requirements that a student must have satisfied before they will be assessed or 
before the qualification will be awarded 
• the knowledge and understanding that will be assessed as part of the qualification 
• the method of assessment and any associated requirements relating to it 
• the criteria against which a student’s level of attainment will be measured  
(such as assessment criteria). 
 
 
Rationale 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design meets the following purposes, 
which fulfil those defined by the Office of Qualifications and Examinations Regulation (Ofqual) 
for Advanced GCE qualifications in their GCE Qualification Level Conditions and Requirements 
document, published in April 2014. 
The purposes of this qualification are to: 
• define and assess achievement of the knowledge, skills and understanding that will be 
needed by students planning to progress to undergraduate study at UK higher education 
institutions, particularly (although not only) in the same subject area 
• set out a robust and internationally comparable post-16 academic course of study to 
develop that knowledge, skills and understanding 
• enable HE institutions to identify accurately the level of attainment of students 
• provide a basis for school and college accountability measures at age 18 
• provide a benchmark of academic ability for employers. 
Qualification aims and objectives 
The aims and objectives of the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design are to 
enable students to develop: 
• intellectual, imaginative, creative and intuitive capabilities 
• investigative, analytical, experimental, practical, technical and expressive skills, aesthetic 
understanding and critical judgement 
• independence of mind in developing, refining and communicating their own ideas, their own 
intentions and their own personal outcomes 
• an interest in, enthusiasm for and enjoyment of art, craft and design 
• their experience of working with a broad range of media 
• an understanding of the interrelationships between art, craft and design processes and an 
awareness of the contexts in which they operate 
• knowledge and experience of real-world contexts and, where appropriate, links to the 
creative industries 
• knowledge and understanding of art, craft, design and media and technologies in 
contemporary and past societies and cultures 
• an awareness of different roles, functions, audiences and consumers of art, craft and 
design. 
 
 
Contents 
 
Qualification at a glance 1 
Assessment Objectives and weightings 3 
Knowledge, skills and understanding 5 
Content for both components 5 
Additional guidance 8 
Art, Craft and Design (9AD0) 11 
Art and Design (Fine Art) (9FA0) 12 
Art and Design (Graphic Communication) (9GC0) 15 
Art and Design (Textile Design) (9TE0) 18 
Art and Design (Three-dimensional Design) (9TD0) 21 
Art and Design (Photography) (9PY0) 24 
Component 1: Personal Investigation 27 
Component 2: Externally Set Assignment 30 
Assessment grids 32 
Assignment setting, taking and marking 36 
Presentation of work 39 
Marking, standardisation and moderation 40 
Security and backups 41 
Malpractice 42 
Further information 44 
Health and safety 44 
Assessment 45 
Assessment summary 45 
Assessment Objectives and weightings 47 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 48 
Entry and assessment information 49 
Student entry 49 
Forbidden combinations and discount code 49 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special 
consideration 50 
Equality Act 2010 and Pearson equality policy 51 
Synoptic assessment 52 
Awarding and reporting 52 
Language of assessment 52 
 
 
Other information 53 
Student recruitment 53 
Prior learning and other requirements 53 
Progression 53 
Relationship between GCSE and Advanced GCE 53 
Progression from GCSE to Advanced GCE 53 
Appendix 1: Art and Design Authentication Sheet 57 
Appendix 2: Teacher Mark Sheets 57 
Appendix 3: Level 3 Extended Project qualification 62 
Appendix 4: The context for the development of this 
qualification 66 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 68 
Appendix 6: Codes 70 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
1 
Qualification at a glance 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design consists of two 
components, both teacher assessed and externally moderated by us.  
The qualification can be achieved by following one of the six titles as detailed on 
pages 11–26. Students must complete all assessment in May/June in any single 
year. 
 
Component 1  
*Paper codes: 9AD0/01, 9FA0/01, 9GC0/01, 9TE0/01, 9TD0/01, 9PY0/01 
Title: Personal Investigation 
● Internally set, assessed by the teacher and externally 
moderated. 
● Availability: May/June 
● First assessment: 2017 
60% of the 
total 
qualification 
Overview of content 
This component allows students opportunities to generate and develop ideas, 
research primary and contextual sources, record practical and written 
observations, experiment with media and processes, and refine ideas towards 
producing personal resolved outcome(s).  
This will require students to address each of the Assessment Objectives given on 
page 3. Students must work within one of the following titles: Art, Craft and 
Design, Fine Art, Graphic Communication, Textile Design, Three-dimensional 
Design, Photography. 
Overview of assessment 
● Incorporates three major elements: supporting studies, practical work, and a 
personal study. 
● Supporting studies and practical work will comprise a portfolio of development 
work and outcomes based on themes and ideas developed from personal 
starting points. 
● The personal study will be evidenced through critical written communication 
showing contextual research and understanding in a minimum 1000 words of 
continuous prose, which may contain integrated images. The personal study 
comprises 12% of the total qualification and is marked out of 18. 
● Work must cover all four Assessment Objectives and be marked using the 
assessment grid on page 33–35. 
● Marks available: 90. 
 
*See Appendix 6: Codes for a description of these codes and all other codes 
relevant to this qualification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
2 
 
Component 2  
*Paper codes: 9AD0/02, 9FA0/02, 9GC0/02, 9TE0/02, 9TD0/02, 9PY0/02 
Title: Externally Set Assignment 
● Externally set, assessed by the teacher and externally 
moderated. 
● Availability: May/June 
● First assessment: 2017 
40% of the 
total 
qualification 
Overview of content 
This component allows students opportunities to generate and develop ideas, 
research primary and contextual sources, record practical and written 
observations, experiment with media and processes, and refine ideas towards 
producing personal resolved outcome(s) in response to an externally set theme.   
This will require students to address each of the Assessment Objectives given on 
page 3.  
Students must continue to work within the same title as component 1. 
Overview of assessment 
● Incorporates two major elements: preparatory studies and the 15–hour period 
of sustained focus. 
● Preparatory studies will comprise a portfolio of practical and written 
development work based on the Externally Set Assignment. 
● During the 15–hour period of sustained focus under examination conditions, 
students will produce final outcome(s) extending from their preparatory studies 
in response to the Externally Set Assignment. 
● The Externally Set Assignment is released on 1 February and contains a theme 
and suggested starting points.  
● Students have from 1 February until the commencement of the final 15–hour 
period of sustained focus to develop preparatory studies. 
● The 15–hour period of sustained focus under examination conditions may take 
place over multiple sessions (a maximum of five, within three consecutive 
weeks). 
● Work must cover all four Assessment Objectives and be marked using the 
assessment grid on pages 33–35. 
● Marks available: 72. 
 
*See Appendix 6: Codes for a description of these codes and all other codes 
relevant to this qualification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
3 
Assessment Objectives and weightings 
All student work will be assessed against the following Assessment Objectives. 
Work is assessed using the assessment grids on pages 33–35. Assessment 
Objectives are equally weighted in this qualification. 
 
Students must: 
% in 
GCE 
AO1 Develop ideas through sustained and focused investigations 
informed by contextual and other sources, demonstrating 
analytical and critical understanding 
25 
AO2 Explore and select appropriate resources, media, materials, 
techniques and processes, reviewing and refining ideas as 
work develops 
25 
AO3 Record ideas, observations and insights relevant to intentions, 
reflecting critically on work and progress 25 
AO4 Present a personal and meaningful response that realises 
intentions and, where appropriate, makes connections 
between visual and other elements 
25 
Total 100% 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
4 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
5 
Knowledge, skills and understanding  
Content for both components  
Introduction 
This qualification can be followed through the broad-based title of Art, Craft and 
Design or through one of five endorsed titles: Fine Art, Graphic Communication, 
Textile Design, Three-dimensional Design and Photography. Details of all titles are 
set out in the following pages. When students are entered for an endorsed title, 
they will follow content in that endorsed title for both components. Students 
undertaking the Art, Craft and Design title will work in disciplines chosen from at 
least two of the other five endorsed titles for Component 1. For Component 2, 
students undertaking the Art, Craft and Design title may choose to produce work  
in one or more disciplines, giving the option to specialise if desired. For the 
remaining endorsed titles, students are expected to cover similar content for  
both components. 
Art and Design titles 
All titles explore practical and critical/contextual work through a range of processes 
and media. 
Art, Craft and Design: through a broad-based course of study, developed through 
a range of 2D, 3D and time-based processes and media, drawn from disciplines 
from at least two of the other five endorsed titles in Component 1, with study of 
one or more disciplines in Component 2.  
Fine Art: through the disciplines of painting and drawing, printmaking, sculpture, 
lens-based image making. 
Graphic Communication: through the disciplines of advertising, illustration, 
branding, information design.  
Textile Design: through the disciplines of textiles for interiors, fine art textiles, 
fashion textiles. 
Three-dimensional Design: through the disciplines of spatial design, product 
design, design crafts. 
Photography: through the disciplines of film-based photography, digital 
photography, film and video. 
For all titles, students are required to develop practical and theoretical 
knowledge and understanding of: 
● relevant materials, processes, technologies and resources  
● how ideas, feelings and meanings can be conveyed and interpreted in images 
and artefacts 
● how images and artefacts relate to the time and place in which they were made 
and to their social and cultural contexts 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
6 
● continuity and change in different genres, styles and traditions 
● a working vocabulary and specialist terminology. 
For all titles, students are required to develop the skills to:  
● record experiences and observations in a variety of ways using drawing or other 
appropriate visual forms; undertake research; gather, select and organise visual 
and other appropriate information 
● explore relevant resources; analyse, discuss and evaluate images, objects and 
artefacts; make and record independent judgements 
● use knowledge and understanding of the work of others to develop and extend 
thinking and inform own work 
● generate and explore potential lines of enquiry using appropriate media and 
techniques 
● apply knowledge and understanding in making images and artefacts; review and 
modify work; plan and develop ideas in the light of their own and others’ 
evaluations 
● organise, select and communicate ideas, solutions and responses, and present 
them in a range of visual, tactile and/or sensory forms. 
Developing students’ knowledge, skills and understanding in art and 
design 
Students need opportunities to generate ideas and research from primary and 
contextual sources, record their findings, experiment with media and processes, 
and develop and refine their ideas towards producing outcome(s). It is essential 
that students review their progress at appropriate points in the development of 
their work. 
Each component aims to develop students’ ability to generate and develop ideas for 
their practical work and to build contextual understanding, from either a self-
selected or teacher–negotiated focus. Students will be required to: 
● develop ideas through sustained and focused investigations informed by 
contextual and other sources, demonstrating analytical and critical 
understanding  
● explore and select appropriate resources, media, materials, techniques and 
processes, reviewing and refining ideas as work develops  
● record ideas, observations and insights relevant to intentions, reflecting 
critically on work and progress  
● present a personal and meaningful response that realises intentions and, where 
appropriate, makes connections between visual and other elements . 
For all titles, students should also: 
● understand how ideas generate starting points for art and design practice and 
form an integral part of the creative process 
● understand how images and artefacts relate to ethical and political contexts  
● undertake sustained development and refinement of ideas 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
7 
● develop their visual language to communicate ideas 
● demonstrate skilful use of the formal elements, including line, tone, colour, 
shape, pattern, texture, form and structure 
● record evidence of their progress, in an on–going critical and analytical review 
● respond to a theme, stimulus or ideas 
● make connections between their investigations and creative intentions 
● realise intentions 
● produce and present outcome(s).  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
8 
Additional guidance 
Drawing 
Drawing is an essential skill for studying art and design at GCE and degree level. It 
forms a core element of the practice of artists, craftspeople and designers. It can 
take many forms; at its simplest and most direct it consists of marks of pencil or 
pen on paper, though it can employ any media and be applied in two and three 
dimensions or time-based media.  
Drawing in the context of this qualification is taken to mean the following: recording 
the observed world, using mark-making in appropriate media; exploring ideas 
visually, through the act of mark-making; investigating, through the exploration of 
drawing media to find new ways of expressing ideas, feelings or observations; 
experimenting with various tools, materials and techniques. Further details are 
given in the following sections. 
Annotation 
Notes can be used to annotate visual work, to reflect on students’ own work and 
that of others, as a development log and to record notes on experiments, ideas or 
visits. Students should aim to use specialist terminology and vocabulary relevant to 
art and design in their annotations.  
Personal study 
The personal study, which is an assessed element of Component 1, is a separate 
piece of writing which must comprise a minimum of 1000 words of continuous 
prose. Further details are outlined in the section on Component 1, pages 26–28. 
Critical and contextual knowledge and understanding 
Along with written annotation, an important aspect of student progression in art 
and design is the application of critical and contextual knowledge and 
understanding, and an ability to express and justify ideas. Developments of these 
aspects are integrated within practical work, written annotation and the spoken 
word. They may be honed, for example, through practical visual analysis; by using 
the spoken word in a critique, a discussion or an interview; through investigation of 
some aspect of art and design, e.g. from a museum, gallery or site visit.  
Students should develop a critical understanding of their own work and appreciate 
it in relation to historical and contemporary contexts. In the broadest sense, this 
may be through looking at art, craft and design in galleries and museums, through 
various media, in the designed world and in understanding how art and design 
relates to everything around them. 
Students should consider the impact of global influences, cultures and traditions 
both past and present, particularly those that are influential in relation to 
technique, colour, symbolism, ritual, social climate and location. Environmental and 
social issues have long been a source of work and debate for artists and designers, 
with issues such as poverty, sustainability, consumption and political movements 
stimulating points of creative investigation. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
9 
Where appropriate, students should make reference in their development work to 
influences from past and contemporary creative practice. They should become 
familiar with the work of artists, craftspeople and designers who have made a 
major contribution to practical and conceptual development in their area. They 
should be familiar with contemporary and emerging concepts and learn how to 
analyse and critically evaluate work, demonstrating an understanding of purposes, 
meanings and contexts. 
Students should make links between investigation, drawing, design development, 
project management, technical and digital applications, final presentation and 
evaluation. There should be a continuous critical response to their own work, 
through methods such as an on-going learning log or blog, annotations and written 
explanations of technical and creative processes as well as notes about references 
and sources of information. 
The critique is used in higher education as a vehicle for developing the student’s 
ability to use specialist terminology and vocabulary, to listen to and respond to 
others’ interpretations, to defend their own work and to express their thoughts and 
feelings on art and design. This can be an effective tool for students’ to practice 
contextualising and verbalising an understanding of art and design concepts in 
relation to their own work. 
Evidence of a student’s critical and contextual knowledge and understanding will be 
found, for example, in annotated sketchbooks, visual studies, research notes into 
artists and designers, reviews and evaluations, and in creative expression of 
intentions.  
Discrete evidence of in-depth study, and critical and contextual knowledge and 
understanding, will also be shown through the personal study of a minimum 1000 
words of continuous prose, as outlined in Component 1, pages 26–28 
Digital and non-digital media 
While digital media offers new possibilities for making art and design, many of the 
underlying principles are common to non-digital media. Formal elements apply in 
the same way, although there are fundamental differences between screen-based 
and print-based images, such as the potential for different forms of interaction.  
Many types of digital media are relatively new, while others extend the functions of 
non-digital media. They are subject to continual change in techniques and 
processes both in their own right and in the way they interact with non-digital 
media. Digital media can function as a tool, a process, a method of dissemination 
and a means of interaction with any audience. 
Students can work entirely in digital media or entirely in non-digital media, or in 
any combination of the two, provided the Assessment Objectives are addressed.  
Further guidance on how digital and non-digital media may be applied is given in 
the title sections.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
10 
Depth of study 
Through following this Advanced Level specification, it is expected that students will 
achieve in-depth knowledge, understanding and skills in art and design that will aid 
their progression to foundation and degree-related study in this area.  
In-depth knowledge, understanding and skills can be achieved through: 
● advanced specialisation in particular disciplines, techniques or processes 
● extended development of particular themes, ideas or issues 
● theoretical research and showing increased understanding 
● integration of practical, written and other forms of communication 
● rigorous exploration of an interdisciplinary or multidisciplinary approach. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
11 
Art, Craft and Design (9AD0) 
Introduction 
The broad-based Art, Craft and Design title will enable students to explore a range 
of two-dimensional, three-dimensional or time-based approaches to their studies. 
Artists, craftspeople and designers, while working within their own disciplines, are 
often inspired and influenced by those working in a wide range of different creative 
areas. They draw inspiration from images, compositions, forms and ideas outside of 
their own discipline. They work frequently in multi-disciplinary and cross-
disciplinary ways, breaking traditional boundaries to create works of art, craft and 
design that combine ideas, concepts and materials in new ways. 
Artists, craftspeople and designers all follow a creative process, in which they 
explore and develop approaches to communicating ideas visually. When generating 
and developing new ideas they are pro-active, persistent and self-motivated. 
Producing creative, dynamic and exciting outcomes, they can inspire and challenge 
the viewer through interaction with their work and engagement with their ideas. 
Disciplines within Art, Craft and Design 
Students should be encouraged to work and develop skills in a multi-disciplinary 
and cross-disciplinary way, exploring the connections between areas of art, craft 
and design and gaining knowledge and understanding of the scope and variety of 
disciplines and approaches. 
Students undertaking the Art, Craft and Design title will work in disciplines chosen 
from at least two of the other five endorsed titles for Component 1, with the 
option to specialise in Component 2 by producing work in one or more disciplines. 
The disciplines available are: painting and drawing, printmaking, sculpture, lens-
based image making, advertising, illustration, branding, information design, textiles 
for interiors, fine art textiles, fashion textiles, spatial design, product design, design 
crafts, film-based photography, digital photography, and film and video. 
For Component 1: Personal Investigation, students must work in at least two 
disciplines, drawn from different endorsed titles.  
For Component 2: Externally Set Assignment, students may choose to produce 
work in one or more disciplines. 
Students may produce work entirely from a single discipline from one of the 
endorsed titles for Component 2. If they do so, their work will be standardised with 
the work from students taking that endorsed title. 
Please refer to the endorsed title sections for further details. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
12 
Art and Design (Fine Art) (9FA0) 
Introduction 
Fine art requires engagement with aesthetic and intellectual concepts through the 
use of traditional and/or digital media, materials, techniques and processes for the 
purpose of self-expression, free of external constraints. Fine art may be created to 
communicate ideas and messages about the observed world, the qualities of 
materials, perceptions, or preconceptions. It can also be used to explore personal 
and cultural identity, society and how we live, visual language, and technology. 
Fine Art allows us to consider and reflect on our place in the world, both as 
individuals and collectively. 
Drawing and other materials processes 
Drawing in fine art forms an essential part of the development process from initial 
idea to finished work; from rough sketches, to diagrams setting out compositions, 
to digital drawings used for installations or as part of three-dimensional work. 
Students should use a variety of tools, materials and techniques, as appropriate, for 
recording their surroundings and source materials. Students should consider the 
application and implications of new and emerging technologies that can be used in 
conjunction with traditional and digital fine art materials. 
Contextual understanding and professional practice 
Contexts for fine art can be found in a wide range of sources; for example, from 
historical works in museums, contemporary art shows and fairs, an exhibition at a 
local gallery,  films, architecture, music, literature and nature.  
Students are required to develop the knowledge, skills and understanding 
outlined on pages 5 and 6. When undertaking work in fine art, students 
should also engage with: 
● concepts such as figuration, representation and abstraction 
● how the formal elements evoke responses in the viewer 
● various forms or presentation in fine art and the ways that audiences may 
respond to or interact with them 
● sustainable materials and production processes in the construction of work 
● the potential of collaborative working methodologies in the creative process 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
13 
Disciplines within fine art 
For the purposes of this qualification, fine art is sub-divided into the following four 
disciplines: 
● painting and drawing 
● printmaking 
● sculpture 
● lens-based image making.  
Students will be required to work in one or more of the disciplines to communicate 
their ideas. By working across disciplines, they will extend their understanding of 
the scope of fine art; by focusing on one discipline, they will gain a deeper 
understanding of specific processes within fine art. 
Painting and drawing 
Students will develop integrated knowledge, skills and understanding of the 
following: 
● characteristics of materials such as plasticity, opacity, translucence, malleability 
and transparency 
● properties of colour, such as hue, tint, saturation, tone and colour perception 
● materials such as graphite, wax crayon, oil pastel, soft pastel, aquarelle, 
charcoal, ink, chalk, conté crayon, gouache, watercolour, acrylic paint, oil paint, 
dyes and computer software 
● the use of a range of tools, such as artists’ brushes, decorators’ tools, knives, 
sponges, digital software, fingers, card squeegees, scrapers, sticks, found 
objects and natural forms  
● the potential for exploring combinations of materials, such as combining drawn 
and painted elements, collage, found objects, including inert materials to add 
textures/impart meaning. 
Printmaking 
Students will develop integrated knowledge, skills and understanding of the 
following: 
● print qualities and how they result from different printmaking tools, materials 
and processes 
● printing processes such as screen printing, intaglio printing, relief printing. 
Sculpture 
Students will develop integrated knowledge, skills and understanding of the 
following: 
● producing forms in three dimensions, utilising volume, space, materials and 
movement 
● modelling techniques such as the manipulation of plastic materials such as clay, 
plaster or wax using hands, tools or using 3D software 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
14 
● carving techniques such as cutting and abrading 
● construction techniques such as fixing or joining materials such as card, metals 
and plastics, using processes such as soldering, brazing, welding, glueing, 
jointing, riveting, bolting and 3D printing 
● materials such as wood, stone, plaster, leather, clay, textiles, card, plastics, 
wax, recyclable materials, ready-mades and found objects/materials. 
Lens-based image making 
Students will develop integrated knowledge, skills and understanding of the 
following: 
● the production processes of artworks in a range of lens and time-based media, 
such as mixed media, installation, site-specific, montage, digital, film and video, 
animation and sound 
● elements that can contribute to lens-based image making such as lighting, sets, 
environments and sound 
● qualities and functions of various film and video formats, such as 8mm film, 
analogue video, digital video, HD, 4K, .flv, .mov, .wmv, animated gif 
● editing, including knowledge of the variety of ways in which images might be 
juxtaposed to create appropriate effects, such as in-camera editing, non-linear, 
offline edits, use of timekey, compression, in and out points. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
15 
Art and Design (Graphic Communication) 
(9GC0) 
Introduction 
Graphic communication conveys information and ideas through visual means. The 
critical element for a graphic designer is the effective communication of a message 
or idea through the organisation of images and words. The scope of graphic 
communication has been extended through the growth of design applications in the 
home and in public and through the development of the internet. Graphic designers 
need to understand user and audience needs and how these groups respond to 
various forms of visual communication; as well as how changes to working 
practices lead to new forms of communication and presentation. 
Drawing and other materials processes 
Drawing in the context of graphic communication forms an essential part of the 
development process from initial idea to finished product; from rough sketches to 
diagrams setting out designs, including digital drawings. Students should use a 
variety of tools and materials, as appropriate, for recording their surroundings and 
source materials. Students must be alert to the possibilities offered by a range of 
materials, techniques and processes within graphic communication and of the 
important role of signs and symbols. They must be able to balance aesthetic and 
commercial considerations when producing graphic solutions to defined problems. 
As well as developing skills in their use, students should become aware of and be 
able to judge when it is appropriate to use traditional or computer-based methods 
within graphic communication processes, for example in developing roughs, layouts 
and mock-ups of potential design solutions, in recording and developing ideas and 
for final designs and presentation. Sometimes ideas or feelings need to be recorded 
and developed rapidly; the keys to rapid execution are familiarity with and 
availability of materials. Students should consider the application and implications 
of new and emerging technologies that can be used in conjunction with traditional 
and digital graphic communication materials. 
Contextual understanding and professional practice 
Contexts for graphic communication can be found in a wide range of sources; for 
example, from historical collections and museums, contemporary graphic 
communication shows and fairs, the local environment of signage, advertising and 
branding, films, architecture, music, literature and nature. 
Students should consider the issues, opportunities and constraints involved in 
image and content copyright. They should be aware of the circumstances and 
conditions in which it is acceptable to incorporate images and design concepts 
originated by others, and of the appropriate steps to take to ensure permission to 
reproduce their own work is suitably managed. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
16 
Students are required to develop the knowledge, skills and understanding 
outlined on pages 5 and 6. When undertaking work in graphic 
communication, students should also engage with: 
● how audiences may respond to the use of words, images and how the formal 
elements evoke responses in the viewer 
● the basic typographical and layout requirements for digital and print-based 
products 
● sustainable materials and production processes in the construction of work 
● the potential of collaborative working methodologies in the creative process. 
Disciplines within graphic communication 
For the purposes of this qualification, graphic communication is sub-divided into the 
following four disciplines: 
● advertising 
● illustration 
● branding 
● information design.  
Students will be required to work in one or more of the disciplines to communicate 
their ideas. By working across disciplines, they will extend their understanding of 
the scope of graphic communication; by focusing on one discipline, they will gain a 
deeper understanding of specific processes within graphic communication. 
Advertising 
Students will develop integrated knowledge, skills and understanding of the 
following: 
● how graphic communication is used to convey information, arouse interest, tell 
stories, create brand recognition, sell a product or service, promote brand 
loyalty 
● the role of graphic communication within marketing strategies, promotional 
campaigns, corporate identity design, logo design 
● design briefs, clients, audiences, web-based and digital advertising, use of social 
media 
● the use of images and typography in advertising, such as photography, 
animation and video. 
Illustration 
Students will develop integrated knowledge, skills and understanding of the 
following: 
● the relationships between illustration and narrative 
● illustration briefs, clients and audiences 
● thumbnails, sketches, dissections, plans and elevations 
● the use of digital technology such as photo-editing and vector-based software 
alongside and in combination with traditional wet and dry working processes 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
17 
● illustration for a variety of purposes, such as book, magazine, advertising, 
covers, web-based, interactive 
● infographics as a way of communicating data through imaginative charts and 
diagrams. 
Branding 
Students will develop integrated knowledge, skills and understanding of the 
following: 
● how packaging is determined by its contents 
● marketing briefs, clients and audiences, brand identity, brand loyalty 
● making suitable production drawings, which may include computer-generated 
ideas and developments 
● surface images, illustration decoration or pattern for packaging 
● development and construction of three-dimensional prototypes, considering 
production materials, recyclable design, using sustainable or renewable 
materials 
● planning and developing procedures for reproduction and manufacture 
● specifying sustainable materials and production processes that are suitable for 
recycling and/or reuse 
● the legal requirements for information that must be included on certain types of 
packaging, and for barcoding and tracking. 
Information design 
Students will develop integrated knowledge, skills and understanding of the 
following: 
● letter forms, font types, serif and sans serif fonts, leading, paragraph indents, 
hanging indents, justification, alignment, headings, kerning and sub-headings 
● typographical requirements for digital and print-based products, such as 
magazine design, newspaper design, web page design, leaflet and poster design 
● the appropriate use of templates, page layout, style sheets, image 
manipulation, compression, workflow and file types 
● 3d digital graphic techniques, such as modelling objects, rotation, lathing, 
extruding, linking, creating and applying textures and lighting effects 
● moving image/time-based digital graphic techniques, such as storyboarding, 
sound, animation, colour consistency 
● the appropriate use and combination of words, visual 2D and 3D 
representations, time and desired user behaviours and responses 
● interface design, such as the use of symbols and words to aid and enhance 
navigation, principles of control panel display, use of navigational structures and 
levels 
● a variety of presentation formats for different audiences, such as web-based, 
projection, touch-screen, mobile phones, DVD, downloadable content. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
18 
Art and Design (Textile Design) (9TE0) 
Introduction 
Textile design is a versatile discipline that involves the creation, selection, 
manipulation and application of a range of materials and processes in order to 
produce fabrics for different purposes. Textile designers are expected to work in a 
multi-disciplinary way to create ideas, concepts, materials and techniques for 
different applications; for example in fashion and clothing, there are specialised 
areas such as lingerie, nightwear, sportswear, accessories or innovative clothing for 
theatre or film production. Technological innovation in textile development is used 
increasingly to produce specialist fabrics, which can be protective, fireproof, 
waterproof, or performance enhancing.  
Some textile designers create fabrics for interior applications such as upholstery, 
bed linens, curtains, wallpapers, carpets and rugs or work more generally as 
surface designers for vinyl coverings, tiles, leather, glass, packaging, greetings 
cards and wrapping paper. Textile design can also be interpreted as a personal and 
individual fine art discipline, being used to create installations, mixed media 
constructions, tapestries, three-dimensional pieces, applications, soft sculpture and 
wall hangings. 
Drawing and other materials processes 
At the core of any textile art and design related practice is drawing. Drawing is an 
essential skill in the development process, from initial visual research, recording 
from primary sources, through to the translation of ideas into finished designs. The 
practice of drawing in textile design embraces traditional and non-traditional tools 
with digital translations and applications, whether these relate to fine art based 
textiles, fashion and clothing, interiors or surface design.  
Students should be aware of and apply traditional values of drawing, such as line, 
tone and shape in conjunction with digital applications for sewing, knitting, weaving 
and embroidery, as well as digital imaging software. Students could use drawing, 
photography and video as tools for recording their surroundings and source 
materials. A range of drawing methods will encourage students to consider multiple 
ways of reading, thinking and applying drawing in different contexts. This also 
enables textile design students to consider drawing as a tool of translation, 
analysis, design and illustration. Students should use a variety of tools and 
materials, as appropriate, for recording their surroundings and source materials. 
Students should consider the application and implications of new and emerging 
technologies that can be used in conjunction with traditional and digital textile 
materials. 
Contextual understanding and professional practice 
Contexts for textile design can be found in a wide range of sources; for example, 
from galleries, historical collections and museums, contemporary trade fairs and 
fashion shows, a local exhibition, films, architecture, music, literature and nature.  
Students should gain an awareness of environmental and global factors relating to 
textile design as well as a clear consideration of the aesthetics of the end product.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
19 
In addition, it is important that students are aware of current trends in textile and 
fashion design and development in order to achieve contextual currency in their 
work. This can be done through investigation into textile and fashion consultancies 
and agencies. Students should be familiar with contemporary and emerging 
concepts and learn how to analyse and critically evaluate textile design, 
demonstrating an understanding of purposes, meanings and contexts. 
Students are required to develop the knowledge, skills and understanding 
outlined on pages 5 and 6. When undertaking work in textile design, 
students should also engage with: 
● a range of materials and tools used for textiles processes, including ethically 
and ecologically considered sourcing  
● how the formal elements evoke responses in the viewer 
● the need for the specification of sustainable materials and energy-saving 
production processes in the construction of works and products 
● sustainable materials and production processes in the construction of work 
● the potential of collaborative working methodologies in the creative process. 
Disciplines within textile design 
For the purposes of this qualification, textile design is sub-divided into the following 
three disciplines: 
● textiles for interiors 
● fine art textiles 
● fashion textiles.  
Students will be required to work in one or more of the disciplines to communicate 
their ideas. By working across disciplines, they will extend their understanding of 
the scope of textile design; by focusing on one discipline, they will gain a deeper 
understanding of specific processes within textile design. 
Textiles for interiors 
Students will develop integrated knowledge, skills and understanding of the 
following: 
● the appropriate and necessary skills, which may include computer-generated 
ideas for development in colour, materials and construction, design, repeat 
pattern, surfaces and materials 
● knowledge and application of techniques such as weaving, knitting, embroidery, 
appliqué and fused or felted textiles 
● the basis of textile or surface design printing, including croquis and repeating 
pattern 
● techniques such as mono-print, transfer-relief, relief-print, wood-cut, lino-cut, 
silk-screen and digital printing 
● techniques such as resist dyeing (for example batik, tie and dye methods), 
shibori, silk painting, hand-painting and spraying. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
20 
Fine art textiles 
Students will develop integrated knowledge, skills and understanding of the 
following: 
● a range of materials and tools for making fine art textiles, including, where 
appropriate, digital 
● ways in which ideas and feelings can be effectively communicated through the 
organisation of materials and formal elements 
● how audiences may respond to the variety of forms that work may take, 
including methods of presentation 
● the appropriate skills to combine and exploit a range of media, materials and 
approaches that reflect contemporary fine art textile practice 
● a working knowledge of a range of techniques. 
Fashion textiles 
Students will develop integrated knowledge, skills and understanding of the 
following: 
● the creation and development of fashion design ideas, which may include 
drawing or recording skills, digital designs and the preparation of toiles or 
samples 
● the appropriate skills to combine and explore a range of materials and 
approaches 
● the appropriate skills of modelling, cutting, joining and embellishing in textiles 
or a range of appropriate media 
● a working knowledge of a range of textile techniques chosen from other textile 
disciplines 
● links to the broader areas of fashion, such as marketing, promotion and styling. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
21 
Art and Design (Three-dimensional Design) 
(9TD0) 
Introduction 
Three-dimensional design includes a range of art, craft and design practices to 
meet a specific need with sensitivity to both function and aesthetics. Form, 
function, materials and ultimate destination and use of the design or artefact are all 
important considerations for the three-dimensional designer. Students should be 
able to realise the full potential of their ideas and designs through the application of 
appropriate technical processes, though outcome(s) are likely to be in the form of 
prototypes, models and other forms of presentation. 
Drawing and other materials processes 
Drawing for designers forms an essential part of the development process from 
initial idea to finished product; from rough sketches to diagrams setting out 
patterns, to digital drawings used for products, spatial design or as an adjunct to 
design craft. Students should use a variety of tools and materials, as appropriate, 
for recording their surroundings and source materials. 
Drawing is often an essential two-dimensional stage in the development of three-
dimensional objects. Students will need to have an understanding of the way a 
three-dimensional world is depicted in two dimensions, for example by applying the 
rules of three-point perspective and the tools and conventions of 3D design 
software. Sometimes ideas or feelings need to be recorded and developed rapidly; 
the keys to rapid execution are familiarity with and availability of materials. 
Students should be alert to the possibilities offered by a range of materials and the 
role of digital media in three-dimensional design. As well as developing skills in 
their use, students should become aware of and be able to judge when it is more 
appropriate to use traditional or computer-based methods of design and 
presentation. Students must continue to develop their understanding and 
application of the formal elements, and in particular the use of texture, colour and 
light, giving consideration to psychological and physical impact on the viewer in 
order to evoke a positive emotional response. Students should consider the 
application and implications of new and emerging technologies that can be used in 
conjunction with traditional and digital three-dimensional design materials. 
Contextual understanding and professional practice 
Contexts for three-dimensional design can be found in a wide range of sources; for 
example, from galleries, historical collections and museums, contemporary design 
and craft fairs, the built environment, restoration projects, products, craft items, 
films, architecture, music, literature and nature.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
22 
Students should understand the appropriate application of a range of design skills, 
including concept formulation and analysis of a brief, experimentation, evaluation 
and communication to a range of different audiences. They should investigate 
specific areas of a design problem, determine relevant sources of information and 
use them to research and explore possible solutions. Students should be familiar 
with contemporary and emerging concepts and learn how to analyse and critically 
evaluate three-dimensional design, demonstrating an understanding of purposes, 
meanings and contexts. 
Students are required to develop the knowledge, skills and understanding 
outlined on pages 5 and 6. When undertaking work in three-dimensional 
design, students should also engage with: 
● the properties and characteristics of a range of materials and tools used for 
modelling and manufacturing places, spaces and three-dimensional products 
including, where appropriate, digital 
● the requirements for space, light, shape, form and colour in different design 
contexts and how they can be used to evoke emotional responses 
● how the formal elements evoke responses in the viewer 
● sustainable materials and production processes in the construction of work 
● the potential of collaborative working methodologies in the creative process. 
Disciplines within three-dimensional design 
For the purposes of this qualification, three-dimensional design is sub-divided into 
the following three disciplines: 
● spatial design 
● product design 
● design crafts.  
Students will be required to work in one or more of the disciplines to communicate 
their ideas. By working across disciplines, they will extend their understanding of 
the scope of three-dimensional design; by focusing on one discipline, they will gain 
a deeper understanding of specific processes within three-dimensional design. 
Spatial design  
Students will develop integrated knowledge, skills and understanding of the 
following: 
● the way in which spatial design incorporates the design of performance spaces, 
interiors, exhibitions, the built environment and architecture 
● developing ideas involving scale drawings and models, plans, elevations, cross-
sections and, where appropriate, perspectives, visualisations, models, fly-
throughs and axonometric drawings, props, costumes and maquettes 
● the demands of text, script, sound, choreography, stage directions, production, 
screenplay in relation to spatial design 
● factors that influence design solutions in private and public interiors and within 
the built environment 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
23 
● the role of technology in contemporary interiors and public spaces, including 
aspects such as service design, intelligent lighting, energy-saving devices and 
interactivity. 
Product design 
Students will develop integrated knowledge, skills and understanding of the 
following: 
● a range of consumer product types, such as mechanical, electronic and 
decorative 
● the generation and development of ideas, through appropriate drawing skills, 
computer-aided designs and the preparation of maquettes, prototypes and 
models 
● real and virtual modelling, bending, cutting and fastening in materials such as 
clay, wood, plastic, card, glass, metal, textiles, including recycled materials 
● influencing factors, such as interface and service design, portability, 
maintainability, miniaturisation and potential for shared information 
● the realisation of product design concepts through an understanding of the 
properties and characteristics of a range of materials and processes 
● product design as a component of branding, market position and opportunity 
and the ways in which customers relate to different products 
● batch or mass production, core industrial methods and the potential impact of 
new production concepts. 
Design crafts 
Students will develop integrated knowledge, skills and understanding of the 
following: 
● the properties and characteristics of a range of materials and processes,  
such as, clay, wood, plastic, card, glass, metal and textiles 
● the potential of a craft-based approach in the production of artefacts such as 
jewellery, furniture, lighting, textiles, containers and toys 
● the ways in which different materials can be combined in the production of 
artefacts 
● the routes to market for craft-based items, such as specialist shops, tourist 
locations, events, exhibitions, online galleries 
● the design of commissioned pieces for specific locations, individuals, clients or 
organisations. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
24 
Art and Design (Photography) (9PY0) 
Introduction 
Photography has been used by practitioners to record, document and present 
examples of everyday life, in ordinary and extraordinary circumstances. It has also 
been used as the vehicle for artistic expression, communicating personal ideas 
about the world around us. It is used to convey personal identity more widely than 
any other art form, is applied in the creative process across art, craft and design 
and is widely used in social, commercial and scientific contexts. The development of 
affordable lens-based technology has changed the way that both professionals and 
the public use photography. 
Drawing and other materials processes 
The word photography could be taken to mean ‘a graphic representation with light’. 
In this way a photograph can take on the qualities of a drawing. In the context of 
this endorsed title, drawing forms an essential element of both development and 
final product. A camera can record the observed world but is not able on its own to 
explore ideas. Students must reflect on, refine and apply the observations they 
make with a camera, and determine which tools or techniques are most appropriate 
in their exploration of ideas. Drawing methods such as pen or pencil on paper may 
enhance their development and understanding of photographic ideas, for example 
to plan shots, analyse and deconstruct their own imagery, or record ways in which 
practitioners have used formal elements and visual language. Students should use 
a variety of tools and materials, as appropriate, for recording their surroundings 
and source materials.  
Photography includes works in film, video, digital imaging and light-sensitive 
materials. Sometimes specific techniques and processes are used to convey 
messages and create works related to other disciplines, such as web-based 
animations, photographic images in printed journals, and light projections within 
theatrical or architectural spaces. 
Many practitioners define their image before it has even been taken by scouting 
locations and by planning a shot around specific weather conditions or time of day, 
using filters, studio lighting, reflectors, soft boxes, props, makeup, or backgrounds 
to control each element within the frame.  
Students should consider the application and implications of new and emerging 
technologies that can be used in conjunction with traditional and digital 
photography materials. 
Contextual understanding and professional practice 
Contexts for photography can be found in a wide range of sources; for example, 
from galleries and museums, contemporary photography shows, web-based 
sources, films, architecture, music, literature and nature.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
25 
Students must consider the issues, opportunities and constraints involved in image 
and content copyright. They should be aware of the circumstances and conditions in 
which it is acceptable to incorporate images and content originated by others, and 
of the appropriate steps to take to ensure permission to reproduce their own work 
is suitably managed. Students should be familiar with contemporary and emerging 
concepts and learn how to analyse and critically evaluate photography, 
demonstrating an understanding of purposes, meanings and contexts. 
Students are required to develop the knowledge, skills and understanding 
outlined on pages 5 and 6. When undertaking work in photography, 
students should also engage with: 
● the operations and principles of creating a photographic image, including the 
use of available and controlled light, lenses, cameras and light-sensitive 
materials, including digital and non-digital 
● a range of materials used in photography, including print and screen-based 
materials 
● how the formal elements evoke responses in the viewer 
● the processes for production of digital and print-based photographs 
● methods of presentation of photographic images 
● sustainable materials and production processes in the construction of work 
● the potential of collaborative working methodologies in the creative process. 
Disciplines within photography 
For the purposes of this qualification, photography is sub-divided into the following 
three disciplines: 
● film-based photography 
● digital photography 
● film and video.  
Students will be required to work in one or more of the disciplines to communicate 
their ideas. By working across disciplines, they will extend their understanding of 
the scope of photography; by focusing on one discipline, they will gain a deeper 
understanding of specific processes within photography. 
Film-based photography 
Students will develop integrated knowledge, skills and understanding of the 
following: 
● film types, film speeds, specialised films which will facilitate the processes of 
generating and developing ideas, pushing/pulling films, reciprocity failure 
● viewpoint, composition, focus, aperture, shutter speed, exposure, through the 
lens metering 
● darkroom techniques, using appropriate paper types, developing and printing, 
emulsions, exposures, tone and contrast 
● techniques such as polarisation and solarisation when printing, photograms, 
photomontage 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
26 
● acquisition, manipulation and distribution of the image through computers, 
scanners, photocopiers and computer software. 
Digital photography 
Students will develop integrated knowledge, skills and understanding of the 
following: 
● the principles of digital photography, including the pixel and digital processing 
● viewpoint, white balance, composition, focus, aperture, shutter speed, 
exposure, shooting modes, histograms 
● the use and qualities of image acquisition hardware and software, image 
manipulation and analogies between digital and other forms of photography 
● the relationships between colour and tone for screen and print-based media, 
screen calibration, colour gamut, file formats such as raw, jpeg, tiff, png 
● the use of a range of source material, software and hardware in the generation 
and development of ideas. 
Film and video 
Students will develop integrated knowledge, skills and understanding of the 
following: 
● synopsis, storyboards, scripting, camera angles, viewpoints, length of shot, 
cutting, composition, cropping and pacing, which may include computer-
generated ideas and developments 
● various animation processes, such as stop-frame, rostrum and 3D modelling 
and associated hardware and software 
● qualities and functions of various film and video formats, such as 8mm film, 
analogue video, digital video, HD, 4K, .flv, .mov, .wmv, animated gif 
● the use of sound, narration and storyline and their relation to moving images 
● editing, including knowledge of the variety of ways in which images might be 
juxtaposed to create appropriate effects, such as in-camera editing, non-linear, 
offline edits, use of timekey, compression, in and out points. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
27 
Component 1: Personal Investigation 
Overview 
This component is weighted 60% of the total qualification. 
 
This component incorporates three major elements: supporting studies, 
practical work and a personal study of a minimum 1000 words of continuous 
prose. 
These elements should be seen as integrally connected. Supporting studies may 
combine investigation and research for both the practical work and personal study, 
however, the personal study must be presented as a separate outcome. The 
practical work and personal study may be approached in any order, or progress 
simultaneously. 
The purpose of the Personal Investigation is to develop a portfolio of practical work 
and a minimum 1000 words of continuous prose that shows critical understanding 
in relation to the practical portfolio. This component offers teachers ample 
opportunities to structure programmes of study that encourage breadth and depth 
in the development of students’ visual language. 
Work produced will be based around themes and subject matter developed from 
personal starting points, to be negotiated with the teacher. The Personal 
Investigation is internally set and assessed, and externally moderated. Centres 
should support students in addressing the aims and objectives for the component. 
All work must be completed in advance of internal assessment and standardisation. 
The personal study must be submitted for assessment at the same time as the 
practical work. 
This component is assessed against all four Assessment Objectives. Please see 
pages 33–35. 
Supporting studies 
Supporting studies can help to generate ideas and focus for the practical work and 
the written personal study. Supporting studies will be evidenced throughout the 
working process and can take many forms, such as recorded research, written 
annotation and practical exploration and development. 
Supporting studies must be submitted with outcome(s) produced during the course 
of the Personal Investigation. Supporting studies must show the full breadth and 
depth of students’ visual and written critical thinking in the progress of their work 
for both elements. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
28 
Practical work 
This work will consist of a body of development work and outcome(s). See 
pages 11–26 for further details relating to each title.  
The personal study  
The personal study will consist of a critical and analytical written piece of  
a minimum 1000 words continuous prose, making links to the student’s own 
practical investigations, supported by contextual research. The personal study 
comprises 12% of the final qualification and is marked out of 18. Through the 
personal study, students will demonstrate understanding of relevant social, cultural 
or historical contexts. Students will also express personal interpretations or 
conclusions, and use technical and specialist vocabulary. 
The focus of the personal study can be any concept, movement, person, people, 
artefact(s), or other source of reference. However, it must be related to their own 
ideas, investigations and practical work. 
Students will not be specifically penalised on the basis of the length of their written 
component and any difference from the indicative minimum word count of 1000 
words. However, failure to meet the minimum word count may restrict students’ 
ability to develop the required depth and breadth to access the full mark range. 
The personal study can take any form but must: 
● be presented as a separate piece in writing 
● be a minimum 1000 words on the chosen subject 
● be written in continuous prose 
● be in a presentable format for assessment 
● include a full bibliography, citing all references. 
Students will need to consider: 
● critical and analytical content 
● expression of personal interpretations and conclusions 
● contextual research and understanding 
● links between research, analysis and own investigations 
● use of specialist terminology and vocabulary 
● clarity of expression and language 
● appropriate structure and presentation. 
The personal study must be the student’s own work, forming an essential part of 
their independent investigations. Development of the personal study may be 
supported through presentations to the class, discussions and individual tutorials. 
Teachers can also help students to focus their ideas for the personal study by 
asking them to produce a proposal or an outline of their intentions. 
Students may support their progress in writing the minimum 1000 words with 
visual examples of their own work and the work of others, sketchbook annotation, 
notes from visits, exploration of materials and the development of their own ideas.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
29 
Any references to others’ writing should be acknowledged through a bibliography. 
Internet sources should be cited with a brief description of the source material.  
The personal study is marked against all four Assessment Objectives. An additional 
criterion for the marking of the written communication is included in the 
assessment grid on page 35. 
To summarise: 
● supporting studies will help to prepare for both practical work and personal 
study 
● the practical work and personal study may be approached in any order, or 
progress simultaneously 
● the outcome for the personal study must form a separate presentation 
● work must not be added to or altered once submitted for assessment 
● this component will be assessed using the assessment grid on pages 33–35. 
Assessment Objectives 1 to 4 should be applied to the practical work and 
supporting studies; criterion 5 (which covers all four assessment objectives) 
should be applied to the minimum 1000–word continuous prose personal study 
only. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
30 
Component 2: Externally Set Assignment 
Overview 
This component is weighted 40% of the total qualification. 
 
This component incorporates two major elements: preparatory studies and the 
15–hour period of sustained focus. The Externally Set Assignment represents 
the culmination of the GCE Qualification allowing students to draw together all the 
knowledge, understanding and skills developed throughout. The Externally Set 
Assignment consists of one broad-based thematic starting point to which students 
respond by developing a portfolio of practical work and final outcome(s). 
The Externally Set Assignment comprises an externally set theme with suggested 
starting points. Students will need to develop their own personal work from this 
theme and related starting points.  
It is internally assessed, and externally moderated. The Externally Set Assignment 
will be available from 1 February of each year. Students can then begin their 
preparatory studies, culminating in the final 15–hour period of sustained focus 
under examination conditions. The 15-hour period of sustained focus under 
examination conditions may take place over multiple sessions (a maximum of five, 
within three consecutive weeks). All student work must be completed in advance of 
centres’ internal assessment and standardisation. 
Preparatory studies 
Preparatory studies can help to provide focus for the development of ideas and 
outcomes. Preparatory studies will be evidenced throughout the creative journey 
and can take many forms such as recorded research, written annotation and 
practical exploration and development. 
Preparatory studies must be submitted with final outcome(s) produced during the 
period of 15 hours’ sustained focus. The preparatory studies must show the full 
breadth and depth of students’ visual and written critical thinking in the progress of 
their work. 
15–hour period of sustained focus 
During the 15–hour period of sustained focus students will produce their final 
outcome(s) responding to the Externally Set Assignment theme, based on their 
preparatory studies. This work must be produced unaided under controlled 
examination conditions. The 15-hour period of sustained focus under examination 
conditions may take place over multiple sessions (a maximum of five, within three 
consecutive weeks). Students should plan the best use of the 15 hours to complete 
all final outcome(s) within this time. Students must not access their work outside of 
assessment time. Work must not be added to or altered after the 15-hour 
supervised period has ended. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
31 
To summarise: 
● preparatory studies will support the work for the period of sustained focus 
● knowledge, understanding and skills should primarily be communicated through 
a portfolio of practical work 
● the Externally Set Assignment will be available on 1 February in the year of 
certification 
● the delivery of this component should be planned to include appropriate 
guidance during the preparatory period (from 1 February until the 
commencement of the final 15 hours), encouraging students to develop ideas, 
intentions and response(s) independently 
● students must produce work unaided under examination conditions during the 
15-hour period of sustained focus 
● the 15-hour period of sustained focus under examination conditions may take 
place over multiple sessions (a maximum of five, within three consecutive 
weeks) 
● work completed as preparatory studies and during the 15–hour period of 
sustained focus must be presented together for assessment and moderation 
● work must not be added to or altered after the 15-hour supervised period has 
ended 
● this component will be assessed using the assessment grid on pages 33–35. 
Only Assessment Objectives 1 to 4 should be used when assessing students’ 
work.  
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
32 
Assessment grids 
 
Teachers must assess students’ work using the criteria in the following assessment 
grids. The same grids must be used for all titles. 
For Component 1 (60% of the qualification):  
● Assessment Objectives 1–4 are to be used for practical work and written 
annotation where present.  
● The personal study grid is to be used only for the assessment of the personal 
study of a minimum 1000 words continuous written prose. 
For Component 2 (40% of the qualification):  
● Assessment Objectives 1–4 are to be used for the assessment of all practical 
work and written annotation where present. 
Mark bands 1 to 6 each contain three marks. Teachers/assessors must establish 
whether the work being assessed is in the top, middle or bottom of a given band for 
each criterion.  
Band 0 should be used where work has not achieved the required standard for this 
qualification. 
Please use the mark grids in Appendix 2: Teacher Mark Sheets when entering 
marks for assessment of each component by each student.  
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
33 
The following grid relates to all Advanced level student practical work and annotation. The grid assesses all four 
Assessment Objectives equally. 
 
 0 Level 1 
Limited ability 
Level 2 
Basic ability 
Level 3 
Emerging 
competent ability 
Level 4 
Competent and 
consistent ability 
Level 5 
Confident and 
assured ability 
Level 6 
Exceptional ability 
Marks 
Objectives 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 
Assessment 
Objective 1 
Develop ideas 
through sustained 
and focused 
investigations 
informed by 
contextual and 
other sources, 
demonstrating 
analytical and 
critical 
understanding 
No 
rewardable 
material 
Development of ideas 
shows limited ability 
Sustained and 
focused 
investigations show 
limited ability, 
partially informed by 
contextual and other 
sources 
Development of ideas 
shows basic ability 
Sustained and 
focused 
investigations are 
basic, partially 
informed by 
contextual and  
other sources 
Development of ideas 
shows emerging 
competence in ability  
Sustained and focused 
investigations show 
emerging competence 
informed by 
contextual and other 
sources 
Development of ideas 
shows competent and 
consistent ability  
Sustained and focused 
investigations are 
competent and 
consistent, informed by 
contextual and other 
sources  
Development of ideas 
shows confident and 
assured ability  
Sustained and focused 
investigations are 
confident and assured, 
thoroughly informed by 
contextual and other 
sources  
Development of ideas 
shows exceptional 
ability  
Sustained and  
focused investigations 
are exceptional, 
thoroughly informed  
by contextual and 
other sources 
 Limited ability in 
analytical and critical 
understanding 
Basic analytical and 
critical understanding  
 
Emerging competence 
in analytical and 
critical understanding 
Competent and 
consistent analytical 
and critical 
understanding 
Confident and assured 
analytical and critical 
understanding 
Exceptional analytical 
and critical 
understanding 
Assessment 
Objective 2 
Explore and select 
appropriate 
resources, media, 
materials, 
techniques and 
processes, 
reviewing and 
refining ideas as 
work develops 
No 
rewardable 
material 
Limited ability to 
explore and select 
appropriate to 
intentions 
Limited ability to 
review and refine 
ideas as work 
develops 
Basic ability to 
explore and select 
appropriate to 
intentions 
Basic ability to review 
and refine ideas as 
work develops 
Emerging competence 
in ability to explore 
and select appropriate 
to intentions  
Emerging competence 
in ability to review and 
refine ideas as work 
develops 
Competent and 
consistent ability to 
explore and select 
appropriate to 
intentions 
Competent and 
consistent ability to 
review and refine ideas 
as work develops 
Confident and assured 
ability to explore and 
select appropriate to 
intentions 
Confident and assured 
ability to review and 
refine ideas as work 
develops 
Exceptional ability to 
explore and select 
appropriate to 
intentions 
Exceptional ability to 
review and refine ideas 
as work develops 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
34 
 
 0 Level 1 
Limited ability 
Level 2 
Basic ability 
Level 3 
Emerging 
competent ability 
Level 4 
Competent and 
consistent ability 
Level 5 
Confident and 
assured ability 
Level 6 
Exceptional ability 
Marks 
Objectives 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 
Assessment 
Objective 3 
Record ideas, 
observations and 
insights relevant 
to intentions, 
reflecting critically 
on work and 
progress 
No 
rewardable 
material 
Ability to record is 
limited and partially 
relevant to intentions 
Limited ability to 
reflect critically on 
work and progress  
Ability to record is 
basic and partially 
relevant to intentions 
Basic ability to reflect 
critically on work and 
progress 
Ability to record shows 
emerging competence 
and relevance to 
intentions 
Emerging competence 
in ability to reflect 
critically on work and 
progress  
Ability to record is 
competent and 
consistent, and relevant 
to intentions 
Competent and 
consistent ability to 
reflect critically on  
work and progress 
Ability to record is 
confident and assured, 
and relevant to 
intentions 
Confident and assured 
ability to reflect 
critically on work  
and progress 
Ability to record is 
exceptional and 
relevant to intentions 
Exceptional ability to 
reflect critically on 
work and progress 
Assessment 
Objective 4 
Present a personal 
and meaningful 
response that 
realises intentions 
and, where 
appropriate, 
makes 
connections 
between visual 
and other 
elements 
No 
rewardable 
material 
Limited ability to 
present a personal 
and meaningful 
response  
Limited ability to 
realise intentions and 
make connections 
where appropriate 
 
Basic ability to 
present a personal 
and meaningful 
response 
Basic ability to realise 
intentions and make 
connections where 
appropriate 
Emerging competence 
in ability to present  
a personal and 
meaningful response 
Emerging competence 
in ability to realise 
intentions and make 
connections where 
appropriate 
Competent and 
consistent ability to 
present a personal and 
meaningful response 
Competent and 
consistent ability to 
realise intentions and 
make connections 
where appropriate 
Confident and assured 
ability to present a 
personal and 
meaningful response 
Confident and assured 
ability to realise 
intentions and make 
connections where 
appropriate 
Exceptional ability to 
present a personal and 
meaningful response 
Exceptional ability to 
realise intentions and 
make connections 
where appropriate 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
35 
The following grid relates only to Advanced level Component 1: Personal Study. The grid relates to all four 
Assessment Objectives equally. 
 
 0 Level 1 
Limited ability 
Level 2 
Basic ability 
Level 3 
Emerging 
competent ability 
Level 4 
Competent and 
consistent ability 
Level 5 
Confident and 
assured ability 
Level 6 
Exceptional ability 
Marks 
Objectives 
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 
Personal Study 
(AO1/AO2/ 
AO3/AO4) 
No 
rewardable 
material 
All level descriptions 
for Level 1 apply in 
addition to the level 
description below. 
Limited ability in  
use of written 
communication and 
specialist terminology 
 
All level descriptions 
for Level 2 apply in 
addition to the level 
description below. 
Basic use of written 
communication and 
specialist terminology 
 
All level descriptions 
for Level 3 apply in 
addition to the level 
description below. 
Emerging competence 
in use of written 
communication and 
specialist terminology 
All level descriptions  
for Level 4 apply in 
addition to the level 
description below.  
Competent and 
consistent use of 
written communication 
and specialist 
terminology 
All level descriptions 
for Level 5 apply in 
addition to the level 
description below.  
Use of written 
communication and 
specialist terminology 
is confident and 
assured, and expresses 
ideas fluently 
All level descriptions 
for Level 6 apply in 
addition to the level 
description below.  
Use of written 
communication and 
specialist terminology 
is exceptional and 
expresses complex 
ideas with authority  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
36 
Assignment setting, taking and marking 
Assignment setting 
Component 1 
Students will develop their assessed responses for 
component 1 from themes and subject matter developed 
from personal starting points, to be negotiated with the 
teacher. Teachers must ensure that there is sufficient 
potential for the student to meet the Assessment 
Objectives.  
 
Component 2 
The Externally Set Assignment is set by Pearson and will be 
released on 1 February in the year of assessment. This will 
be available on our secure website on 1 February and hard 
copies will be dispatched to centres based on entries. 
 
Assignment taking 
Authenticity 
Students must work to develop a personal response to the 
assignment. Teacher knowledge of student work in progress 
will help to confirm the authenticity of individual 
submissions. Students must ensure that all quotations and 
citations are referenced using an established referencing 
system, such as Harvard.  
To ensure that submissions are free from plagiarism the 
student and the teacher are required to sign the Art and 
Design Authentication Sheet (see Appendix 1). 
In component 2 – during the final 15 hours of 
sustained focus, students must produce work 
unaided. 
During this period of sustained focus students may refer to 
preparatory work. All preparatory work must be labelled to 
make it distinct from work produced during the period of 
sustained focus and it must be stored securely by the 
centre at the end of each session. 
Collaboration 
As part of this creative process, working with others may be 
of great benefit. Through the use of a learning log, students 
can track their own progress and contribution to any group 
work. Students must be supervised and, when working with 
others to develop a response to the assignment, their own 
contribution should be tracked by the student and checked 
by the teacher. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
37 
Students must sign an authentication sheet to confirm that 
the work submitted has been carried out without assistance 
other than that which is acceptable under the scheme of 
assessment. Teachers and centres must be satisfied that 
the work is the student’s own, and both teachers and 
students must sign the authentication sheet to this effect. 
In component 2 – during the final 15 hours of 
sustained focus, students must produce work 
unaided. 
Feedback 
Teachers may help students to understand instructions, 
assessment objectives and controls. Teachers must not 
provide students with solutions.  
There are some cases where students may require technical 
assistance which may be given by teachers. The following 
are some examples of the technical assistance which may 
properly be given in order to ensure the safety of the 
students: 
● the welding of an armature for a figure, the student 
having determined the proportions and disposition of 
the components 
● the selection of the type of dye to be used on a 
particular material, but not the colour. It should 
however be noted that students who offer printmaking 
in any form will be expected to carry out all necessary 
processes themselves without the teacher’s aid 
● the loading of the kiln and the firing of the ware (the 
latter is in any case not included in the time allowance) 
but not the preparation of the clay and the shaping or 
throwing of the ware. 
The following are some examples of the technical assistance 
which may properly be given in order to ensure students’ 
work is not misplaced and is available for assessment: 
● the filing, formatting, rendering and storage of digital 
image, video or audio data files, but not the editing or 
manipulation of the content contained in those files 
which constitute any part of the final presented output, 
and are therefore part of the creative process. Any other 
technical (hardware or software) support related to 
digital processing that does not in any way assist with 
the creative decision-making process. 
Feedback is not allowed where an activity is part of the 
creative process, that activity should be counted within the 
timed examination period. Students are advised to keep a 
time-sheet in order to record the time spent on such 
activities. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
38 
Resources 
Students must have equal access to IT resources.  
In component 2: 
• during the final 15 hours of sustained focus, in 
situations where computer workstations are situated 
near one another, invigilators must ensure that 
students are working independently 
• internet access is prohibited under examination 
conditions, and must be disabled on school 
workstations used during the 15 hours’ sustained focus. 
Mobile devices with internet access are not permitted. 
Secure storage of work 
Component 1 – once submitted for assessment, students 
must not be able to access their work. Work must not be 
added to or altered once submitted for assessment. 
Component 2 – once the final 15 hours of sustained focus 
has commenced students must not be able to access their 
work outside the assessment setting. Work must not be 
added to or altered after the 15-hour supervised period has 
ended. 
Where students are completing the 15 hours of sustained 
focus over a number of sessions, at the end of each session 
all work must be saved and stored securely by the centre. 
This includes the work in progress and the preparatory 
studies. It is the responsibility of the centre to ensure that 
no additional work is brought in or out of each session. 
Time control 
Students have from 1 February until the commencement of 
the final 15 hours of sustained focus to prepare and develop 
work towards the Externally Set Assignment. During this 
period ongoing work for this component must not be shared 
with others through the use of online forums or social 
media. The 15-hour period of sustained focus may be 
divided into shorter sessions up to a maximum of five 
sessions. The 15 hours of controlled assessment should be 
carried out over three consecutive weeks.  
Assignment marking 
Teachers should mark all student work using the Teacher 
Mark Sheets in Appendix 2. The teacher mark sheets should 
be copied and used as necessary when marking each 
student’s work. A sheet should be used for each 
component. The sheets for each student need to be 
displayed with the relevant work for moderation. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
39 
Work presented for assessment is internally marked by 
teachers and externally moderated. Within a centre, 
internal standardisation is carried out across all titles for 
each component to ensure a consistent standard is applied 
to each title. During the internal standardisation process, 
teachers must: 
● mark their own group’s responses 
● mark sample pieces of work together to compare 
marking standards across all teaching groups 
● discuss any differences and ensure there is a common 
understanding of the criteria 
● amend marks so they are consistent 
● pay particular attention to marks awarded across both 
components and across all titles to ensure consistency 
of marking, using the generic assessment grid on  
pages 33–35 of the specification. 
Presentation of work 
Centres must ensure that all work is presented in the most 
appropriate format for the medium of the work, allowing 
visiting moderators to view the original work in all cases.  
Reproductions of the original artwork, including 
photographs of non-photographic work, on-screen display 
of artwork, on-line portfolios or video are acceptable means 
of presentation for assessment where: 
● the work is digital in nature (e.g. graphic design, 
3D design, digital art, web design) 
● the work is created specifically with the intention of 
implementing a digital medium or format as an integral 
part of the final piece (e.g. videotape or photographs of 
site-specific work). 
Larger and/or 3D pieces may be presented separately from 
portfolios/sketchbooks.  
Any other work may be presented in a portfolio, which may 
include sketchbooks.  
In component 1 – the continuous prose should be submitted 
as a separate presentation, which can take any written 
form, but must be in an appropriate format to allow readers 
to access the content. 
Student work must be clearly labelled and identifiable by 
name and component number.  
Each component submitted for assessment must be 
accompanied by the completed assessment grid and a 
signed copy of the authentication form. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
40 
Please refer to the Centre Guidance for GCE Art and Design 
for detailed information on the presentation and submission 
of work. 
Marking, standardisation and moderation 
Work presented for assessment is marked by teachers. 
Where marking has been carried out by more than one 
teacher in a centre, there must be a process of internal 
standardisation carried out to ensure that there is a 
consistent application of the assessment objectives. 
● Centre assessors must use the same assessment grids 
for all student work.  
● Marks awarded by the centre will be subject to external 
moderation through visiting moderators from Pearson.  
● Moderation of a sample of student work will ensure 
consistency with national standards.  
● Pearson will notify centres of the students whose work 
has been selected for moderation. This sample will take 
cohort size into account. 
● The moderator will contact the centre to arrange a visit 
at a mutually convenient time. On the day of the 
moderator’s visit, the centre must display all work from 
students identified in the sample so that it can be 
moderated during the visit. 
● If the moderation of the sampled students indicates that 
the centre’s assessment is not sufficiently accurate in 
relation to the national standard, marks may be 
adjusted. 
Please refer to the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ) 
Instructions for conducting non-examination assessments 
(new GCE and GCSE specifications) on the JCQ website: 
www.jcq.org.uk for further information. The assessment of 
this qualification must comply with these instructions. 
Marks awarded by the centre will be subject to external 
moderation by a visiting moderator from Pearson. 
Moderation will ensure consistency with national standards. 
Pearson will notify centres of the students whose work has 
been selected for moderation. This sample will take cohort 
size into account. 
The moderator will contact the centre to arrange a visit at a 
mutually convenient time. On the day of the moderator’s 
visit, the centre must display all work from students 
identified in the sample so that it can be moderated during 
the visit. 
If the moderation indicates that centre assessment does not 
reflect national standards, an adjustment will be made to 
students’ final marks to compensate. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
41 
For further information about standardisation and 
moderation please refer to the Joint Council for 
Qualifications (JCQ) Instructions for Conducting non-
examination assessments (new GCE and GCSE 
specifications) on the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk. The 
assessment of this qualification must comply with these 
instructions. 
Security and backups 
It is the responsibility of the centre to ensure that the 
Externally Set Assignment is kept secure until released.  
It is the responsibility of the centre to store the work that 
students have submitted for assessment securely. 
Secure storage is defined as a securely-locked cabinet or 
cupboard. Where students are producing artefacts, secure 
storage is defined as a classroom studio or workshop that is 
locked or supervised from the end of one session to the 
start of the next. 
Secure storage also applies to electronic data. For example, 
centres should collect memory sticks for secure storage 
between sessions or restrict student access to specific areas 
of the centre’s IT network. 
For materials stored electronically, centres are strongly 
advised to utilise firewall protection and virus-checking 
software, and to employ an effective backup strategy, so 
that an up-to-date archive of students’ evidence is 
maintained. 
It is the centre’s responsibility to keep the work that 
students have submitted for assessment secure. If the work 
submitted for assessment is lost or damaged whilst being 
kept secure by the centre, through reasons beyond their 
control e.g. fire, flood etc., the centre may apply to Pearson 
for Special Consideration so that students may still be 
considered for assessment of the qualification. For further 
information please refer to the Centre Guidance document 
for GCSE Art and Design on the Pearson website. 
Centres must ensure that photographic or digital records 
are made and held within the centre as student’s progress 
through both components in order to support any Special 
Consideration application should this prove to be necessary 
at a later date.  
After the completion of all assessment, centres are advised 
to archive completed, assessed work to free up space for 
work in progress and may release original work to the 
relevant student. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
42 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of 
assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in controlled assessments discovered 
before the candidate has signed the declaration of 
authentication form does not need to be reported to 
Pearson. 
Candidate malpractice found in controlled assessments after 
the declaration of authenticity has been signed, and in 
examinations must be reported to Pearson on a JCQ M1 
Form (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-
office/malpractice). The completed form should be emailed 
to candidatemalpractice@pearson.com. Please provide as 
much information and supporting documentation as 
possible. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate 
sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report candidate malpractice constitutes staff or 
centre malpractice.  
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate 
malpractice and maladministration of our qualifications. As 
with candidate malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is 
any act that compromises or seeks to compromise the 
process of assessment or undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and 
maladministration must be reported immediately, before 
any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson 
on a JCQ M2(a) Form (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-
office/malpractice). The form, supporting documentation 
and as much information as possible can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com. Note that the final decision 
regarding appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More-detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the 
latest version of the document JCQ General and Vocational 
Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-
office/malpractice.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
43 
Student/teacher authentication section 
Centres must ensure that the student authentication section 
is completed for each student by both the student and 
teacher. 
Declaration by the student that: 
● the work is their own, that is there are no instances in 
which the work has been copied from another source, 
which includes published literature (text books, journals 
and magazines), the internet, class notes/teacher 
provided templates,  previous independent 
investigations and the work of any other person 
● they have access to and understand the JCQ regulations 
– Information for students. 
Declaration by the teacher that: 
● the work was conducted under the requirements set out 
in the specification 
● the work is solely the student’s own  
● the work can be authenticated as such to the best of the 
teacher’s ability 
● they have indicated where any planning and processing 
was not undertaken individually 
● they have has indicated if necessary where the student 
has needed additional support over and above that 
required to complete the work and has also indicated via 
annotation on the student’s work how this has affected 
their marking. 
● the students have completed the work in the required 
time (e.g. 15 hours for the Externally Set Assignment) 
● students have not accessed their preparatory supporting 
studies after completing the timed test. 
The following are not to be included in the time allowance 
for the examination: 
● rest period for models 
● arrangement of still-life groups 
● stretching of screens, preparation of blocks and plates 
● mixing of photographic chemicals and washing and 
drying prints 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
44 
● drying of printing inks 
● the mounting of models and sculptures 
● drying and firing of pottery and sculpture 
● fixing dye, dyeing yarn, washing and finishing of hand-
woven fabrics, stretching of embroidery 
● the making of a bare model stage 
● ceramic work should, where appropriate, be fired and 
completed before presentation for assessment. In 
certain cases, considerable time is required for drying-
out and firing. It is suggested that students working 
with clay should commence their timed examination 
sufficiently early to ensure that the work is completed in 
good time. 
Missing or incomplete Authentication forms 
If an Authentication form is found to be missing, the 
Awarding Organisation will in the first instance contact the 
centre to rectify the matter. If this request is not addressed 
satisfactorily, the Awarding Organisation will take further 
action, which may lead to a malpractice investigation 
and/or withholding the centre’s A Level Art and Design 
results. 
Further information 
For up-to-date advice on teacher involvement and 
administration of coursework, please refer to the Joint 
Council for Qualifications (JCQ) Instructions for conducting 
non-examination assessments (new GCE and GCSE 
specifications) document on the JCQ website: 
www.jcq.org.uk  
Health and safety 
It is the responsibility of the teacher/invigilator to ensure 
that safe working practice is observed at all times.  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
45 
 
Assessment 
Assessment summary 
Students must complete all assessment in May/June in any single year. 
 
Component 1  
*Paper codes: 9AD0/01, 9FA0/01, 9GC0/01, 9TE0/01, 9TD0/01, 9PY0/01 
Title: Personal Investigation 
● First assessment: May/June 2017. 
● The assessment consists of 90 raw marks. 
● Work presented for assessment draws on topics from across 
the qualification relevant to the title being followed. 
● The assessment is completed over the duration of the course. 
● Assessment evidence consists of responses to internally set and 
negotiated assignments and personal starting points, including 
practical work, supporting studies and a personal study 
comprising a minimum 1000 words of continuous written prose. 
● Work must not be added to or altered once submitted for 
assessment. 
● All work must be submitted at the end of the course prior to 
internal assessment. 
60% of the 
total 
qualification 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
46 
 
Component 2  
*Paper code: 9AD0/02, 9FA0/02, 9GC0/02, 9TE0/02, 9TD0/02, 9PY0/02 
Title: Externally Set Assignment 
● First assessment: May/June 2017. 
● The assessment consists of 72 raw marks. 
● The Externally Set Assignment theme and starting points will be 
released each year, on 1 February. 
● The 15-hour period of sustained focus under examination 
conditions may take place over multiple sessions (a maximum 
of five, within three consecutive weeks). 
● Students must not access their work outside of assessment 
time. 
● All work must be submitted at the end of the course prior to 
internal assessment. 
● Work must not be added to or altered after the 15-hour 
supervised period has ended. 
● Centres must ensure that work submitted for assessment is 
valid for the series in which it is submitted. 
40% of the 
total 
qualification 
 
 
The sample assessment materials for component 2 can be found in the Pearson 
Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design Sample Assessment Materials 
document. 
*See Appendix 6: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant 
to this qualification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
47 
Assessment Objectives and weightings 
 
Students must: 
% in 
GCE 
AO1 Develop ideas through sustained and focused investigations 
informed by contextual and other sources, demonstrating 
analytical and critical understanding 
25 
AO2 Explore and select appropriate resources, media, materials, 
techniques and processes, reviewing and refining ideas as 
work develops 
25 
AO3 Record ideas, observations and insights relevant to intentions, 
reflecting critically on work and progress 25 
AO4 Present a personal and meaningful response that realises 
intentions and, where appropriate, makes connections 
between visual and other elements 
25 
Total 100% 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
48 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
 
 Assessment Objectives Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives Component AO1 AO2 AO3 AO4 
Component 1: Personal Investigation 15% 15% 15% 15% 60% 
Component 2: Externally Set Assignment 10% 10% 10% 10% 40% 
Total for this qualification 25% 25% 25% 25% 100% 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
49 
Entry and assessment information 
Student entry 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for 
this qualification can be found in our UK Information 
Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations 
officers and is available on our website at: 
qualifications.pearson.com/en/support-topics/centre-
administration/information-manual.html 
Forbidden combinations and discount code 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more 
than one GCE qualification with the same discount code will 
have only one of the grades they achieve counted for the 
purpose of the School and College Performance Tables – 
normally the better grade (please see Appendix 6: Codes). 
Students should be advised that if they take two 
qualifications with the same discount code, colleges, 
universities and employers are very likely to take the view 
that they have achieved only one of the two GCEs. The 
same view may be taken if students take two GCE 
qualifications that have different discount codes but have 
significant overlap of content. Students or their advisers 
who have any doubts about their subject combinations 
should check with the institution to which they wish to 
progress before embarking on their programmes. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
50 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and 
special consideration 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. 
They allow students with special educational needs, 
disabilities or temporary injuries to:  
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the 
demands of the assessment.  
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the 
particular needs of an individual student with a disability 
without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding 
bodies comply with the duty under the Equality Act 2010 to 
make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the 
start of the course. Students will then know what is 
available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for 
assessment.   
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to 
make reasonable adjustments where a person with a 
disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in 
undertaking an assessment. The awarding organisation is 
required to take reasonable steps to overcome that 
disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be 
unique to that individual and therefore might not be in the 
list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will 
depend on a number of factors, which will include: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with 
the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves 
unreasonable costs to the awarding organisation, 
timeframes or affects the security or integrity of the 
assessment. This is because the adjustment is not 
‘reasonable’. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
51 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a 
student's mark or grade to reflect temporary injury, illness 
or other indisposition at the time of the examination/ 
assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have 
had, a material effect on a student’s ability to take an 
assessment or demonstrate his or her level of attainment in 
an assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to 
apply for access arrangements and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, 
reasonable adjustments and special consideration, please 
refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk. 
Equality Act 2010 and Pearson equality policy 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality 
policy requires all students to have equal opportunity to 
access our qualifications and assessments, and our 
qualifications to be awarded in a way that is fair to every 
student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by 
the Equality Act 2010) are not, when they are 
undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in 
comparison to students who do not share that 
characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for 
undertaking a qualification and that this achievement 
can be compared fairly to the achievement of their 
peers. 
Teachers can find details on how to make adjustments for 
students with protected characteristics in the policy 
document Access Arrangements, Reasonable Adjustments 
and Special Consideration, which is on our website, 
qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/support-
topics/understanding-our-qualifications/policies-for-centres-
learners-and-employees.html 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
52 
Synoptic assessment 
Synoptic assessment requires students to work across 
different parts of a qualification and to show their 
accumulated knowledge and understanding of a topic or 
subject area. 
Synoptic assessment enables students to show their ability 
to combine their skills, knowledge and understanding with 
breadth and depth of the subject.  
In this qualification, synoptic assessment can be found 
throughout both assessments, as the Assessment 
Objectives and criteria are assessed holistically across all 
student evidence in each component. 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to 
comply with the requirements of the current Code of 
Practice published by the Office of Qualifications and 
Examinations Regulation (Ofqual). 
The marks for components in this qualification will be scaled 
by Pearson to represent the relative weighting of 60% for 
Component 1 and 40% for Component 2. All marks 
submitted by centres should be in raw marks based on the 
assessment grids pages 32-24. 
 
Component Weighting Raw Marks Scaling Factor Scaling Mark 
1 60% 90 x 1.2 108 
2 40% 72 x 1 72 
 
The Advanced GCE qualification will be graded and 
certificated on a six-grade scale from A* to E using the total 
subject mark. Individual components are not graded. 
The first certification opportunity for the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design will be 2017. 
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum 
judged by Pearson to be of sufficient standard to be 
recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U 
result. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be available in English. 
All student work must be in English. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
53 
Other information 
Student recruitment 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to 
our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of 
reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and 
progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this 
qualification. 
 
Progression 
Students can progress from this qualification to: 
● further education courses such as the BTEC Level 3 
Foundation Diploma in Art and Design (QCF)  
● higher education courses such as BTEC Higher National 
Diplomas in art and design subjects, or direct to a BA 
Honours degree with an art and design focus 
● apprenticeships or other training  
● employment in a related sector.  
Relationship between GCSE and Advanced GCE 
It is likely that students will have studied a Level 1/Level 2 
qualification such as a GCSE in Art and Design. 
Progression from GCSE to Advanced GCE 
There is a distinct step up from GCSE in terms of content 
and skills to study art and design as a subject at Advanced 
GCE.  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
54 
 
 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
55 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Art and Design Authentication Sheet 57 
Appendix 2: Teacher Mark Sheets 57 
Appendix 3: Level 3 Extended Project qualification 62 
Appendix 4: The context for the development of this qualification 66 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 68 
Appendix 6: Codes 70 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
56 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
57 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 1: Art and Design 
Authentication Sheet 
Students must sign an authentication sheet to confirm that the work submitted has 
been carried out without assistance other than that which is acceptable under the 
scheme of assessment. Teachers and centres must be satisfied that the work is the 
student’s own, and both teachers and students must sign the authentication sheet 
to this effect.  
Each component submitted for assessment must be accompanied by the completed 
assessment grid and a signed copy of the authentication sheet.  
Please download the authentication form from our website. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
58 
 
Appendix 2: Teacher Mark Sheets 
 
The grids shown on the next three pages should be copied and used as necessary 
when marking each student’s work. A sheet should be used for each component. 
You should write a mark for each criterion and then total them in the boxes 
provided. The sheets for each student need to be displayed with the relevant work 
for moderation. These sheets can also be found for download on the Edexcel 
website. 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
59 
 
 0 Level 1 
Limited ability 
Level 2 
Basic ability 
Level 3 
Emerging 
competent ability 
Level 4 
Competent and 
consistent ability 
Level 5 
Confident and 
assured ability 
Level 6 
Exceptional 
ability 
Mark 
awarded 
Marks 
Objectives 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18  
Assessment 
Objective 1 
Develop ideas 
through sustained 
and focused 
investigations 
informed by 
contextual and 
other sources, 
demonstrating 
analytical and 
critical 
understanding 
No 
rewardable 
material 
Development  
of ideas shows 
limited ability 
Sustained and 
focused 
investigations 
show limited 
ability, partially 
informed by 
contextual and 
other sources 
Development  
of ideas shows 
basic ability 
Sustained  
and focused 
investigations are 
basic, partially 
informed by 
contextual and 
other sources 
Development of ideas 
shows emerging 
competence in ability  
Sustained and focused 
investigations show 
emerging competence 
informed by 
contextual and other 
sources 
Development  
of ideas shows 
competent and 
consistent ability  
Sustained and 
focused 
investigations are 
competent and 
consistent, informed 
by contextual and 
other sources  
Development of ideas 
shows confident and 
assured ability  
Sustained and focused 
investigations are 
confident and 
assured, thoroughly 
informed by 
contextual and  other 
sources  
Development  
of ideas shows 
exceptional ability 
 
Sustained and 
focused 
investigations  
are exceptional, 
thoroughly 
informed by 
contextual and 
other sources 
 
 Limited ability  
in analytical  
and critical 
understanding 
Basic analytical 
and critical 
understanding  
Emerging competence 
in analytical and 
critical understanding 
Competent and 
consistent analytical 
and critical 
understanding 
Confident and assured 
analytical and critical 
understanding 
Exceptional 
analytical  
and critical 
understanding 
 
Assessment 
Objective 2 
Explore and select 
appropriate 
resources, media, 
materials, 
techniques and 
processes, 
reviewing and 
refining ideas as 
work develops 
No 
rewardable 
material 
Limited ability  
to explore and 
select appropriate 
to intentions 
Limited ability to 
review and refine 
ideas as work 
develops 
Basic ability to 
explore and 
select appropriate  
to intentions 
Basic ability to 
review and refine 
ideas as work 
develops 
Emerging competence 
in ability to explore 
and select appropriate 
to intentions  
Emerging competence 
in ability to review 
and refine ideas as 
work develops 
Competent and 
consistent ability to 
explore and select 
appropriate to 
intentions 
Competent and 
consistent ability to 
review and refine 
ideas as work 
develops 
Confident and assured 
ability to explore and 
select appropriate to 
intentions 
Confident and assured 
ability to review and 
refine ideas as work 
develops 
Exceptional ability 
to explore and 
select appropriate 
to intentions 
Exceptional ability 
to review and 
refine ideas as 
work develops 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
60 
 
 0 Level 1 
Limited ability 
Level 2 
Basic ability 
Level 3 
Emerging 
competent ability 
Level 4 
Competent and 
consistent ability 
Level 5 
Confident and 
assured ability 
Level 6 
Exceptional 
ability 
Mark 
awarded 
Marks 
Objectives 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18  
Assessment 
Objective 3 
Record ideas, 
observations and 
insights relevant 
to intentions, 
reflecting critically 
on work and 
progress 
No 
rewardable 
material 
Ability to record is 
limited and 
partially relevant  
to intentions 
Limited ability to 
reflect critically on 
work and progress  
Ability to record 
is basic and 
partially 
relevant to 
intentions 
Basic ability to 
reflect critically 
on work and 
progress 
Ability to record 
shows emerging 
competence and 
relevance to 
intentions 
Emerging competence 
in ability to reflect 
critically on work  
and progress  
Ability to record is 
competent and 
consistent, and 
relevant to 
intentions 
Competent and 
consistent ability to 
reflect critically on 
work and progress 
Ability to record is 
confident and 
assured, and 
relevant to 
intentions 
Confident and 
assured ability to 
reflect critically on 
work and progress 
Ability to record is 
exceptional and 
relevant to 
intentions 
Exceptional ability 
to reflect critically 
on work and 
progress 
 
Assessment 
Objective 4 
Present a personal 
and meaningful 
response that 
realises intentions 
and, where 
appropriate, 
makes connections 
between visual 
and other 
elements 
No 
rewardable 
material 
Limited ability to 
present a personal 
and meaningful 
response  
Limited ability to 
realise intentions 
and make 
connections where 
appropriate 
 
Basic ability  
to present a 
personal and 
meaningful 
response 
Basic ability  
to realise 
intentions  
and make 
connections 
where 
appropriate 
Emerging competence 
in ability to present a 
personal and 
meaningful response 
Emerging competence 
in ability to realise 
intentions and make 
connections where 
appropriate 
Competent and 
consistent ability to 
present a personal 
and meaningful 
response 
Competent and 
consistent ability to 
realise intentions 
and make 
connections where 
appropriate 
Confident and 
assured ability to 
present a personal 
and meaningful 
response 
Confident and 
assured ability to 
realise intentions 
and make 
connections where 
appropriate 
Exceptional ability 
to present a 
personal and 
meaningful 
response 
Exceptional ability 
to realise 
intentions and 
make connections 
where appropriate 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
61 
The following grid relates only to Advanced level Component 1: Personal Study. The grid relates to all four 
Assessment Objectives equally. 
 
 0 Level 1 
Limited ability 
Level 2 
Basic ability 
Level 3 
Emerging 
competent ability 
Level 4 
Competent and 
consistent ability 
Level 5 
Confident and 
assured ability 
Level 6 
Exceptional 
ability 
Mark 
awarded 
Marks 
Objectives 
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18  
Personal Study 
(AO1/AO2/ 
AO3/AO4) 
No 
rewardable 
material 
All level 
descriptions for 
Level 1 apply in 
addition to the 
level description 
below. 
Limited ability in 
use of written 
communication  
and specialist 
terminology  
All level 
descriptions for 
Level 2 apply in 
addition to the 
level description 
below. 
Basic use  
of written 
communication 
and specialist 
terminology  
All level descriptions 
for Level 3 apply in 
addition to the level 
description below. 
Emerging competence 
in use of written 
communication and 
specialist terminology 
All level descriptions 
for Level 4 apply in 
addition to the level 
description below.  
Competent and 
consistent use of 
written 
communication  
and specialist 
terminology 
All level 
descriptions for 
Level 5 apply in 
addition to the 
level description 
below.  
Use of written 
communication  
and specialist 
terminology is 
confident and 
assured, and 
expresses ideas 
fluently 
All level 
descriptions for 
Level 6 apply in 
addition to the 
level description 
below.  
Use of written 
communication  
and specialist 
terminology is 
exceptional and 
expresses complex 
ideas with 
authority  
 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
62 
Appendix 3: Level 3 Extended Project 
qualification  
 
What is the Extended Project? 
The Extended Project is a standalone qualification that can be taken alongside 
GCEs. It supports the development of independent learning skills and helps to 
prepare students for their next step – whether that be university study or 
employment. The qualification: 
● is recognised by universities for the skills it develops 
● is worth half of an Advanced GCE qualification at grades A*–E  
● carries UCAS points for university entry. 
The Extended Project encourages students to develop skills in the following areas: 
research, critical thinking, extended writing and project management. Students 
identify and agree a topic area of their choice (which may or may not be related to 
a GCE subject they are already studying), guided by their teacher. 
Students can choose from one of four approaches to produce: 
● a dissertation (e.g. an investigation based on predominately secondary research) 
● an investigation/field study (e.g. a practical experiment) 
● a performance (e.g. in music, drama or sport) 
● an artefact (e.g. a creating a sculpture in response to a client brief or solving an 
engineering problem). 
The qualification is coursework based and students are assessed on the skills of 
managing, planning and evaluating their project. Students will research their topic, 
develop skills to review and evaluate the information, and then present the final 
outcome of their project. 
Students: what they need to do 
The Extended Project qualification requires students to: 
● select a topic of interest for an in-depth study and negotiate the scope of the 
project with their teacher 
● identify and draft an objective for their project (e.g. in the form of a question, 
hypothesis, challenge, outline of proposed performance, issue to be investigated 
or commission for a client) and provide a rationale for their choice 
● produce a plan for how they will deliver their intended objective 
● conduct research as required by the project brief, using appropriate techniques 
● carry out the project using tools and techniques safely 
● share the outcome of the project using appropriate communication methods, 
including a presentation. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
63 
Teachers: key information 
● The Extended Project has 120 guided learning hours (GLH) consisting of: 
o a taught 40 GLH element that includes teaching the technical skills  
(e.g. research skills) 
o a guided 80 GLH element that includes mentoring students through the 
project work 
● Group work is acceptable, however it is important that each student provides 
evidence of their own contribution and produces their own report. 
● 100% externally moderated. 
● Four Assessment Objectives: manage, use resources, develop and realise, 
review. 
● Can be run over 1, 1½ or 2 years. 
● Can be submitted in January or June. 
How to link Extended Project with Art and Design  
The Extended Project creates the opportunity to develop transferable skills for 
progression to higher education and to the workplace through the exploration of 
either an area of personal interest or a topic of interest from within the Art and 
Design qualification content. For example, students could choose to create an 
artefact which would give them an opportunity to develop their skills in creating 
work in response to a design brief, carrying out research into materials, processes 
and techniques and exploring alternative ways of realising their design. 
Alternatively, they could choose to complete a dissertation around an artist, period 
of history or art movement.  
Skills developed 
Through the Extended Project students will develop skills in the following areas: 
● independent research skills, including skills in research into materials, 
processes, techniques and the use of different media  
● planning/project management, including the refining of creative ideas in 
response to a design brief 
● developing ideas about alternative ways of realising the design brief, 
experimenting creatively and developing new technical skills 
● evaluation of different ways of realising a design brief 
● critical thinking. 
Using the Extended Project to support breadth and depth  
In the context of the Extended Project, critical thinking refers to the ability to give a 
reasoned justification for decisions taken during the development process about the 
choice of materials, processes and techniques, including reflection on alternative 
design possibilities. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
64 
There are no specified materials that students are expected to study and in the 
Extended Project Qualification (EPQ); students are assessed on the quality of the 
work they produce and the skills they develop and demonstrate. It is expected that 
the project will also demonstrate extension in one or more dimensions:  
● deepening understanding – the student explores a topic in greater depth 
than would be expected at GCE  
● broadening skills – the student learns a new skill. In an art-based project, this 
might involve learning to work in a new medium or acquiring and using new 
technical skills 
● widening perspectives – the student’s project spans different subjects. This 
might involve discussing historical, philosophical or ethical aspects of an art-
based topic or making links with other subject areas such as Psychology, 
Business or Music. 
Choosing topics and narrowing down to a question 
An artefact Extended Project question involves working towards the realisation of a 
design brief, perhaps set by a real or imaginary client, using research into choice of 
media, materials, processes and techniques to inform a developmental process in 
which different ways of realising the brief are explored and the final artefact is 
developed and refined. The process ends with a review of the project, including a 
presentation. The evidence of the development process should be submitted using 
appropriate records, such as design development sheets, sketchbooks, photographs 
and a written report (typically around 3000 words in length), and an activity log of 
the project process. 
For example, consider a student with an interest in graphics who decided to carry 
out a project with the aim of creating a series of advertisements for a leading soft 
drinks manufacturer. During the research phase, the student searched for examples 
of advertisements and carried out a visual analysis. Alternative advertising formats 
were considered and research was also conducted into the theory and psychology 
of advertising, including the appropriateness of different formats for various 
markets. During development work, a number of creative avenues were explored, 
with extensive creation of images, using photography and graphic techniques. The 
stages of the creative process were recorded in a sketchbook with annotated 
images, photographs and writing based on research. The project ended with a 
presentation in which the images were shown to an audience and the design 
process explained. As part of the project review, the student carried out a 
questionnaire survey to assess the impact of the images. 
Other sample titles for artefact projects include: 
● nature’s vessels – design and make a series of ceramic forms based on natural 
containers such as seedpods, shells or nests 
● portrait and personality – make a series of 2D or 3D images that are based on 
the theme of portraiture 
● illustration – make illustrations for either a poem or a children’s story of your 
choice 
● recycled – design and make a collection of sophisticated jewellery or body 
adornment from unconventional recycled materials 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
65 
● the issue is … – produce graphic material (illustrations, posters, leaflets etc) for 
a promotional campaign on an issue of your choice. The subject may be social, 
environmental, ethical or political 
● erosion and decay – produce a series of images (paintings, drawings, prints, 
photographs, mixed media) based on the theme of erosion and decay. 
Students may also choose to write a dissertation exploring some aspect of art and 
design. For example, a dissertation could be written on the question: ‘Is modern art 
more about the search for meaning than the search for beauty?’. A student could 
also carry out an investigation/field study, using data collection to explore a 
hypothesis about art and design. For example, ‘Is there evidence that the decor of 
a classroom can influence the mood of students?’  
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
66 
Appendix 4: The context for the 
development of this qualification 
 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] 
and our ambition to put the learner at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by:  
• reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with 
those taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
• consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including learned 
bodies, subject associations, higher education academics, teachers and 
employers to ensure this qualification is suitable for a UK context 
• reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in 
their documents GCE Qualification Level Conditions and Requirements and GCE 
Subject Level Conditions and Requirements for Art and Design, published in 
April 2014. 
 
 
 
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification Principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
● demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning and 
measuring higher-order skills 
● rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and valid 
assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in end users of the knowledge, skills 
and competencies of certified students 
● inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students develop at 
different rates and have different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
● empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills, see Appendix 1. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
67 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
May2014 
“The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important change 
to the education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications will assist 
them in helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an 
‘Expert Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or because 
of our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the world as 
diverse as Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification 
development process that has included: 
• Extensive international comparability of subject content against the highest-
performing jurisdictions in the world 
• Benchmarking assessments against UK and overseas providers to ensure that 
they are at the right level of demand 
• Establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-
specific expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
• Subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future 
oriented. The design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, 
meaning learner outcomes have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a 
learner’s success in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident 
that we have supported the development of qualifications that are outstanding for 
their coherence, thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as 
representing world-class best practice.
” 
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Lee Sing Kong  
Director, National Institute of 
Education, Singapore 
  
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
  
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
All titles are correct as of May 2014. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
68 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 
 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently 
flagged the need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable 
them to respond with confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the 
world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines 
skills, or competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that 
can be learned and that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform 
an activity or task and can be built upon and extended through learning.’
1 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected 
and evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this 
process, we identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the 
most evidence-based and robust skills framework. We adapted the framework 
slightly to include the Program for International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT 
Literacy and Collaborative Problem Solving (CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves:2 
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve 
general cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and 
communicate3. 
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, oral communication, written 
communication, assertive communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, 
service orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and 
negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared 
understanding, taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team 
organisation. 
 
 
1 OECD (2012), Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives 
(2012):http://skills.oecd.org/documents/OECDSkillsStrategyFINALENG.pdf 
2 Koenig, J. A. (2011) Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop, National Research 
Council 
3 PISA (2011) The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy, PISA 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
69 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work 
stress, adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, 
and physical adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual 
teams, work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and 
able to acquire new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher 
education, as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the 
teaching and learning of this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning 
materials, developed with stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
70 
Appendix 6: Codes 
 
Type of code Use of code Code number 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for 
performance tables is assigned 
a discount code indicating the 
subject area to which it 
belongs. 
Discount codes are published 
by the DfE. 
Please see the GOV.UK 
website* 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes 
Each qualification title is 
allocated an Ofqual Regulated 
Qualifications Framework 
(RQF) code. 
The RQF code is known as a 
Qualification Number (QN). 
This is the code that features 
in the DfE Section 96 and on 
the LARA as being eligible for 
16–18 and 19+funding, and is 
to be used for all qualification 
funding purposes. The QN will 
appear on students’ final 
certification documentation. 
The QN for the qualification 
in this publication is: 
601/4958/9 
Subject codes The subject code is used by 
centres to enter students for a 
qualification. Centres will need 
to use the entry codes only 
when claiming students’ 
qualifications. 
Art, Craft and Design: 9AD0 
Fine Art: 9FA0 
Graphic Communication: 
9GC0 
Textile Design: 9TE0 
Three-dimensional Design: 
9TD0 
Photography: 9PY0 
 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
71 
 
Type of code Use of code Code number 
Component code These codes are 
provided for reference 
purposes. Students do 
not need to be entered 
for individual 
components. 
Component 1  
Art, Craft and Design: 9AD0/01 
Fine Art: 9FA0/01 
Graphic Communication: 9GC0/01 
Textile Design: 9TE0/01 
Three-dimensional Design: 9TD0/01 
Photography: 9PY0/01 
Component 2  
Art, Craft and Design: 9AD0/02 
Fine Art: 9FA0/02 
Graphic Communication: 9GC0/02 
Textile Design: 9TE0/02 
Three-dimensional Design: 9TD0/02 
Photography: 9PY0/02 
* https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/key-stage-4-qualifications-
discount-codes-and-point-scores 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024  © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
72 
 
 
DB060624 9781446929919_GCE2015_A_ARTDESGN_ISS6.DOC.1–81/0 
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com 
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited 
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office:  80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL 
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121 
