Specification
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology (9PS0)
First teaching from September 2015
First certification from 2017 Issue 3
A level 
Psychology

Edexcel, BTEC and LCCI qualifications 
Edexcel, BTEC and LCCI qualifications are awarded by Pearson, the UK’s largest 
awarding body offering academic and vocational qualifications that are globally 
recognised and benchmarked. For further information, please visit our qualifications 
website at qualifications.pearson.com. Alternatively, you can get in touch with us 
using the details on our contact us page at qualifications.pearson.com/contactus 
About Pearson 
Pearson is the world's leading learning company, with 35,000 employees in more 
than 70 countries working to help people of all ages to make measurable progress 
in their lives through learning. We put the learner at the centre of everything we 
do, because wherever learning flourishes, so do people. Find out more about how 
we can help you and your learners at qualifications.pearson.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This specification is Issue 3. Key changes are sidelined. We will inform centres of 
any changes to this issue. The latest issue can be found on the Pearson website: 
qualifications.pearson.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References to third party material made in this specification are made in good faith. 
Pearson does not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of 
materials, which may be subject to change, or any opinions expressed therein. 
(Material may include textbooks, journals, magazines and other publications and 
websites.) 
 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
 
ISBN 978 1 446 94208 6 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2025 
 
 
Summary of Pearson Edexcel Level 3 
Advanced GCE in Psychology (9PS0) specification  
Issue 3 changes 
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this current 
issue 
Page 
number 
Updated exam time for papers 1 and 2, from 2 hours to 2 hours and 15 
minutes each. 
1, 2 
Updated exam time for papers 1 and 2, from 2 hours to 2 hours and 15 
minutes each. 
46 
 
If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, contact us via 
our website at: qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/contact-us.html. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
 
  The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important 
change to the education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications 
will assist them in helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an 
‘Expert Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or 
because of our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the 
world as diverse as Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries 
across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification 
development process that has included: 
• Extensive international comparability of subject content against the highest-
performing jurisdictions in the world 
• Benchmarking assessments against UK and overseas providers to ensure that 
they are at the right level of demand 
• Establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-
specific expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
• Subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future 
oriented. The design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, 
meaning learner outcomes have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a 
learner’s success in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident 
that we have supported the development of qualifications that are outstanding for 
their coherence, thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as 
representing world-class best practice.  
  
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Lee Sing Kong 
Director, National Institute of 
Education, Singapore 
  
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Sw
itzerland 
  
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-V ice Chancellor, University of Durham  
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
 
“ 
” 
 
 
 
Introduction 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology is designed for use in 
schools and colleges. It is part of a suite of GCE qualifications offered by Pearson. 
Purpose of the specification  
This specification sets out: 
● the objectives of the qualification 
● any other qualification that a student must have completed before taking the 
qualification 
● any prior knowledge and skills that the student is required to have before taking 
the qualification 
● any other requirements that a student must have satisfied before they will be 
assessed or before the qualification will be awarded 
● the knowledge and understanding that will be assessed as part of the 
qualification 
● the method of assessment and any associated requirements relating to it 
● the criteria against which a student’s level of attainment will be measured  
(such as assessment criteria). 
 
 
 
Rationale 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology meets the following 
purposes, which fulfil those defined by the Office of Qualifications and Examinations 
Regulation (Ofqual) for GCE qualifications in their GCE Qualification Level 
Conditions and Requirements document, published in April 2014. 
The purposes of this qualification are to: 
● define and assess achievement of the knowledge, skills and understanding that 
will be needed by students planning to progress to undergraduate study at a UK 
higher education establishment, particularly (although not only) in the same 
subject area, for example higher education qualifications such as psychology 
degrees and further education courses such as BTEC Higher Nationals 
● set out a robust and internationally comparable post-16 academic course of 
study to develop that knowledge, skills and understanding 
● enable UK universities to accurately identify the level of attainment of students 
● provide a basis for school and college accountability measures at age 18 
● provide a benchmark of academic ability for employers. 
Qualification aims and objectives 
The aims and objectives of the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in 
Psychology are to enable students to: 
● develop essential knowledge and understanding of different areas of the subject 
and how they relate to each other 
● develop and demonstrate a deep appreciation of the skills, knowledge and 
understanding of scientific methods 
● develop competence and confidence in a variety of practical, mathematical and 
problem-solving skills 
● develop their interest in and enthusiasm for the subject, including developing an 
interest in further study and careers associated with the subject 
● appreciate how society makes decisions about scientific issues and how the 
sciences contribute to the success of the economy and society. 
 
 
 
 
The context for the development of this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] 
and our ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
● reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with 
those taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
● consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including learned 
bodies, subject associations, higher-education academics, teachers and 
employers to ensure this qualification is suitable for a UK context 
● reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in 
their documents GCE Qualification Level Conditions and Requirements and GCE AS 
and A level regulatory requirements for biology, chemistry, physics and psychology, 
published by the Department for Education (DfE) in April 2014. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
● demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep 
learning and measuring higher-order skills 
● rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing 
reliable and valid assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in 
end users of the knowledge, skills and competencies of certified students 
● inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that 
students develop at different rates and have different learning needs, and 
focusing on progression 
● empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills,  
see Appendix 1. 
 
 
 
Contents 
Qualification at a glance 1 
Assessment Objectives and weightings 4 
Knowledge, skills and understanding 5 
Topic 1: Social psychology 6 
Topic 2: Cognitive psychology 10 
Topic 3: Biological psychology 15 
Topic 4: Learning theories 19 
Topic 5: Clinical psychology 24 
Topic 6: Criminological psychology 29 
Topic 7: Child psychology 34 
Topic 8: Health psychology 39 
Topic 9: Psychological skills 43 
Assessment 46 
Assessment summary 46 
Assessment Objectives and weightings 48 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 49 
Entry and assessment information 50 
Student entry 50 
Discount code and performance tables 50 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special 
consideration 51 
Malpractice 52 
Equality Act 2010 and Pearson equality policy 53 
Synoptic assessment 53 
Awarding and reporting 54 
Language of assessment 54 
Other information 55 
Student recruitment 55 
Prior learning and other requirements 55 
Progression 55 
Appendix 1: Transferable skills 57 
Appendix 2: Level 3 Extended Project qualification 59 
Appendix 3: Mathematical skills 62 
Appendix 4: Formulae and statistical tables 65 
Appendix 5: Codes 70 
Appendix 6: Taxonomy (command words) 71 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 1 
Qualification at a glance 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology is structured into nine 
topic areas. Topics 1–4 are compulsory and focus on the areas that have laid the 
foundations of modern psychological understanding. Topics 5–8 focus on how our 
understanding of psychology is applied today. Topic 5 is compulsory. One topic 
from 6, 7 or 8 must be studied. Finally, Topic 9 summarises the psychological skills 
and research methods covered in the qualification. 
This qualification consists of three externally examined papers. 
Students must complete all assessment in May/June in any single year. 
 
Paper 1: Foundations in psychology *Paper code: 9PS0/01 
 
● Externally assessed 
● Availability: May/June 
● First assessment: 2017 
35% of the 
total 
qualification 
Overview of content 
● Topic 1: Social psychology 
● Topic 2: Cognitive psychology 
● Topic 3: Biological psychology 
● Topic 4: Learning theories 
Overview of assessment 
● Written examination. 
● Students must answer all questions from five sections. 
● Sections A–D total 70 marks and comprise mixed question types, including 
stimulus and data response, short-answer and extended response questions 
and cover the topic areas as follows: 
Section A: Social psychology 
Section B: Cognitive psychology 
Section C: Biological psychology 
Section D: Learning theories 
● Section E: Issues and debates has 20 marks and comprises two extended 
response questions, covering the topic area of issues and debates in 
psychology. 
● The assessment is 2 hours and 15 minutes long. 
● The assessment consists of 90 marks. 
● The formulae and statistical tables given in Appendix 4: Formulae and 
statistical tables will also be given in the paper. 
● Calculators may be used in the examination. 
 
*See Appendix 5: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant 
to this qualification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 2 
 
Paper 2: Applications of psychology *Paper code: 9PS0/02 
 
● Externally assessed 
● Availability: May/June 
● First assessment: 2017 
35% of the 
total 
qualification 
Overview of content 
Mandatory content 
● Topic 5: Clinical psychology 
Optional topics (students must study one) 
● Topic 6: Criminological psychology 
● Topic 7: Child psychology 
● Topic 8: Health psychology 
Overview of assessment 
● Written examination. 
● The paper is composed of two sections. Students must answer all questions 
from Section A and all questions from a choice of three optional topic areas in 
Section B. 
● Section A has 54 marks and comprises of mixed question types, including 
data and stimulus response, short-answer and extended response questions 
with a 20-mark response covering the topic area of clinical psychology. 
● Section B presents students with a choice of one from three optional topic 
areas – Criminological psychology, Child psychology or Health psychology. 
Each section totals 36 marks and comprises mixed question types, including 
stimulus and data response, short-answer and extended response questions. 
● The assessment is 2 hours and 15 minutes long. 
● The assessment consists of 90 marks. 
● The formulae and statistical tables given in Appendix 4: Formulae and 
statistical tables will also be given in the paper. 
● Calculators may be used in the examination. 
 
*See Appendix 5: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant 
to this qualification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 3 
 
Paper 3: Psychological skills  *Paper code: 9PS0/03 
 
● Externally assessed 
● Availability: May/June 
● First assessment: 2017 
30% of the 
total 
qualification 
Overview of content 
Topic 9: Psychological skills: 
● Methods 
● Synoptic review of studies 
● Issues and debates. 
Overview of assessment 
● Written examination. 
● Students must answer all questions from three sections. 
● Section A has 24 marks and comprises mixed question types, including 
stimulus and data response and short-answer questions, covering the topic 
area of research methods. 
● Section B has 24 marks and comprises mixed question types, including 
stimulus and data response and short-answer questions based on psychological 
studies and one extended response questions based on classic studies given in 
Topics 1-5. 
● Section C has 32 marks and comprises two extended response questions, 
covering the topic area of issues and debates in psychology. 
● The assessment is 2 hours long. 
● The assessment consists of 80 marks. 
● The formulae and statistical tables given in Appendix 4: Formulae and 
statistical tables will also be given in the paper. 
● Calculators may be used in the examination. 
 
*See Appendix 5: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant 
to this qualification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 4 
Assessment Objectives and weightings 
 
Students must: % in 
GCE 
AO1 Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of scientific ideas, 
processes, techniques and procedures 
30-35% 
AO2 Apply knowledge and understanding of scientific ideas, 
processes, techniques and procedures: 
● in a theoretical context 
● in a practical context 
● when handling qualitative data 
● when handling quantitative data 
30-35% 
AO3 Analyse, interpret and evaluate scientific information, ideas 
and evidence, including in relation to issues, to: 
● make judgements and reach conclusions 
● develop and refine practical design and procedures 
35-40% 
Total 100% 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 5 
Knowledge, skills and understanding 
Content overview 
Students should know, understand, apply, critically analyse 
and evaluate the following content – performing procedures 
and making connections where appropriate.  
This qualification is composed of nine topics. For  
Topics 1–4, content in the What students need to learn 
column in bold will be assessed for this qualification only 
but will not be assessed as part of the Advanced Subsidiary 
GCE qualification. 
Content indicated with an ‘e.g.’ is intended to further 
illustrate core material and is indicative of content that may 
be assessed. Additional examples not stated in the 
specification may also be assessed. 
There are opportunities for students to develop 
mathematical skills throughout the content. They are 
required to apply the skills to relevant psychological 
contexts. Please see Appendix 3: Mathematical skills for 
further information.  
Assessment overview 
Students will be assessed through three examination 
papers, which focus on specific topics in the qualification. 
Paper 3 is by nature synoptic, however extended writing 
questions in papers 1 and 2 may ask students to draw on 
their knowledge from other topics addressed in the paper 
concerned. 
The formulae and statistical tables given in Appendix 4: 
Formulae and statistical tables will also be given in the 
paper. 
Calculators may be used in the examination. 
Students may be required to respond to stimulus material 
using psychological concepts, theories and research from 
across topic areas. 
Students may be asked to consider issues of validity, 
reliability, credibility, generalisability, objectivity and 
subjectivity in their evaluation of studies and theories. 
Students should be able to define any terms given in the 
specification. 
Relevant psychological skills are contextualised in each 
topic area. In addition, they have been drawn together in 
Topic 9 in order to ensure that all content has been 
covered. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 6 
Topic 1: Social psychology 
Topic overview 
Students must show understanding that social psychology is 
about aspects of human behaviour that involve the 
individual’s relationship to other persons, groups and 
society, including cultural influences on behaviour. 
Individual differences and developmental psychology must 
be considered when learning about obedience, prejudice, 
personality and cultural influences on social behaviour. 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
1.1 Content 
 
Obedience 
1.1.1 Theories of obedience, including agency theory and 
social impact theory. 
1.1.2 Research into obedience, including Milgram’s 
research into obedience and three of his variation 
studies: Rundown Office Block (Experiment 10), 
Telephonic instructions (Experiment 7), Ordinary 
man gives orders (Experiment 13) as they 
demonstrate situational factors that encourage 
dissent. 
1.1.3 Factors affecting obedience and dissent/resistance 
to obedience, including individual differences 
(personality and gender), situation and culture. 
Prejudice 
1.1.4 Explanations and research into prejudice, including 
social identity theory (Tajfel and Turner, 1979, 
1986) and realistic conflict theory (Sherif, 1966). 
1.1.5 Factors affecting prejudice (and discrimination), 
including individual differences (personality), 
situation and culture. 
1.1.6 Individual differences in obedience/prejudice  
● Obedience is affected by personality. 
● Prejudice can have an explanation linked to 
personality. 
1.1.7 Developmental psychology in obedience/prejudice 
● Obedience can be affected by gender and 
culture, which come from environmental effects. 
● Prejudice can be affected by culture, which 
comes from environmental effects. 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 7 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
1.2 Methods Self-reporting data 
1.2.1 Designing and conducting questionnaires and 
interviews, considering researcher effects. 
1.2.2 Unstructured, semi-structured and structured 
interviews, open, closed (including ranked scale) 
questions. 
1.2.3 Alternate hypotheses. 
Sample selection and techniques 
1.2.4 Random, stratified, volunteer and opportunity 
techniques. 
Qualitative and quantitative data 
1.2.5 Analysis of quantitative data: calculating measures 
of central tendency, frequency tables, graphical 
presentation using a bar chart, measures of 
dispersion (range and standard deviation). 
1.2.6 Analysis of qualitative data using thematic analysis. 
Ethical guidelines 
1.2.7 B ritish Psychological Society (BPS) code of ethics 
and conduct (2009) including risk management 
when carrying out research in psychology. 
1.3 Studies 
 
Classic study 
1.3.1 Sherif et al. (1954/1961) Intergroup conflict and 
cooperation: The Robbers Cave Experiment. 
One contemporary study from the following: 
1.3.2 Burger (2009) Replicating Milgram: Would people 
still obey today? 
1.3.3 Reicher and Haslam (2006) Rethinking the 
psychology of tyranny. 
1.3.4 Cohrs et al. (2012) Individual differences in 
ideological attitudes and prejudice: evidence from 
peer report data. 
1.4 Key questions 
 
1.4.1 One key question of relevance to today’s society, 
discussed as a contemporary issue for society rather 
than an academic argument. 
1.4.2 Concepts, theories and/or research (as appropriate 
to the chosen key question) drawn from social 
psychology as used in this qualification. 
Suitable examples 
● How can knowledge of social psychology be used to 
reduce prejudice in situations such as crowd behaviour 
or rioting? 
● How can social psychology be used to explain heroism? 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 8 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
1.5 Practical 
investigation 
1.5.1 One practical research exercise to gather data 
relevant to topics covered in social psychology. This 
practical research exercise must adhere to ethical 
principles in both content and intention. 
In conducting the practical research exercise, students 
must: 
● design and conduct a questionnaire to gather both 
qualitative and quantitative data to look for a difference 
in the data 
● consider questionnaire construction, sampling decisions 
and ethical issues  
● collect and present an analysis of quantitative data using 
measures of central tendency, measures of dispersion, 
(including range and standard deviation as appropriate), 
bar graph and frequency table 
● collect and present an analysis of qualitative data using 
thematic analysis 
● consider strengths and weaknesses of the questionnaire 
and possible improvements 
● write up the procedure, results and discussion section of 
a report. 
Suitable examples 
● A questionnaire to see if males or females perceive 
themselves to be more obedient. 
● An investigation into in-group favouritism. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 9 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
1.6 Issues and 
debates 
Examples of issues and debates in social psychology: 
● Ethics (e.g. when researching obedience and prejudice, 
and also implications of findings in both areas). 
● Practical issues in the design and implementation 
of research (e.g. designing questionnaires and 
interviews and social desirability). 
● Reductionism (e.g. the risk of reductionism when 
drawing conclusions from social data). 
● Comparisons between ways of explaining 
behaviour using different themes (e.g. the two 
theories of prejudice: social identity and realistic 
conflict). 
● Psychology as a science (e.g. social desirability in 
questionnaires; issues of validity in questionnaires). 
● Culture and gender (e.g. whether prejudice and 
obedience are influenced by cultural factors or according 
to gender). 
● Nature-nurture (e.g. the role of personality in 
obedience compared with the role of the situation). 
● An understanding of how psychological 
understanding has developed over time (e.g. if 
using Burger's work replicating Milgram and comparing 
with Milgram's work; or looking at Tajfel's ideas and a 
contemporary study). 
● Issues of social control (e.g. reducing prejudice; or 
how people obey someone in authority/uniform). 
● The use of psychological knowledge in society  
(e.g. reducing conflict in society) 
● Issues related to socially-sensitive research  
(e.g. racism or cultural differences in social psychology). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 10 
Topic 2: Cognitive psychology 
Topic overview 
Students must show understanding that cognitive 
psychology is about the role of cognition/cognitive 
processes in human behaviour. Processes include 
perception, memory, selective attention, language and 
problem solving. The cognitive topic area draws on the 
likeness of cognitive processing to computer processing. 
Individual differences and developmental psychology must 
be considered when learning about memory differences, 
memory deficits and how this develops as the brain ages. 
 
Subject content What students need to learn:  
2.1 Content 
 
Memory 
2.1.1 The working memory model (Baddeley and Hitch, 
1974). 
2.1.2 The multi-store model of memory (Atkinson and 
Shiffrin, 1968), including short- and long-term 
memory, and ideas about information processing, 
encoding, storage and retrieval, capacity and 
duration. 
2.1.3 Explanation of long-term memory – episodic and 
semantic memory (Tulving, 1972). 
2.1.4 Reconstructive memory (Bartlett, 1932) including 
schema theory. 
2.1.5 Individual differences in memory  
● Memory can be affected by individual differences 
in processing speed or by schemas that guide 
the reconstructive nature of memory. 
● Autobiographical memory is by nature individual. 
2.1.6 Developmental psychology in memory, including at 
least one of these: 
● Sebastián and Hernández-Gil (2012) discuss 
developmental issues in memory span 
development, which is low at 5-years old, then 
develops as memory develops, up to 17-years 
old. 
● Dyslexia affects children's memory, span and 
working memory which can affect their learning. 
● The impact of Alzheimer's on older people and 
the effects on their memory. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 11 
 
Subject content What students need to learn:  
2.2 Methods Experiments 
2.2.1 Designing and conducting experiments, including 
field and laboratory experiments. 
2.2.2 Independent and dependent variables. 
2.2.3 Experimental and null hypotheses. 
2.2.4 Directional (one-tailed) and non-directional (two-
tailed) tests and hypotheses. 
2.2.5 Experimental and research designs: repeated 
measures, independent groups and matched pairs. 
2.2.6 Operationalisation of variables, extraneous variables 
and confounding variables. 
2.2.7 Counterbalancing, randomisation and order effects. 
2.2.8 Situational and participant variables. 
2.2.9 Objectivity, reliability and validity (internal, 
predictive and ecological). 
2.2.10 Experimenter effects, demand characteristics and 
control issues. 
 2.2.11 Quantitative data analysis 
● Analysis of quantitative data: calculate measures 
of central tendency, frequency tables, measures 
of dispersion (range and standard deviation), 
percentages. 
● Graphical presentation of data (bar graph, 
histogram). 
 2.2.12 Decision making and interpretation of inferential 
statistics 
● Non-parametric test of difference:  
Mann-Whitney U and Wilcoxon. 
● Probability and levels of significance  
(p≤.10 p≤.05 p≤.01). 
● Observed and critical values, use of critical 
value tables and sense checking of data. 
● One- or two-tailed regarding inferential testing. 
● Type I and type II errors. 
● Normal and skewed distribution. 
 2.2.13 Case study of brain-damaged patients, including 
Henry Molaison (HM) and the use of qualitative 
data, including strengths and weaknesses of the 
case study. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 12 
 
Subject content What students need to learn:  
2.3 Studies 
 
Classic study 
2.3.1 Baddeley (1966b) Working memory model: The 
influence of acoustic and semantic similarity on 
long-term memory for word sequences. 
One contemporary study from the following: 
2.3.2 Schmolck et al. (2002) Semantic knowledge in 
patient HM and other patients with bilateral medial 
and lateral temporal lobe lesions. 
2.3.3 Steyvers and Hemmer (2012) Reconstruction from 
memory in naturalistic environments. 
2.3.4 Sebastián and Hernández-Gil (2012) Developmental 
pattern of digit span in Spanish population. 
2.4 Key questions 
 
2.4.1 One key question of relevance to today’s society, 
discussed as a contemporary issue for society rather 
than an as academic argument. 
2.4.2 Concepts, theories and/or research (as appropriate 
to the chosen key question) drawn from cognitive 
psychology as used in this specification. 
Suitable examples 
● How can psychologists’ understanding of memory help 
patients with dementia? 
● How can knowledge of working memory be used to 
inform the treatment of dyslexia? 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 13 
 
Subject content What students need to learn:  
2.5 Practical 
investigation 
2.5.1 One practical research exercise to gather data 
relevant to topics covered in cognitive psychology. 
This practical research exercise must adhere to 
ethical principles in both content and intention. 
In conducting the practical research exercise, students 
must: 
● design and conduct a laboratory experiment to gather 
quantitative data and include descriptive statistics as 
analysis and a non-parametric test of difference 
● make design decisions when planning and conducting 
your experiment, including experimental design, 
sampling decisions, operationalisation, control, ethical 
considerations, hypothesis construction, experimenter 
effects and demand characteristics 
● collect, present and comment on data gathered, 
including using measures of central tendency (mean, 
median, mode as appropriate); measures of dispersion 
(including range and standard deviation as appropriate); 
bar graph, histogram, frequency graph as relevant; 
normal distribution if appropriate and draw conclusions 
● use a Mann-Whitney U or Wilcoxon non-parametric test 
of difference to test significance (as appropriate), 
including level of significance and critical/observed 
values 
● consider strengths and weaknesses of the experiment, 
and possible improvements 
● write up the procedure, results and discussion section of 
a report. 
Suitable examples 
● Dual task experiment to investigate components of 
working memory. 
● An experiment to look at acoustic similarity of words and 
the effect on short-term memory. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 14 
 
Subject content What students need to learn:  
2.6 Issues and 
debates 
 
Examples of issues and debates in cognitive psychology: 
● Ethics (e.g. Henry Molaison (HM) and confidentiality). 
● Practical issues in the design and implementation 
of research (e.g. how to measure memory and the 
validity of experimental design). 
● Reductionism (e.g. under-emphasis on the 
interconnections between parts of the brain in favour of 
individual parts responsible for memory; artificially 
breaking memory up into parts like Short-term Memory 
and Long-term Memory for the purposes of study). 
● Comparisons of ways of explaining behaviour 
using different themes (e.g. the different memory 
models). 
● Psychology as a science (e.g. laboratory experiments 
and controls). 
● Culture and gender (e.g. how memory is reconstructed 
based on cultural differences or gender stereotypes; or 
differences in digit span cross-culturally if studied 
Sebastian and Hernandez-Gil contemporary study). 
● Nature-nurture (e.g. Henry Molaison (HM) and brain 
function = nature, reconstructive memory emphasises 
experiences = nurture). 
● An understanding of how psychological 
understanding has developed over time (e.g. if 
studying the development of the working memory model 
over time; or how the multi-store model informed later 
memory models). 
● Issues of social control (e.g. perhaps using 
understanding of memory in court situations). 
● The use of psychological knowledge within society 
(e.g. using understanding of memory to help with 
memory 'loss', for example a memory bus). 
● Issues related to socially sensitive research (e.g. 
memory loss related to dementia is socially sensitive for 
the individual). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 15 
Topic 3: Biological psychology 
Topic overview 
Students must show an understanding that biological 
psychology is about the mechanisms within our body and 
understand how they affect our behaviour, focusing on 
aggression.  
Individual differences and developmental psychology must 
be considered when learning about issues such as 
aggression caused by an accident and how the function of 
structures of the brain can be affected by the environment. 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
3.1 Content 
 
3.1.1 The central nervous system (CNS) and 
neurotransmitters in human behaviour, including 
the structure and role of the neuron, the function of 
neurotransmitters and synaptic transmission. 
3.1.2 The effect of recreational drugs on the transmission 
process in the central nervous system.  
3.1.3 The structure of the brain, different brain areas  
(e.g. pre-frontal cortex) and brain functioning as an 
explanation of aggression as a human behaviour. 
3.1.4 The role of evolution and natural selection to explain 
human behaviour, including aggression. 
3.1.5 Biological explanation of aggression as an 
alternative to Freud’s psychodynamic explanation, 
referring to the different parts of the personality (id, 
ego, superego), the importance of the unconscious, 
and catharsis. 
3.1.6 The role of hormones (e.g. testosterone) to explain 
human behaviour such as aggression. 
3.1.7 Individual differences  
● Damage to the brain may be affected by 
individual differences in case studies of brain-
damaged patients when it is assumed there are 
no individual differences. 
● Freud's view of the personality shows it develops 
individual differences. 
3.1.8 Developmental psychology 
● The role of evolution in human development. 
● The role of hormones in human development. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 16 
 
Subject content What students need to learn:  
3.2 Methods 3.2.1 Correlational research 
● The use of the correlational research method in 
psychology, including co-variables. 
● Types of correlation: positive, negative and 
including the use of scatter diagrams. 
● Issues surrounding the use of correlations in 
psychology; issues with cause and effect, other 
variables. 
3.2.2 Analysis of correlational data 
● Analysis of, use of, and drawing conclusions 
from correlational studies, including scatter 
diagrams, using inferential statistical testing 
(use of Spearman’s rho) and issues of statistical 
significance; levels of measurement; critical 
and observed values. 
● The use of alternate, experimental and null 
hypotheses. The use of IV and DV in 
experiments and co-variables in correlations. 
The use of control groups, randomising to 
groups, sampling, levels of measurement 
(ordinal, interval, nominal), reasons for 
using Spearman’s rho. 
3.2.3 Other biological research methods 
● Brain-scanning techniques (CAT, PET, and fMRI). 
● The use of brain-scanning techniques to 
investigate human behaviour, e.g. aggression. 
● One twin study and one adoption study, e.g. 
Gottesman and Shields (1966); Ludeke et al. 
(2013). 
3.3 Studies 
 
Classic study 
3.3.1 Raine et al. (1997) Brain abnormalities in murderers 
indicated by positron emission tomography. 
One contemporary study from the following: 
3.3.2 Li et al. (2013) Abnormal function of the posterior 
cingulate cortex in heroin addicted users during 
resting-state and drug-cue stimulation task. 
3.3.3 Brendgen et al. (2005) Examining genetic and 
environmental effects on social aggression: A study 
of 6-year-old twins. 
3.3.4 Van den Oever et al. (2008) Prefrontal cortex AMPA 
receptor plasticity is crucial for cue-induced relapse 
for heroin-seeking. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 17 
 
Subject content What students need to learn:  
3.4 Key questions 
 
3.4.1 One key question of relevance to today’s society, 
discussed as a contemporary issue for society rather 
than as an academic argument. 
3.4.2 Concepts, theories and/or research (as appropriate 
to the chosen key question) drawn from biological 
psychology as used in this specification. 
Suitable examples 
● How effective is drug therapy for treating addictions? For 
example, methadone to treat heroin addiction. 
● What are the implications for society if aggression is 
found to be caused by nature not nurture? 
3.5 Practical 
investigation 
3.5.1 One practical research exercise to gather data 
relevant to topics covered in biological psychology. 
This practical research exercise must adhere to 
ethical principles in both content and intention. 
In conducting the practical research exercise, students 
must: 
● design and conduct a correlational study 
● link their research to aggression or attitudes to drug use 
● include inferential statistical testing (Spearman’s rho) 
and explain the significance of the result and the use of 
levels of significance. Students must also be able to use 
descriptive statistics (strength/direction) to explain the 
relationship 
● produce an abstract of the research method and a 
discussion section that includes conclusions 
● include research question/hypothesis; research method, 
sampling, ethical considerations, data-collection tools, 
data analysis, results; discussion 
● consider strengths and weaknesses of the correlational 
study and possible improvements. 
Suitable examples 
● A correlation into age and attitudes to drug use. 
● A correlation to see if there is a relationship between 
height and a self-rating of aggressive tendencies. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 18 
 
Subject content What students need to learn:  
3.6 Issues and 
debates 
 
Examples of issues and debates in biological psychology: 
● Ethics (e.g. studying aggression and how findings are 
used; in the research itself such as issues of 
confidentiality and informed consent). 
● Practical issues in the design and implementation 
of research (e.g. issues in scanning and measuring the 
complexity of the brain). 
● Reductionism (e.g. focusing on aggression when 
studying the brain). 
● Comparisons of ways of explaining behaviour 
using different themes (e.g. causes of aggression 
comparing Freud's ideas and biological explanations). 
● Psychology as a science (e.g. synaptic transmission; 
brain-scanning techniques). 
● Culture and gender (e.g. hormonal differences 
between males and females possibly influencing 
behaviour, such as aggression) 
● Nature-nurture (e.g. brain localisation in aggression 
and environmental influences in aggression). 
● An understanding of how psychological 
understanding has developed over time (e.g. 
development of scanning techniques up to fMRI and 
development of knowledge accordingly). 
● Issues of social control (e.g. using knowledge of brain 
function to control individuals). 
● The use of psychological knowledge within society 
(e.g. understanding causes of aggression, in order to 
perhaps deal with them). 
● Issues related to socially sensitive research  
(e.g. confidentiality). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 19 
Topic 4: Learning theories 
Topic overview 
Students must show an understanding that learning 
theories are about learning from the environment and of 
the effects of conditioning, reinforcement, punishment, the 
role of reward and social learning on the organism. 
Individual differences and developmental psychology must 
be considered when learning about the effect of rewards 
and punishment on individuals and how children develop 
through the different ways of learning, including social 
learning. 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
4.1 Content 
 
Classical conditioning 
4.1.1 The main features of classical conditioning, 
including: unconditioned stimulus (UCS); 
unconditioned response (UCR); conditioned stimulus 
(CS); neutral stimulus (NS); conditioned response 
(CR); extinction, spontaneous recovery and stimulus 
generalisation. 
4.1.2 Pavlov (1927) experiment with salivation in dogs. 
Operant conditioning 
4.1.3 The main features of operant conditioning, 
including: types of reinforcement and punishment 
(positive and negative). 
4.1.4 Properties of reinforcement, including primary and 
secondary reinforcement and schedules of 
reinforcement. 
4.1.5 Behaviour modification, including ‘shaping’ 
behaviour. 
4.1.6 The main features of social learning theory, 
including: observation, imitation, modelling and 
vicarious reinforcement. 
4.1.7 Social learning ‘stages’ of attention, retention, 
reproduction and motivation (reinforcement). 
4.1.8 Bandura (1961, 1963) original Bobo doll 
experiments. 
4.1.9 Bandura (1965) Bobo doll experiment with vicarious 
reinforcement. 
4.1.10 How learning theories explain the acquisition and 
maintenance of phobias. 
4.1.11 Treatments for phobias based on theories of 
learning, including systematic desensitisation and 
one other. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 20 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
4.1 Content 
(continued) 
4.1.12 Individual differences 
● How people differ because of different 
environmental influences and experiences, for 
example in the form of rewards and 
punishments and models observed. 
4.1.13 Developmental psychology 
● The idea that development is through patterns 
of rewards and punishments. 
● Social learning theory's idea that development is 
through observation of others. 
4.2 Methods 4.2.1 Human research 
● The use of the observational research method in 
psychology, including the gathering of both 
qualitative and quantitative data (including 
tallying, event and time sampling).
 
● Types of observation: participant, non-
participant, structured, naturalistic overt and 
covert.
 
● Use of content analysis as a research method. 
4.2.2 Animal research 
● The use of animals in laboratory experiments 
where results can be related to humans.
 
● Ethical issues regarding the use of animals in 
laboratory experiments, including Scientific 
Procedures Act (1986) and Home Office 
Regulations. 
4.2.3 Analysis of data 
● With regard to inferential statistics: levels of 
measurement; reasons for choosing a  
chi-squared test; comparing observed and 
critical values to judge significance; the  
chi-squared test. 
● Analysis of qualitative data using thematic 
analysis.
 
4.2.4 Scientific status of psychology, including: 
● Replicability, reliability, validity (internal, 
predictive and ecological), reductionism, 
falsification, empiricism, hypothesis testing, and 
use of controls. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 21 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
4.3 Studies 
 
Classic study 
4.3.1 Watson and Rayner (1920) Little Albert: Conditioned 
emotional reactions. 
One contemporary study from the following: 
4.3.2 Becker et al. (2002) Eating behaviours and attitudes 
following prolonged exposure to television among 
ethnic Fijian adolescent girls. 
4.3.3 Bastian et al. (2011) Cyber-dehumanization: Violent 
video game play diminishes our humanity. 
4.3.4 Capafóns et al. (1998) Systematic desensitisation in 
the treatment of the fear of flying. 
4.4 Key questions 
 
 
4.4.1 One key question of relevance to today’s society, 
discussed as a contemporary issue for society rather 
than as an academic argument. 
4.4.2 Concepts, theories and/or research (as appropriate 
to the chosen key question) drawn from learning 
theories as used in this specification. 
Suitable examples 
● Is the influence of role models and celebrities something 
that causes anorexia? 
● Would it be a good idea for airline companies to offer 
treatment programmes for fear of flying? 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 22 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
.5 Practical 
investigation 
4.5.1 Two observations (one observation can be carried 
out if both qualitative and quantitative data are 
gathered in the same observation). 
In conducting the practical research exercise, students 
must: 
● ensure that observations relate to an aspect of learned 
behaviour, such as behaviour of different sexes, driving 
characteristics, age-related behaviour, politeness and 
helping behaviour 
● ensure that observations enable the gathering of both 
qualitative and quantitative data (including the use of 
note taking, tallying and thematic analysis)  
● analyse the findings to produce results, including using a 
chi-squared test 
● consider the strengths and weaknesses of the studies 
and possible improvements  
● write up the results of the quantitative data, including 
appropriate graphs and tables 
● write up the results of the qualitative analysis (thematic 
analysis). 
 
 
Suitable examples 
● How age and sex affect driving speed. 
● Investigating the differences in helpful or polite 
behaviour in men and women. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 23 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
4.6 Issues and 
debates 
 
Examples of issues and debates in learning theories: 
● Ethics (e.g. the ethical issues involved in using animals 
in studies). 
● Practical issues in the design and implementation 
of research (e.g. generalising from animal-study 
findings to humans). 
● Reductionism (in the way behaviourism reduces 
behaviour into parts to be studied). 
● Comparisons between ways of explaining 
behaviour using different themes (e.g. different 
learning theories). 
● Psychology as a science (e.g. in the methodology; in 
the explicit focus of behaviourism on the measurable). 
● Culture (e.g. relates to reinforcement patterns in 
learning theory as well as social learning theory and 
what is modelled) and gender (e.g. if used in the 
practical research exercise, and in observational learning 
issues). 
● Nature-nurture (e.g. in the observations if looking at 
gender or age or characteristics as these can be learned 
or biologically given). 
● An understanding of how psychological 
understanding has developed over time (e.g. can 
come through choice of study, such as if looking at video 
game violence or through current therapy practice). 
● Issues of social control (e.g. use of learning theories 
in therapy can be social control, including issues of 
power of the therapist). 
● The use of psychological knowledge within society 
(e.g. using patterns of reward to shape behaviour in 
schools or prisons). 
● Issues related to socially sensitive research (e.g. 
issues of the power of the therapist).  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 24 
Topic 5: Clinical psychology 
Topic overview 
Students must show understanding that clinical psychology 
is about explaining and treating mental health issues, and 
of the different ways of treating them, including counselling 
and drug treatments. 
Individual differences and developmental psychology must 
be considered when learning about links between 
personality factors and mental disorders and genetic 
influences (nature) or environmental influences (nurture) 
within different explanations for mental health disorders. 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
5.1 Content 
 
5.1.1 Diagnosis of mental disorders, including deviance, 
dysfunction, distress, and danger. 
5.1.2 Classification systems (DSM IVR or DSM V, and ICD) 
for mental health, including reliability and validity of 
diagnoses. 
5.1.3 Schizophrenia and one other disorder from anorexia 
nervosa, Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) and 
unipolar depression. 
For schizophrenia 
● Description of symptoms and features, including thought 
insertion, hallucinations, delusions, disordered thinking. 
● The function of neurotransmitters as a 
theory/explanation. 
● One other biological theory/explanation. 
● One non-biological theory/explanation. 
For the other disorder 
● Description of symptoms and features. 
● Two explanations/theories: one biological 
theory/explanation and one non-biological 
theory/explanation. 
5.1.4 For schizophrenia and the other disorder, students 
should be familiar with two treatments for each 
disorder: one from biological and one from 
psychological. 
Two treatments for each disorder. The two for schizophrenia 
must come from different topic areas. The two for the other 
chosen disorder must come from different topic areas (these 
may be from the same topic areas as those used for 
schizophrenia).
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 25 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
5.1 Content 
(continued) 
5.1.5 Individual differences  
● Cultural effects can lead to individual differences 
in mental health disorders, e.g. non-biological 
explanation for schizophrenia. 
● Cultural effects can lead to different diagnoses of 
mental health disorders affecting reliablity and 
validity. 
5.1.6 Developmental psychology 
● Issues around genes and mental health, such as 
a genetic or biochemical explanation for 
schizophrenia, can affect development. 
5.2 Methods 5.2.1 Awareness of Health and Care Professions Council 
(HCPC) guidelines for clinical practitioners. 
5.2.2 Researching mental health 
 The use of longitudinal, cross-sectional, cross-
cultural methods, meta-analysis, and the use of 
primary and secondary data. 
5.2.3 The use of case studies, to include an example 
study: 
 e.g. Lavarenne et al. (2013) Containing psychotic 
patients with fragile boundaries: a single group case 
study. 
5.2.4 The use of interviews in clinical psychology, to 
include an example study: 
 e.g. Vallentine et al. (2010) Psycho-educational 
group for detained offender patients: understanding 
mental illness. 
5.2.5. Within the methods mentioned here:  
 A nalysis of quantitative data using both descriptive 
and inferential statistics (chi-squared, Spearman's, 
Wilcoxon and Mann-Whitney U as appropriate). 
 Analysis of qualitative data using thematic analysis 
and grounded theory. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 26 
 
Subject content What students need to learn:  
5.3 Studies 
 
Classic study 
5.3.1 Rosenhan (1973) On being sane in insane places. 
One contemporary study on schizophrenia 
5.3.2 Carlsson et al. (2000) Network interactions in 
schizophrenia – therapeutic implications. 
One contemporary study on another disorder, from the 
following: 
Depression 
5.3.3 Kroenke et al. (2008) The PHQ-8 as a measure of 
current depression in the general population. 
5.3.4 Williams et al. (2013) Combining imagination and 
reason in the treatment of depression: a 
randomised control trial of internet based cognitive 
bias modification and internet-CBT for depression. 
Anorexia 
5.3.5 Scott-Van Zeeland et al. (2013) Evidence for the 
role of EPHX2 gene variants in anorexia nervosa. 
5.3.6 Guardia et al. (2012) Imagining One’s Own and 
Someone Else’s Body Actions: Dissociation in 
Anorexia Nervosa. 
Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (OCD) 
5.3.7 Masellis et al. (2003) Quality of life in OCD: 
Differential impact of obsessions, compulsions, and 
depressions co morbidity. 
5.3.8 POTS team including March et al. (2004) Cognitive 
behaviour therapy, Sertraline and their combination 
for children and adolescents with OCD. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 27 
 
Subject content What students need to learn:  
5.4 Key questions 
 
5.4.1 One key question of relevance to today’s society, 
discussed as a contemporary issue for society rather 
than an academic argument. 
5.4.2 Concepts, theories and/or research (as appropriate 
to the chosen key question) drawn from clinical 
psychology as used in this specification. 
Suitable examples 
● How do different societies define mental health 
disorders? 
● What are the issues surrounding mental health in the 
workplace?  
5.5 Practical 
investigation 
5.5.1 One practical research exercise to gather data 
relevant to topics covered in clinical psychology. 
This practical research exercise must adhere to 
ethical principles in both content and intention. 
 Content analysis that explores attitudes to mental 
health. 
In conducting the practical research exercise, students 
must: 
● perform summative content analysis 
● analyse at least two sources (e.g. radio interviews, 
newspapers, magazines) to compare attitudes towards 
mental health. 
Suitable examples 
● Comparing how attitudes have changed over time. 
● How different sources report mental health. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 28 
 
Subject content What students need to learn:  
5.6 Issues and 
debates 
Examples of issues and debates in clinical psychology: 
● Ethics (e.g. issues of diagnosing mental disorders such 
as using labelling; obtaining consent for participation in 
research; HCPC guidelines for practitioners). 
● Practical issues in the design and implementation 
of research (e.g. quantitative v qualitative data, 
balancing validity with reliability). 
● Reductionism (e.g. in research where causes of mental 
disorders are isolated and diagnoses are not holistic). 
● Comparisons between ways of explaining 
behaviour using different themes (e.g. ICD and 
DSM; different explanations for mental health issues). 
● Psychology as a science (e.g. in research that 
involves biological methods; in treatments such as drug 
therapies; in research that uses scientific research 
methods such as laboratory experiments). 
● Culture (e.g. cultural differences in diagnosis practices) 
and gender (e.g. gender featuring as a difference in 
frequency of a disorder). 
● Nature-nurture (e.g. different theories of what causes 
mental disorders, biological compared to social 
psychology). 
● An understanding of how psychological 
understanding has developed over time (e.g. DSM 
changes; changes in therapies; changing explanations 
for mental health issues). 
● Issues of social control (e.g. policies for the 
treatement and therapy for mental health issues can 
itself be seen as a form of social control). 
● The use of psychological knowledge within society 
(e.g. therapies and treatments for mental health issues). 
● Issues related to socially sensitive research (e.g. 
research in the area of mental health and cultural 
issues). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 29 
Topic 6: Criminological psychology 
Topic overview 
Students must show understanding that criminological 
psychology is about the definition and causes of crime and 
anti-social behaviour, and of the identification and 
treatment of offenders undertaken by forensic investigators. 
Individual differences and developmental psychology must 
be considered when learning about the possible causes of 
criminal behaviour, such as labelling, self-fulfilling prophecy 
and social learning. 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
6.1 Content 
 
Explanations of crime and anti-social behaviour, with 
consideration given to gender differences 
6.1.1 Biological explanations, including brain injury, 
amygdala and aggression, XYY syndrome and 
personality. 
6.1.2 Social explanations, including labelling, self-fulfilling 
prophecy. 
Understanding the offender, offence analysis and case 
formulation 
6.1.3 Cognitive interview and ethical interview techniques. 
6.1.4 The use of psychological formulation to understand 
the function of offending behaviour in the individual. 
Two treatments for offenders, including strengths and 
weaknesses and one study for each that considers their 
effectiveness 
6.1.5 One cognitive-behavioural treatment e.g. CBT, 
social skills training, anger management, 
assertiveness training. 
6.1.6 One biological treatment, e.g. improved diet, 
hormone treatment. 
6.1.7 Factors influencing eye-witness testimony, including 
consideration of reliability (including post-event 
information and weapon focus). Studies can be the 
same as those used for the methodology section of 
criminological psychology. 
6.1.8 Factors influencing jury decision-making, including 
characteristics of the defendant and pre-trial 
publicity, including studies in this area. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 30 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
6.1 Content 
(continued) 
6.1.9 Individual differences  
● Personality as a factor in criminal/anti-social 
behaviour. 
● Individual differences affecting whether a self-
fulfilling prophecy occurs, e.g. with regard to 
developing criminal or anti-social behaviour. 
6.1.10 Developmental psychology 
● The self-fulfilling prophecy is an explanation for 
criminal/anti-social behaviour that explains 
development of some individuals. 
● Social learning theory is a theory of human 
development that can account for criminal/ 
anti-social behaviour. 
● Other causes for criminal/anti-social behaviour, 
including biological, can explain development. 
6.2 Methods 6.2.1 Research methods 
● Research methods used to assess eye-witness 
effectiveness, including laboratory experiments 
and field experiments.
 
● Case studies. 
6.2.2 Sample selection and techniques 
● Random. 
● Stratified. 
● Volunteer and technique. 
● Opportunity. 
6.2.3 Issues of reliability, validity, objectivity, credibility 
and ethics in research in criminological psychology. 
6.2.4 Data analysis 
● Analysis of quantitative data: calculating 
measures of central tendency, frequency tables, 
measures of dispersion (range and standard 
deviation) correlations, meta-analysis. 
● Analysis of, use of, and drawing conclusions 
from quantitative data, including using 
inferential statistical testing (use of chi-squared, 
Spearman, Mann-Whitney U, Wilcoxon) and 
issues of statistical significance; levels of 
measurement; critical and observed values. 
● Analysis of qualitative data using thematic 
analysis and grounded theory. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 31 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
6.2 Methods 
(continued) 
6.2.5 Ethical guidelines 
British Psychological Society (BPS) Code of Ethics 
and Conduct (2009), including risk management 
when carrying out research in psychology and 
Health and Care Professions Council (HCPC) 
principles for undertaking psychological, formulation 
and intervention. 
6.3 Studies 
 
Classic study 
6.3.1 Loftus and Palmer (1974) Reconstruction of auto 
mobile destruction: An example of the interaction 
between language and memory.  
One contemporary study from the following: 
6.3.2 Bradbury M D and Williams, M R (2013) Diversity 
and Citizen Participation: The Effects of Race on 
Juror Decision Making.  
6.3.3 Valentine T and Mesout J (2009) Eyewitness 
identification under stress in the London Dungeon 
6.3.4 Howells et al. (2005) Brief anger management 
programs with offenders: Outcomes and predictors 
of change. 
6.4 Key questions 
 
6.4.1 One key issue of relevance to today’s society, 
discussed as a contemporary issue for society rather 
than as an academic argument. 
6.4.2 Concepts, theories and/or research as appropriate 
to the chosen key question drawn from 
criminological psychology as given in this 
specification. 
Suitable examples 
● Is eye-witness testimony too unreliable to trust? 
● Should jury bias lead to the abolishment of juries? 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 32 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
6.5 Practical 
investigation 
6.5.1 One practical research exercise to gather data 
relevant to topics covered in criminological 
psychology. The practical research exercise must 
adhere to ethical principles in both content and 
intention. 
In conducting the practical research exercise, students 
must: 
● conduct a questionnaire, interview or an experiment  
● gather qualitative and/or quantitative data but must 
involve quantitative data for analysis (can turn 
qualitative data into quantitative date for analysis 
purposes) 
● include inferential statistical testing as appropriate such 
as chi squared, Mann-Whitney U, Wilcoxon or 
Spearman’s rho  
● include research question/hypothesis; research method; 
sampling; ethical considerations; data collection tools; 
data analysis; results; discussion 
● consider strengths and weaknesses of the practical 
research exercise and possible improvements. 
Suitable examples 
● An experiment into the use of cognitive interview 
concerning recall of a specific event.  
● View a crime/courtroom drama and conduct an 
interview/questionnaire on participants about the 
reasons why the defendants may have committed the 
crime they are accused of. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 33 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
6.6 Issues and 
debates 
Examples of issues and debates in criminological 
psychology: 
● Ethics (e.g. effects of unreliability of jury decision-
making; effects of unreliability of eye-witness testimony; 
using field experiments to test eye-witness unreliability 
with possible lack of debriefing). 
● Practical issues in the design and implementation 
of research (e.g. having to use mock juries and 
artificial situations because of not being able to 
manipulate real trial situations). 
● Reductionism (e.g. using experiments and field 
experiments to test issues around eye-witness testimony 
such as weapons effect; biological explanations for 
criminal behaviour). 
● Comparisons between ways of explaining 
behaviour using different themes (e.g. different 
explanations for criminal behaviour drawing on biology, 
learning theories and social psychology). 
● Psychology as a science (e.g. using experiments and 
field experiments; using biological explanations). 
● Culture and gender (e.g. as issues that might affect 
jury decision-making – sometimes to the detriment of 
the defendant). 
● Nature-nurture (e.g. biological versus social/learning 
explanations for criminal behaviour).  
● An understanding of how psychological 
understanding has developed over time (e.g. Loftus 
and Palmer's study of eye-witness testimony and 
consider Loftus's work in the field currently; cognitive 
interview and ethical interview). 
● Issues of social control (e.g. treatments and therapies 
for those convicted of crime or anti-social behaviour; the 
power of a therapist, a forensic psychologist, or the 
person controlling the treatment/therapy). 
● The use of psychological knowledge within society 
(e.g. warning about unreliability of eye-witness 
testimony; warning about issues that might affect jury 
decision-making). 
● Issues related to socially-sensitive research (e.g. 
looking at causes for criminal behaviour in socially 
sensitive areas such as socio-economic status, race, age, 
gender).
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 34 
Topic 7: Child psychology 
Topic overview 
Students must show understanding that child psychology is 
about the development of the individual from before birth to 
adolescence and beyond, in that what we experience as 
children affects our later development. 
Individual differences and developmental psychology must 
be considered when learning about differences that can 
come from the child’s age, gender, social situation, 
privation and deprivation. 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
7.1 Content 
 
Attachment, deprivation and privation 
7.1.1 Bowlby’s work on attachment. 
7.1.2 Ainsworth’s work on attachment, including types of 
attachment and the Strange Situation procedure. 
7.1.3 Research into deprivation (short-term and long-term 
effects) and how negative effects can be reduced. 
7.1.4 Research into privation and whether the negative 
effects can be reversed. 
7.1.5 Research into day care, including advantages and 
disadvantages for the child, and what makes good 
and poor-quality day care. 
7.1.6 Cross-cultural research into attachment types and 
nature-nurture issues that arise about development. 
7.1.7 Autism 
● The features of autism. 
● One biological explanation for autism. 
● One other explanation for autism. 
● Therapies for helping children with autism. 
7.1.8 Individual differences  
● Attachment type can affect individuals 
differently, such as issues of child temperament. 
● Positive and negative aspects of day care can be 
affected by individual differences such as gender 
or temperament. 
7.1.9 Developmental psychology 
● Effects on development of day care. 
● Effects on development of attachment 
interactions, including deprivation, privation and 
separation. 
● Effects on development of developmental 
disorders, including autism. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 35 
 
Subject content What students need to learn:  
7.2 Methods 7.2.1 Observation 
● The use of the observational research method in 
child psychology, including the gathering of both 
qualitative and quantitative data (including 
tallying).  
● Types of observation: participant, non-
participant, overt and covert. 
7.2.2 Questionnaire/interview 
● The use of both questionnaires and interviews in 
child psychology, including the gathering of both 
qualitative and quantitative data. 
● Issues around using questionnaire and interview 
methods: semi-structured, structured, 
unstructured interviews; sampling; open and 
closed questions; social desirability; demand 
characteristics. 
7.2.3 Cross-cultural research 
● The use of the cross-cultural research method, 
including the Strange Situation, in child 
psychology, including nature-nurture issues and 
issues of cross-sectional versus longitudinal 
designs. 
● The use of meta-analysis using cross-cultural 
research to draw conclusions about the 
universality of attachment types. 
7.2.4 The ethics of researching with children, including 
children’s rights and the UNCRC (1989), and issues 
around participation and protection. 
7.2.5 Data analysis 
● Analysis of quantitative data using measures of 
central tendency, frequency tables, measures of 
dispersion (range and standard deviation). 
● Analysis of, use of, and drawing conclusions 
from quantitative data using inferential 
statistics, including use of chi-squared, 
Spearman, Mann-Whitney U and Wilcoxon, and 
issues of statistical significance, levels of 
measurement, critical and observed values. 
● Analysis of qualitative data using thematic 
analysis and grounded theory. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 36 
 
Subject content What students need to learn:  
7.3 Studies 
 
Classic study 
7.3.1 van IJzendoorn and Kroonenberg (1988) Cross-
cultural patterns of attachment: A Meta-Analysis of 
the Strange Situation. 
One contemporary study from the following: 
7.3.2 Cassibba et al. (2013) Attachment the Italian way. 
7.3.3 Gagnon-Oosterwaal et al. (2012) Pre-adoption 
adversity and self-reported behaviour problems in 
7-year-old international adoptees. 
7.3.4 Li et al. (2013) Timing of High-Quality Child Care 
and Cognitive, Language and Preacademic 
Development. 
7.4 Key questions 
 
7.4.1 One issue of relevance to today’s society, explaining 
the issue and applying concepts, theories and/or 
research (as appropriate) drawn from child 
psychology as given in this specification. 
7.4.2 Concepts, theories and/or research (as appropriate 
to the chosen key question) drawn from child 
psychology as given in this specification. 
Suitable examples 
● What issues should parents take into account when 
deciding about day care for their child? 
● Is international adoption good or bad for a child? 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 37 
 
Subject content What students need to learn:  
7.5 Practical 
investigation 
7.5.1 One practical research exercise to gather data 
relevant to topics covered in child psychology. This 
practical research exercise must adhere to ethical 
principles in both content and intention. 
In conducting the practical research exercise, students 
must: 
● conduct one study using a questionnaire, interview or 
observation  
● gather qualitative and/or quantitative data but must 
involve quantitative data for analysis (can turn 
qualitative data into quantitative date for analysis 
purposes) 
● include inferential statistical testing as appropriate, such 
as chi squared, Mann-Whitney U, Wilcoxon or 
Spearman’s rho 
● include a research question/hypothesis, research 
method, sampling, ethical considerations, data collection 
tools, data analysis, results, discussion 
● consider strengths and weaknesses of the practical 
research exercise and possible improvements. 
Suitable examples 
● Interview of an adult to look for a relationship between 
strong attachment experiences and strong adult 
relationships. 
● Interview of a parent of a child under 3 years old around 
positive experiences when using day care for their child. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 38 
 
Subject content What students need to learn:  
7.6 Issues and 
debates 
Examples of issues and debates in child psychology: 
● Ethics (e.g. balancing participation and protection rights 
and the UNCRC). 
● Practical issues in the design and implementation 
of research (e.g. in meta-analyses, with special issues 
about comparing results from different studies; in 
observations and getting objective data). 
● Reductionism can be discussed (e.g. reducing 
behaviour to the Strange Situation in order to test 
attachment types).
 
● Comparisons between ways of explaining 
behaviour using different themes (e.g. Ainsworth's 
and Bowlby's theories about attachment; evolution ideas 
about attachment).
 
● Psychology as a science (e.g. looking at how cross-
cultural research can answer questions about nature-
nurture, so looking at what is universal in child 
development).
 
● Culture (e.g. cross-cultural findings about attachment 
types and cultural differences in child rearing) and 
gender (not considered directly but studies do look at 
differences in gender, day care, and social, emotional 
and cognitive development).
 
● Nature-nurture (e.g. what cross-cultural studies say 
about the universality of attachment types). 
● An understanding of how psychological 
understanding has developed over time (e.g. 
Bowlby’s work has been followed up with more recent 
studies on maternal deprivation linking to issues around 
day care).
 
● Issues of social control (e.g. how findings about day 
care and parenting styles/attachments can be used as a 
form of control such as advising day care (or not) for 
economic reasons; treatment, therapy and behaviour 
around the issue of autism).
 
● The use of psychological knowledge within society 
(e.g. treatment or therapy for problem behaviour; pros 
and cons of day care and advice to parents; advice 
regarding looked after children).
 
● Issues related to socially sensitive research (e.g. 
research into developmental issues such as autism; 
research into issues around child development such as 
socio-economic status; research around adoption and 
the effects of privation).
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 39 
Topic 8: Health psychology 
Topic overview 
Students must show understanding that health psychology 
is about understanding health from a biological, cognitive 
and social basis and that health psychology is about 
promoting good health. 
Individual differences and developmental psychology must 
be considered when learning about peer influence or 
labelling as explanations for drug misuse, and biological and 
learning explanations for drug misuse. 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
8.1 Content 
 
8.1.1 Issues around drug taking, including addiction, 
tolerance, physical and psychological dependency, 
withdrawal. 
Explanations of drug addiction 
8.1.2 One biological explanation each for alcohol, heroin 
and nicotine addiction, including mode of action. 
8.1.3 One learning explanation each for alcohol, heroin 
and nicotine addiction. 
Explanations may apply to more than one drug. 
Treatments for drug addiction 
8.1.4 Two treatments each for alcohol, heroin and nicotine 
addiction, including aversion therapy. 
Treatments may apply to more than one drug. 
8.1.5 One anti-drug campaign and the psychological 
strategies behind it. 
8.1.6 Individual differences  
● Biological and social factors in drug misuse can 
include effects dependent on differences in the 
individual, such as personality. 
8.1.7 Developmental psychology 
● Social interactions during development can lead 
to drug misuse, including learning. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 40 
 
Subject content What students need to learn:  
8.2 Methods 8.2.1 Use of animals 
● The use of animal laboratory experiments to 
study drugs. 
● Ethics of using animals to study drugs. 
8.2.2 Human drug studies 
● Two research methods using humans to study 
drugs. 
● Ethics of using human participants to study 
drugs.  
8.2.3 The use of cross-cultural research, including nature-
nurture issues related to drug misuse. 
8.2.4 Data analysis 
● Analysis of quantitative data using measures of 
central tendency, frequency tables, measures of 
dispersion (range and standard deviation). 
● Analysis of, use of, and drawing conclusions 
from quantitative data, including using 
inferential statistical testing (use of chi squared, 
Spearman, Mann-Whitney U, Wilcoxon) and 
issues of statistical significance; levels of 
measurement; critical and observed values. 
● Analysis of qualitative data using thematic 
analysis and grounded theory. 
8.3 Studies 
 
Classic study 
8.3.1 Olds and Milner (1954) Positive reinforcement 
produced by electrical stimulation of septal area and 
other regions of rat brain. 
One contemporary study from the following: 
8.3.2 Mundt et al. (2012) Peer selection and influence 
effects on adolescent alcohol use: a stochastic 
actor-based model. 
8.3.3 Dixit et al. (2012) Biosocial determinants of alcohol 
risk behaviour: An epidemiological study in urban 
and rural communities of Aligarh, Uttar Pradesh. 
8.3.4 Pengpid et al. (2012) Screening and brief 
intervention for hazardous and harmful alcohol use 
among hospital out-patients in South Africa: results 
from a randomised controlled trial. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 41 
 
Subject content What students need to learn:  
8.4 Key questions 
 
8.4.1 One issue of relevance to today’s society and to 
explain the issue apply concepts, theories and/or 
research (as appropriate) drawn from health 
psychology as given in this specification. 
8.4.2 Concepts, theories and/or research (as appropriate 
to the chosen key question) drawn from health 
psychology as given in this specification. 
Suitable examples 
● How to encourage the cessation of smoking? 
● Government intervention in health behaviours versus 
freedom of choice: to what extent is government 
intervention appropriate? 
8.5 Practical 
investigation 
8.5.1 One practical research exercise to gather data 
relevant to topics covered in health psychology. This 
practical research exercise must adhere to ethical 
principles in both content and intention. 
In conducting the practical research exercise, students 
must: 
● conduct a questionnaire, interview or a content analysis 
● gather qualitative and/or quantitative data but must 
involve quantitative data for analysis (can turn 
qualitative data into quantitative date for analysis 
purposes) 
● include inferential statistical testing as appropriate such 
as chi squared, Mann-Whitney U, Wilcoxon or 
Spearman’s rho  
● include research question/hypothesis; research method; 
sampling; ethical considerations; data-collection tools; 
data analysis; results; discussion 
● consider strenghts and weaknesses of the practical 
research exercise and possible improvements. 
Suitable examples 
● Content analysis of pop music/television programmes 
e.g. references to drugs. 
● Content analysis of newspaper articles/news comparing 
references to alcohol and nicotine. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 42 
 
Subject content What students need to learn:  
8.6 Issues and 
debates 
 
Examples of issues and debates in health psychology: 
● Ethical (e.g. the use of animals and humans when 
researching drugs and drug treatments like aversion 
therapy). 
● Practical issues in the design and implementation 
of research (e.g. generalising from findings from animal 
studies to human behaviour; studying drug action in the 
brain is hard to access holistically). 
● Reductionism (e.g. when considering the use of 
methods such as experiments; that studies using 
animals tend to isolate variables). 
● Comparisons between ways of explaining 
behaviour using different themes (e.g. different 
explanations for drug misuse, learning and biological). 
● Psychology as a science (e.g. using animal 
experiments to study drug misuse; considering biological 
explanations for drug misuse). 
● Culture (e.g. considering the cross-cultural research) 
and gender (not specifically considered in this topic area, 
though gender differences in drug taking could be 
considered). 
● Nature-nurture (e.g. learning as opposed to biological 
explanations for drug misuse). 
● An understanding of how psychological 
understanding has developed over time (e.g. rise of 
understanding about drug misuse – explanations for 
drug misuse; rising understanding used in anti-drug 
campaigns). 
● Issues of social control (e.g. treating drug misuse as 
criminal and requiring treatment). 
● The use of psychological knowledge within society 
(e.g. using understanding of drug misuse to develop 
treatment ideas). 
● Issues related to socially sensitive research (e.g. 
asking about drug 'habits' when people are vulnerable). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 43 
Topic 9: Psychological skills 
Topic overview 
This is a synoptic section in which students will be asked to 
draw on other areas of the qualification in order to 
understand conceptual and methodological issues. Students 
will develop an understanding of how to use theories and 
evidence from many areas of psychology and apply them to 
the issues. 
Relevant psychological skills have been contextualised in 
Topics 1–8. This topic collects them together in order to 
ensure that all content has been covered. 
Students must consider issues and debates from across all 
topics in order to develop a general knowledge of key issues 
and debates. 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
9.1 Methods 9.1.1 Types of data: qualitative and quantitative data; 
primary and secondary data. 
9.1.2 Sampling techniques: random, stratified, volunteer 
and opportunity. 
9.1.3 Experimental/research designs: independent 
groups, repeated measures and matched pairs. 
9.1.4 Hypotheses: null, alternate, experimental; 
directional and non-directional. 
9.1.5 Questionnaires and interviews: open, closed 
(including ranked scale questions); structured, 
semi-structured and unstructured interviews;  
self-report data. 
9.1.6 Experiments: laboratory and field; independent and 
dependent variables. 
9.1.7 Observations: tallying; event and time sampling; 
covert, overt, participant, non-participant; 
structured observations; naturalistic observations. 
9.1.8 Additional research methods and techniques: twin 
and adoption studies, animal experiments, case 
studies as used in different areas of psychology, 
scanning (CAT, PET, fMRI), content analysis, 
correlational research, longitudinal and cross-
sectional, cross-cultural and meta-analysis. 
 9.1.9 Control issues: counterbalancing, order effects, 
experimenter effects, social desirability, demand 
characteristics, participant variables, situational 
variables, extraneous variables, confounding 
variables, operationalisation of variables. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 44 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
9.1 Methods  
(continued) 
9.1.10 Descriptive statistics 
● measures of central tendency, frequency tables, 
graphs (bar chart, histogram, scatter diagram), 
normal distribution (including standard 
deviation), skewed distribution, sense checking 
data, measures of dispersion (range, standard 
deviation). 
● Produce, handle, interpret data-including 
drawing comparisons (e.g. between means of 
two sets of data). 
Students do not need to know formulae but are expected to 
be competent in simple mathematical steps. 
9.1.11 Inferential statistics  
 Decision making and interpretation 
● Levels of measurement. Appropriate choice of 
statistical test. The criteria for and use of  
Mann-Whitney U, Wilcoxon, Spearman’s,  
chi squared (for difference) tests. Directional 
and non-directional testing. 
● Use of critical value tables, one- and two-tailed 
testing. 
● Levels of significance, including knowledge of 
standard statistical terminology such as p equal 
to or greater than (e.g. p≤.05). Rejecting 
hypotheses. Type I and type II errors. The 
relationship between significance levels and  
p values. 
● Observed and critical values. 
9.1.12 Methodological issues: validity (internal, predictive, 
ecological), reliability, generalisability, objectivity, 
subjectivity (researcher bias), credibility. 
9.1.13 Analysis of qualitative data (thematic analysis and 
grounded theory). 
9.1.14 Conventions of published psychological research: 
abstract, introduction, aims and hypotheses, 
method, results, discussion; the process of  
peer review. 
9.1.15 Ethical issues in research using humans (BPS Code 
of Ethics and Conduct, 2009), including risk 
assessment when carrying out research in 
psychology. 
9.1.16 Ethical issues in research using animals (Scientific 
Procedures Act 1986 and Home Office regulations). 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 45 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
9.2 Synoptic 
review of 
studies 
9.2.1 Draw on and compare studies from the classic study 
section throughout the qualification. 
9.2.2 Review synoptically the classic studies of psychology 
in terms of issues and debates. 
9.2.3 Use principles of understanding, evaluation and 
synopticity on unseen material. 
9.3 Issues and 
debates 
See issues and debates sections in each topic area for 
examples of how to apply each of the topic areas of 
psychology. 
9.3.1 Ethical issues in research (animal and human). 
9.3.2 Practical issues in the design and implementation of 
research. 
9.3.3 Reductionism in the explanation of behaviour. 
9.3.4 Comparisons of ways of explaining behaviour using 
different themes. 
9.3.5 Psychology as a science. 
9.3.6 Cultural and gender issues in psychological 
research. 
9.3.7 The role of both nature and nurture in psychology. 
9.3.8 An understanding of how psychological 
understanding has developed over time. 
9.3.9 The use of psychology in social control. 
9.3.10 The use of psychological knowledge in society. 
9.3.11 Issues related to socially-sensitive research. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 46 
 
Assessment 
Assessment summary 
Summary of table of assessment 
Students must complete all assessment in May/June in any single year. 
The formulae and statistical tables given in Appendix 4: Formulae and statistical 
tables will also be given in each paper. 
Calculators may be used in each examination. 
Paper 1: Foundations in psychology *Paper code: 9PS0/01 
● Students must answer all questions from five sections. 
● Sections A–D total 70 marks comprising mixed question types, 
including stimulus and data response, short-answer and 
extended response questions and cover the topic areas as 
follows: 
Section A: Social psychology 
Section B: Cognitive psychology 
Section C: Biological psychology 
Section D: Learning theories. 
● Section E: Issues and debates has 20 marks and comprises two 
extended response questions, covering the topic area of issues 
and debates in psychology. 
● The assessment is 2 hours and 15 minutes long. 
● The assessment consists of 90 marks. 
● First assessment: May/June 2017. 
35% of the 
total 
qualification 
 
 
Paper 2: Applications of psychology  *Paper code: 9PS0/02 
● The paper is composed of two sections. Students must answer 
all questions from Section A and all questions from a choice of 
three optional topic areas in Section B. 
● Section A has 54 marks comprising mixed question types, 
including data response, short-answer and extended response 
questions and a 20-mark response covering the topic area of 
clinical psychology. 
● Section B presents students with a choice of one from three 
optional topic areas: Criminological psychology, Child 
psychology or Health psychology. Each section totals 36 marks, 
and comprises mixed question types, including stimulus and  
data-response, short-answer and extended response questions. 
● The assessment is 2 hours and 15 minutes long. 
● The assessment consists of 90 marks. 
● First assessment: May/June 2017. 
35% of the 
total 
qualification 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 47 
 
Paper 3: Psychological skills  *Paper code: 9PS0/03 
 
● Students must answer all questions from three sections. 
● Section A has 24 marks and comprises mixed question types, 
including stimulus and data response and short-answer 
questions, covering the topic area of research methods. 
● Section B has 24 marks and comprises mixed question types, 
including stimulus and data response and short-answer 
questions based on psychological studies and one extended 
response question based on classic studies given in Topics 1–5. 
● Section C has 32 marks and comprises two extended response 
questions, covering the topic area of issues and debates in 
psychology. 
● The assessment is 2 hours long. 
● The assessment consists of 80 marks. 
● First assessment: May/June 2017. 
30% of the 
total 
qualification 
 
 
The sample assessment materials can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 
Advanced GCE in Psychology Sample Assessment Materials document. 
*See Appendix 5: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant 
to this qualification. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 48 
Assessment Objectives and weightings 
 
Students must: 
% in 
GCE 
AO1 Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of scientific ideas, 
processes, techniques and procedures 30–35% 
AO2 Apply knowledge and understanding of scientific ideas, 
processes, techniques and procedures: 
● in a theoretical context 
● in a practical context 
● when handling qualitative data 
● when handling quantitative data 
30–35% 
AO3 Analyse, interpret and evaluate scientific information, ideas 
and evidence, including in relation to issues, to: 
● make judgements and reach conclusions 
● develop and refine practical design and procedures 
35–40% 
Total 100% 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 49 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
 
 Assessment Objectives Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives Paper AO1 AO2 AO3 
Paper 1: Foundations in 
psychology 11–15% 12–15% 8–12% 35% 
Paper 2: Applications of 
psychology 11–15% 9–12% 8–12% 35% 
Paper 3: Psychological skills 6–8% 7–9% 15–17% 30% 
Total for this qualification 30–35% 30–35% 35–40% 100% 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 50 
Entry and assessment information 
Student entry 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for 
this qualification can be found in our UK Information 
Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations 
officers and is available on our website at: 
www.edexcel.com/iwantto/Pages/uk-information-
manual.aspx 
Discount code and performance tables  
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more 
than one GCE qualification with the same discount code will 
have only one of the grades they achieve counted for the 
purpose of the School and College Performance Tables. This 
will be the grade for the larger qualification (i.e. the A Level 
grade rather than the AS grade). If the qualifications are 
the same size, then the better grade will be counted (please 
see Appendix 5: Codes). 
Students should be advised that if they take two GCE 
qualifications with the same discount code colleges, 
universities and employers they wish to progress to are 
likely to take the view that this achievement is equivalent to 
only one GCE. The same view may be taken if students take 
two GCE qualifications that have different discount codes 
but have significant overlap of content. Students or their 
advisers who have any doubts about their subject 
combinations should check with the institution to which 
they wish to progress to before embarking on their 
programmes. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 51 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and 
special consideration 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. 
They allow students with special educational needs, 
disabilities or temporary injuries to:  
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the 
demands of the assessment.  
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the 
particular needs of an individual student with a disability 
without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding 
bodies comply with the duty under the Equality Act 2010 to 
make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the 
start of the course. Students will then know what is 
available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for 
assessment.  
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to 
make reasonable adjustments where a person with a 
disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in 
undertaking an assessment. The awarding organisation is 
required to take reasonable steps to overcome that 
disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be 
unique to that individual and therefore might not be in the 
list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will 
depend on a number of factors, which will include: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with 
the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves 
unreasonable costs to the awarding organisation, 
timeframes or affects the security or integrity of the 
assessment. This is because the adjustment is not 
‘reasonable’. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 52 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a 
student's mark or grade to reflect temporary injury, illness 
or other indisposition at the time of the 
examination/assessment, which has had, or is reasonably 
likely to have had, a material effect on a candidate’s ability 
to take an assessment or demonstrate his or her level of 
attainment in an assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to 
apply for access arrangements and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, 
reasonable adjustments and special consideration, please 
refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk. 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of 
assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in controlled assessments discovered 
before the candidate has signed the declaration of 
authentication form does not need to be reported to 
Pearson. 
Candidate malpractice found in controlled assessments after 
the declaration of authenticity has been signed, and in 
examinations must be reported to Pearson on a JCQ 
Form M1 (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-
office/malpractice
). The completed form can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to Investigations 
Team, Pearson, 190 High Holborn, London, WC1V 7BH. 
Please provide as much information and supporting 
documentation as possible. Note that the final decision 
regarding appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report candidate malpractice constitutes staff or 
centre malpractice.  
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate 
malpractice and maladministration of our qualifications. As 
with candidate malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is 
any act that compromises or seeks to compromise the 
process of assessment or undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and 
maladministration must be reported immediately, before  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 53 
any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson 
on a JCQ Form M2(a) (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-
office/malpractice). The form, supporting documentation 
and as much information as possible can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to Investigations 
Team, Pearson, 190 High Holborn, London, WC1V 7BH. Note 
that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies 
with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the 
latest version of the document General and Vocational 
Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments Policies and Procedures, available at 
www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/ malpractice. 
Equality Act 2010 and Pearson equality policy 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality 
policy requires all students to have equal opportunity to 
access our qualifications and assessments, and our 
qualifications to be awarded in a way that is fair to every 
student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by 
the Equality Act 2010) are not, when they are 
undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in 
comparison to students who do not share that 
characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for 
undertaking a qualification and that this achievement 
can be compared fairly to the achievement of their 
peers. 
You can find details on how to make adjustments for 
students with protected characteristics in the policy 
document Access Arrangements, Reasonable Adjustments 
and Special Consideration, which is on our website, 
www.edexcel.com/Policies. 
Synoptic assessment 
Synoptic assessment requires students to work across 
different parts of a qualification and to show their 
accumulated knowledge and understanding of a topic or 
subject area. 
Synoptic assessment enables students to show their ability 
to combine their skills, knowledge and understanding with 
breadth and depth of the subject.  
Paper 3 is by nature synoptic, however extended writing 
questions in Papers 1 and 2 may ask students to draw on 
their knowledge from other topics addressed in the 
examination paper concerned. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 54 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to 
comply with the requirements of the current Code of 
Practice, published by the Office of Qualifications and 
Examinations Regulation (Ofqual). 
The Advanced GCE qualification will be graded and 
certificated on a six-grade scale from A* to E using the total 
subject mark. Individual papers are not graded. 
The first certification opportunity for the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology will be 2017. 
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum 
judged by Pearson to be of sufficient standard to be 
recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U 
result. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be available in English. 
All student work must be in English. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 55 
 
Other information 
Student recruitment 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to 
our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of 
reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and 
progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this 
qualification. 
Progression 
Students will develop transferable skills that support study 
in a wide range of subjects at university and the transition 
to employment, including quantitative and analytical 
analysis, and forming and testing hypotheses. The 
development and application of mathematical skills prepare 
students for the study of psychology and related courses at 
university. 
Students can progress from this qualification to: 
● higher education qualifications such as psychology 
degrees and biology-related courses 
● further education courses such as BTEC Higher 
Nationals, for example Higher Nationals in Applied 
Biology and Biological Sciences for Industry. 
 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 56 
 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Transferable skills 57 
Appendix 2: Level 3 Extended Project qualification 59 
Appendix 3: Mathematical skills 62 
Appendix 4: Formulae and statistical tables 65 
Appendix 5: Codes 70 
Appendix 6: Taxonomy (command words) 71 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 57 
 
Appendix 1: Transferable skills 
 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently 
flagged the need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable 
them to respond with confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the 
world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines 
skills, or competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that 
can be learned and that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform 
an activity or task and can be built upon and extended through learning.’
1 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected 
and evaluated seven global transferrable skills frameworks. Following on from this 
process, we identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the 
most evidence-based and robust skills framework. We adapted the framework 
slightly to include the Program for International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT 
Literacy and Collaborative Problem Solving (CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves: 2 
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve 
general cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and 
communicate3. 
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, oral communication, written 
communication, assertive communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, 
service orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and 
negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared 
understanding, taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team 
organisation. 
 
 
1  OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012) 
2  Koenig J A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop 
(National Academies Press, 2011) 
3  PISA – The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy (2011) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 58 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work 
stress, adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, 
and physical adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual 
teams, work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and 
able to acquire new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher 
education, as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the 
teaching and learning of this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning 
materials, developed with stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 59 
 
Appendix 2: Level 3 Extended Project 
qualification 
 
What is the Extended Project? 
The Extended Project is a standalone qualification that can be taken alongside 
GCEs. It supports the development of independent learning skills and helps to 
prepare students for their next step – whether that be higher education study or 
employment. The qualification: 
● is recognised by higher education for the skills it develops 
● is worth half of an Advanced GCE qualification at grades A*–E  
● carries UCAS points for university entry. 
The Extended Project encourages students to develop skills in the following areas: 
research, critical thinking, extended writing and project management. Students 
identify and agree a topic area of their choice (which may or may not be related to 
a GCE subject they are already studying), guided by their teacher. 
Students can choose from one of four topics to produce: 
● a dissertation (for example an investigation based on predominately secondary 
research) 
● an investigation/field study (for example a practical experiment) 
● a performance (for example in music, drama or sport) 
● an artefact (for example creating a sculpture in response to a client brief or 
solving an engineering problem). 
The qualification is coursework based and students are assessed on the skills of 
managing, planning and evaluating their project. Students will research their topic, 
develop skills to review and evaluate the information, and then present the final 
outcome of their project. 
Students: what they need to do 
The Extended Project qualification requires students to: 
● select a topic of interest for an in-depth study and negotiate the scope of the 
project with their teacher 
● identify and draft an objective for their project (for example in the form of a 
question, hypothesis, challenge, outline of proposed performance, issue to be 
investigated or commission for a client) and provide a rationale for their choice 
● produce a plan for how they will deliver their intended objective 
● conduct research as required by the project brief, using appropriate techniques 
● carry out the project using tools and techniques safely 
● share the outcome of the project using appropriate communication methods, 
including a presentation. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 60 
Teachers: key information 
● The Extended Project has 120 guided learning hours (GLH) consisting of: 
o a 40-GLH taught element that includes teaching the technical skills (for 
example research skills) 
o an 80-GLH guided element that includes mentoring students through the 
project work. 
● Group work is acceptable, however it is important that each student provides 
evidence of their own contribution and produces their own report. 
● 100% externally moderated. 
● Four Assessment Objectives: manage, use resources, develop and realise, 
review. 
● Can be run over 1, 1½ or 2 years. 
● Can be submitted in January or June. 
How to link the Extended Project with psychology 
The Extended Project enables students to develop transferable skills for progression 
to higher education and to the workplace, through the exploration of either an area 
of personal interest or a topic of interest within the psychology qualification 
content. Through the study of this psychology qualification, students will develop 
knowledge and understanding of psychological concepts and issues; apply these 
concepts and issues to real-world contexts; then analyse and evaluate these 
concepts and issues. 
Skills developed 
Through the Extended Project students will develop skills in: 
● conducting, organising and using research 
● independent reading in the subject area 
● planning, project management and time management 
● defining a hypothesis to be tested in investigations or developing a design brief 
● collecting, handling and interpreting data and evidence 
● evaluating arguments and processes, including arguments in favour of 
alternative interpretations of data and evaluation of experimental methodology 
● critical thinking. 
In the context of the Extended Project, critical thinking refers to the ability to 
identify and develop arguments for a point of view or hypothesis and to consider 
and respond to alternative arguments. This supports the development of evaluative 
skills, through evaluating psychological theories and concepts, and using qualitative 
and quantitative evidence to support informed judgements relating to psychological 
issues and debates. 
The Extended Project is an ideal vehicle to develop the transferrable skills identified 
in Appendix 1. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 61 
Types of Extended Project 
Students may choose a university-style dissertation on any topic that can be 
researched and argued, for example: 
● reductionism in psychology 
● using psychology for social control 
● the nature-nurture debate. 
For their dissertation, students should use secondary research sources to provide a 
reasoned defence or a point of view, with consideration of counter arguments. 
An alternative might be an investigative project or field study involving the 
collection of data, for example: 
● an experiment to look at acoustic similarity of words and the effect on short-
term memory  
● an experiment that tests reaction time related to another measure of speed of 
thinking. 
Using the Extended Project to support breadth and depth 
There is no specified material that students are expected to study and, in the 
Extended Project, students are assessed on the quality of the work they produce 
and the skills they develop and demonstrate through completing this work. 
Students can use the Extended Project to demonstrate extension in one or more 
dimensions: 
● deepening understanding: where a student explores a topic in greater depth 
than in the specification content 
● broadening skills: where a student learns a new skill. This might be learning 
how to design a website or learning a new statistical technique that can be used 
in the analysis of either primary or secondary data collected by the student 
● widening perspectives: where the student’s project spans different subjects. 
A student studying psychology with other sciences may wish to research the 
development of psychology from a new to an established scientific field.  
A student studying psychology with mathematics may wish to use statistical 
techniques to perform a comparative analysis of data from follow-up studies.  
A student studying psychology with economics may wish to conduct an 
experiment that investigates psychological reasons for economic behaviour. 
A wide range of information to support the delivery and assessment of the 
Extended Project, including the specification, teacher guidance for all aspects, 
editable schemes of work and exemplars for all four topics, can be found on our 
website at: www.edexcel.com/project 
 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 62 
Appendix 3: Mathematical skills 
 
This appendix is taken from the document GCE AS and A level regulatory 
requirements for biology, chemistry, physics and psychology, published by the 
Department of Education (DfE) in April 2014.  
Throughout the course of study, students will develop competence in the 
mathematical skills listed below. There are opportunities for students to develop 
these skills throughout the content, and they are required to apply the skills to 
relevant psychological contexts. 
The assessment of mathematical skills will include at least Level 2 mathematical 
skills as a minimum of 10% of the overall marks for this qualification. 
Bold text indicates mathematical skills which will be assessed for this qualification 
but not assessed as part of the Advanced Subsidiary GCE qualification.  
 
Mathematical skills Exemplification of mathematical skill in the 
context of GCE Psychology (assessment is 
not limited to the examples given below) 
D.0 – Arithmetic and numerical computation 
D.0.1 Recognise and use 
expressions in decimal 
and standard form 
For example converting data in standard form 
from a results table into decimal form in order to 
construct a pie chart. 
D.0.2 Use ratios, fractions 
and percentages 
 
For example calculating the percentages of cases 
that fall into different categories in an 
observation study. 
D.0.3 Estimate results For example commenting on the spread of scores 
for a set of data, which would require estimating 
the range. 
D.1 – Handling data 
D.1.1 Use an appropriate 
number of significant 
figures 
For example expressing a correlation coefficient 
to two or three significant figures. 
D.1.2 Find arithmetic means For example calculating the means for two 
conditions using raw data from a class 
experiment. 
D.1.3 Construct and 
interpret frequency 
tables and diagrams, 
bar charts and 
histograms 
For example selecting and sketching an 
appropriate form of data display for a given set 
of data. 
D.1.4 Understand simple 
probability 
For example explaining the difference between 
the 0.05 and 0.01 levels of significance. 
D.1.5 Understand the 
principles of sampling 
as applied to scientific 
data 
For example explaining how a random or 
stratified sample could be obtained from a target 
population. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 63 
 
Mathematical skills Exemplification of mathematical skill in the 
context of GCE Psychology (assessment is 
not limited to the examples given below) 
D.1 – Handling data (continued) 
D.1.6 Understand the terms 
mean, median and 
mode 
For example explaining the differences between 
the mean, median and mode and selecting which 
measure of central tendency is most appropriate 
for a given set of data. 
Calculating standard deviation. 
D.1.7 Use a scatter diagram 
to identify a 
correlation between 
two variables 
For example plotting two variables from an 
investigation on a scatter diagram and 
identifying the pattern as a positive correlation, a 
negative correlation or no correlation. 
D.1.8 Use a statistical test For example calculating a non-parametric test of 
differences using data from a given experiment. 
D.1.9 Make order of 
magnitude calculations 
For example estimating the mean test score for a 
large number of participants on the basis of the 
total overall score. 
D.1.10 Distinguish between 
levels of 
measurement 
For example stating the level of 
measurement (nominal, ordinal or interval) 
that has been used in a study. 
D.1.11 Know the 
characteristics of 
normal and skewed 
distributions 
For example being presented with a set of scores 
from an experiment and being asked to indicate 
the position of the mean (or median, or mode). 
D.1.12 Select an 
appropriate 
statistical test 
For example selecting a suitable inferential 
test for a given practical investigation and 
explaining why the chosen test is 
appropriate. 
D.1.13 Use statistical 
tables to determine 
significance 
For example using an extract from 
statistical tables to say whether or not a 
given observed value is significant at the 
0.05 level of significance for a one-tailed 
test. 
D.1.14 Understand measures 
of dispersion, including 
standard deviation and 
range 
For example explaining why the standard 
deviation might be a more useful measure of 
dispersion for a given set of scores e.g. where 
there is an outlying score. 
D.1.15 Understand the 
differences between 
qualitative and 
quantitative data 
For example explaining how a given qualitative 
measure (such as an interview transcript) might 
be converted into quantitative data. 
D.1.16 Understand the 
difference between 
primary and secondary 
data 
For example stating whether data collected by a 
researcher dealing directly with participants is 
primary or secondary data. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 64 
 
Mathematical skills Exemplification of mathematical skill in the 
context of GCE Psychology (assessment is 
not limited to the examples given below) 
D.2 – Algebra 
D.2.1 Understand and use 
the symbols =, <,  
<<, >>, >, ∝, ~. 
For example, expressing the outcome of an 
inferential test in the conventional form by 
stating the level of significance at the 0.05 level 
or 0.01 level by using symbols appropriately. 
D.2.2 Substitute 
numerical values 
into algebraic 
equations using 
appropriate units 
for physical 
quantities 
For example inserting the appropriate 
values from a given set of data into the 
formula for a statistical test such as 
inserting the N value (for the number of 
scores) into the Chi Square formula. 
D.2.3 Solve simple 
algebraic equations 
For example calculating the degrees of 
freedom for a Chi Square test. 
D.3 – Graphs 
D.3.1 Translate information 
between graphical, 
numerical and 
algebraic forms 
For example using a set of numerical data (a set 
of scores) from a record sheet to construct a bar 
graph. 
D.3.2 Plot two variables from 
experimental or other 
data 
For example sketching a scatter diagram using 
two sets of data from a correlational 
investigation. 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 65 
Appendix 4: Formulae and statistical tables 
Standard deviation (sample estimate) 
( )
2
1
xx
n
 − −
∑  
Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient 
( )
2
2
61
1
d
nn
−
−
∑  
Critical values for Spearman’s rank 
 Level of significance for a one-tailed test 
 0.05 0.025 0.01 0.005 0.0025 
 Level of significance for a two-tailed test 
N 0.10 0.05 0.025 0.01 0.005 
5 0.900 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 
6 0.829 0.886 0.943 1.000 1.000 
7 0.714 0.786 0.893 0.929 0.964 
8 0.643 0.738 0.833 0.881 0.905 
9 0.600 0.700 0.783 0.833 0.867 
10 0.564 0.648 0.745 0.794 0.830 
11 0.536 0.618 0.709 0.755 0.800 
12 0.503 0.587 0.678 0.727 0.769 
13 0.484 0.560 0.648 0.703 0.747 
14 0.464 0.538 0.626 0.679 0.723 
15 0.446 0.521 0.604 0.654 0.700 
16 0.429 0.503 0.582 0.635 0.679 
17 0.414 0.485 0.566 0.615 0.662 
18 0.401 0.472 0.550 0.600 0.643 
19 0.391 0.460 0.535 0.584 0.628 
20 0.380 0.447 0.520 0.570 0.612 
21 0.370 0.435 0.508 0.556 0.599 
22 0.361 0.425 0.496 0.544 0.586 
23 0.353 0.415 0.486 0.532 0.573 
24 0.344 0.406 0.476 0.521 0.562 
25 0.337 0.398 0.466 0.511 0.551 
26 0.331 0.390 0.457 0.501 0.541 
27 0.324 0.382 0.448 0.491 0.531 
28 0.317 0.375 0.440 0.483 0.522 
29 0.312 0.368 0.433 0.475 0.513 
30 0.306 0.362 0.425 0.467 0.504 
The calculated value must be equal to or exceed the critical value in this 
table for significance to be shown. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 66 
Chi squared distribution formula 
( )
2
2 oeX e
−=∑     ( )( )11df r c= −−   
Critical values for chi squared distribution 
Level of significance for a one-tailed test 
 0.10 0.05 0.025 0.01 0.005 0.0005 
Level of significance for a two-tailed test 
df 0.20 0.10 0.05 0.025 0.01 0.001 
1 1.64 2.71 3.84 5.02 6.64 10.83 
2 3.22 4.61 5.99 7.38 9.21 13.82 
3 4.64 6.25 7.82 9.35 11.35 16.27 
4 5.99 7.78 9.49 11.14 13.28 18.47 
5 7.29 9.24 11.07 12.83 15.09 20.52 
6 8.56 10.65 12.59 14.45 16.81 22.46 
7 9.80 12.02 14.07 16.01 18.48 24.32 
8 11.03 13.36 15.51 17.54 20.09 26.12 
9 12.24 14.68 16.92 19.02 21.67 27.88 
10 13.44 15.99 18.31 20.48 23.21 29.59 
       
11 14.63 17.28 19.68 21.92 24.73 31.26 
12 15.81 18.55 21.03 23.34 26.22 32.91 
13 16.99 19.81 22.36 24.74 27.69 34.53 
14 18.15 21.06 23.69 26.12 29.14 36.12 
15 19.31 22.31 25.00 27.49 30.58 37.70 
16 20.47 23.54 26.30 28.85 32.00 39.25 
17 21.62 24.77 27.59 30.19 33.41 40.79 
18 22.76 25.99 28.87 31.53 34.81 42.31 
19 23.90 27.20 30.14 32.85 36.19 43.82 
20 25.04 28.41 31.41 34.17 37.57 45.32 
       
21 26.17 29.62 32.67 35.48 38.93 46.80 
22 27.30 30.81 33.92 36.78 40.29 48.27 
23 28.43 32.01 35.17 38.08 41.64 49.73 
24 29.55 33.20 36.42 39.36 42.98 51.18 
25 30.68 34.38 37.65 40.65 44.31 52.62 
26 31.80 35.56 38.89 41.92 45.64 54.05 
27 32.91 36.74 40.11 43.20 46.96 55.48 
28 34.03 37.92 41.34 44.46 48.28 56.89 
29 35.14 39.09 42.56 45.72 49.59 58.30 
30 36.25 40.26 43.77 46.98 50.89 59.70 
       
40 47.27 51.81 55.76 59.34 63.69 73.40 
50 58.16 63.17 67.51 71.42 76.15 86.66 
60 68.97 74.40 79.08 83.30 88.38 99.61 
70 79.72 85.53 90.53 95.02 100.43 112.32 
The calculated value must be equal to or exceed the critical value in this 
table for significance to be shown. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 67 
Mann-Whitney U test formulae 
( ) 1
2
aa
a ab a
nnU nn R+= +− ∑    
( ) 1
2
bb
b ab b
nnU nn R+= +− ∑   
(U is the smaller of Ua and Ub) 
Critical values for the Mann-Whitney U test 
Nb 
  5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 
Na 
p ≤ 0.05 (one-tailed), p ≤ 0.10 (two-tailed) 
 5 4 5 6 8 9 11 12 13 15 16 18 19 20 22 23 25 
 6 5 7 8 10 12 14 16 17 19 21 23 25 26 28 30 32 
 7 6 8 11 13 15 17 19 21 24 26 28 30 33 35 37 39 
 8 8 10 13 15 18 20 23 26 28 31 33 36 39 41 44 47 
 9 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30 33 36 39 42 45 48 51 54 
 10 11 14 17 20 24 27 31 34 37 41 44 48 51 55 58 62 
 11 12 16 19 23 27 31 34 38 42 46 50 54 57 61 65 69 
 12 13 17 21 26 30 34 38 42 47 51 55 60 64 68 72 77 
 13 15 19 24 28 33 37 42 47 51 56 61 65 70 75 80 84 
 14 16 21 26 31 36 41 46 51 56 61 66 71 77 82 87 92 
 15 18 23 28 33 39 44 50 55 61 66 72 77 83 88 94 100 
 16 19 25 30 36 42 48 54 60 65 71 77 83 89 95 101 107 
 17 20 26 33 39 45 51 57 64 70 77 83 89 96 102 109 115 
 18 22 28 35 41 48 55 61 68 75 82 88 95 102 109 116 123 
 19 23 30 37 44 51 58 65 72 80 87 94 101 109 116 123 130 
 20 25 32 39 47 54 62 69 77 84 92 100 107 115 123 130 138 
 
Nb 
  5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 
Na 
p ≤ 0.01 (one-tailed), p ≤ 0.02 (two-tailed) 
 5 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 
 6 2 3 4 6 7 8 9 11 12 13 15 16 18 19 20 22 
 7 3 4 6 7 9 11 12 14 16 17 19 21 23 24 26 28 
 8 4 6 7 9 11 13 15 17 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 
 9 5 7 9 11 14 16 18 21 23 26 28 31 33 36 38 40 
 10 6 8 11 13 16 19 22 24 27 30 33 36 38 41 44 47 
 11 7 9 12 15 18 22 25 28 31 34 37 41 44 47 50 53 
 12 8 11 14 17 21 24 28 31 35 38 42 46 49 53 56 60 
 13 9 12 16 20 23 27 31 35 39 43 47 51 55 59 63 67 
 14 10 13 17 22 26 30 34 38 43 47 51 56 60 65 69 73 
 15 11 15 19 24 28 33 37 42 47 51 56 61 66 70 75 80 
 16 12 16 21 26 31 36 41 46 51 56 61 66 71 76 82 87 
 17 13 18 23 28 33 38 44 49 55 60 66 71 77 82 88 93 
 18 14 19 24 30 36 41 47 53 59 65 70 76 82 88 94 100 
 19 15 20 26 32 38 44 50 56 63 69 75 82 88 94 101 107 
 20 16 22 28 34 40 47 53 60 67 73 80 87 93 100 107 114 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 68 
 
Nb 
  5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 
Na 
p ≤ 0.025 (one-tailed), p ≤ 0.05 (two-tailed) 
 5 2 3 5 6 7 8 9 11 12 13 14 15 17 18 19 20 
 6 3 5 6 8 10 11 13 14 16 17 19 21 22 24 25 27 
 7 5 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 
 8 6 8 10 13 15 17 19 22 24 26 29 31 34 36 38 41 
 9 7 10 12 15 17 20 23 26 28 31 34 37 39 42 45 48 
 10 8 11 14 17 20 23 26 29 33 36 39 42 45 48 52 55 
 11 9 13 16 19 23 26 30 33 37 40 44 47 51 55 58 62 
 12 11 14 18 22 26 29 33 37 41 45 49 53 57 61 65 69 
 13 12 16 20 24 28 33 37 41 45 50 54 59 63 67 72 76 
 14 13 17 22 26 31 36 40 45 50 55 59 64 67 74 78 83 
 15 14 19 24 29 34 39 44 49 54 59 64 70 75 80 85 90 
 16 15 21 26 31 37 42 47 53 59 64 70 75 81 86 92 98 
 17 17 22 28 34 39 45 51 57 63 67 75 81 87 93 99 105 
 18 18 24 30 36 42 48 55 61 67 74 80 86 93 99 106 112 
 19 19 25 32 38 45 52 58 65 72 78 85 92 99 106 113 119 
 20 20 27 34 41 48 55 62 69 76 83 90 98 105 112 119 127 
 
Nb 
  5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 
Na 
p ≤ 0.005 (one-tailed), p ≤ 0.01 (two-tailed) 
 5 0 1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
 6 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 9 10 11 12 13 15 16 17 18 
 7 1 3 4 6 7 9 10 12 13 15 16 18 19 21 22 24 
 8 2 4 6 7 9 11 13 15 17 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 
 9 3 5 7 9 11 13 16 18 20 22 24 27 29 31 33 36 
 10 4 6 9 11 13 16 18 21 24 26 29 31 34 37 39 42 
 11 5 7 10 13 16 18 21 24 27 30 33 36 39 42 45 48 
 12 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 31 34 37 41 44 47 51 54 
 13 7 10 13 17 20 24 27 31 34 38 42 45 49 53 56 60 
 14 7 11 15 18 22 26 30 34 38 42 46 50 54 58 63 67 
 15 8 12 16 20 24 29 33 37 42 46 51 55 60 64 69 73 
 16 9 13 18 22 27 31 36 41 45 50 55 60 65 70 74 79 
 17 10 15 19 24 29 34 39 44 49 54 60 65 70 75 81 86 
 18 11 16 21 26 31 37 42 47 53 58 64 70 75 81 87 92 
 19 12 17 22 28 33 39 45 51 56 63 69 74 81 87 93 99 
 20 13 18 24 30 36 42 48 54 60 67 73 79 86 92 99 105 
 
The calculated value must be equal to or less than the critical value in this table for 
significance to be shown. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 69 
Wilcoxon Signed Ranks test process 
● Calculate the difference between two scores by taking one from the other 
● Rank the differences giving the smallest difference Rank 1  
Note: do not rank any differences of 0 and when adding the number of scores, 
do not count those with a difference of 0, and ignore the signs when calculating 
the difference 
● Add up the ranks for positive differences  
● Add up the ranks for negative differences 
● T is the figure that is the smallest when the ranks are totalled (may be positive 
or negative) 
● N is the number of scores left, ignore those with 0 difference. 
 
Critical values for the Wilcoxon Signed Ranks test 
 
n 
Level of significance for a one-tailed test 
0.05 0.025 0.01 
Level of significance for a two-tailed test 
0.1 0.05 0.02 
N=5 0 - - 
6 2 0 - 
7 3 2 0 
8 5 3 1 
9 8 5 3 
10 11 8 5 
11 13 10 7 
12 17 13 9 
 
The calculated value must be equal to or less than the critical value in this 
table for significance to be shown. 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 70 
 
Appendix 5: Codes 
 
Type of code Use of code Code number 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for 
performance tables is assigned a 
discount code indicating the subject 
area to which it belongs. 
Discount codes are published by DfE 
in the RAISEonline library 
(www.raiseonline.org) 
For Key Stage 
performance tables: 
4850 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an 
Ofqual Regulated Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) code. 
The RQF code is known as a 
Qualification Number (QN). This is the 
code that features in the DfE 
Section 96 and on the LARA as being 
eligible for 16–18 and 19+ funding, 
and is to be used for all qualification 
funding purposes. The QN will appear 
on students’ final certification 
documentation. 
The QN for the 
qualification in this 
publication is:  
601/5573/5 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to 
enter students for a qualification. 
Centres will need to use the entry 
codes only when claiming students’ 
qualifications. 
GCE – 9PS0 
Paper code These codes are provided for 
reference purposes. Students do not 
need to be entered for individual 
papers. 
Paper 1: 9PS0/01 
Paper 2: 9PS0/02 
Paper 3: 9PS0/03 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 71 
 
Appendix 6: Taxonomy (command words) 
 
The following command words in this taxonomy will be used consistently by 
Pearson in its assessments to ensure students are rewarded for demonstrating the 
necessary skills. Careful consideration has been given to this taxonomy to ensure 
that Assessment Objectives are targeted consistently across questions.  
Please note: the list below will not necessarily be used in every paper/session and 
is provided for guidance only. 
One of the key changes is that a single command word will be used per item; dual 
injunctions, for example describe and evaluate, will no longer be used. 
 
Command word Definition/meaning 
Analyse Break something down into its components/parts. Examine each 
part methodically and in detail in order to discover the meaning 
or essential features of a theme, topic or situation. Explore the 
relationship between the features and how each one contributes 
to the topic.
 
Assess Give careful consideration to all the factors or events that apply 
and identify which are the most important or relevant. Make a 
judgement on the importance of something, and come to a 
conclusion where needed.
 
Calculate Obtain a numerical answer, showing relevant working. If the 
answer has a unit, this must be included. 
Compare Looking for the similarities and differences of two (or more) 
things. This should not require the drawing of a conclusion. The 
answer must relate to both (or all) things mentioned in the 
question. The answer must include at least one similarity and 
one difference.
 
Complete To fill in/write all the details asked for. 
Convert Express a quantity in alternative units. 
Define Provide a definition of something.  
Describe To give an account of something. Statements in the response 
need to be developed as they are often linked but do not need to 
include a justification or reason. 
Determine The answer must have an element that is quantitative from the 
stimulus provided, or must show how the answer can be reached 
quantitatively. To gain maximum marks there must be a 
quantitative element to the answer.  
Discuss Explore the issue/situation/problem/argument that is being 
presented within the question, articulating different or 
contrasting viewpoints.
 
Draw Produce an output, either by freehand or using a ruler (e.g. 
graph). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Psychology 
Specification – Issue 3 – July 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 72 
 
Command word Definition/meaning 
Evaluate Review information then bring it together to form a conclusion, 
drawing on evidence including strengths, weaknesses, 
alternative actions, relevant data or information. Come to a 
supported judgement of a subject’s qualities and relation to its 
context.
 
Explain An explanation that requires a justification/exemplification of a 
point. The answer must contain some element of 
reasoning/justification. This can include mathematical 
explanations. 
Give Generally involves the recall of one or more pieces of 
information; when used in relation to a context, it is used to 
determine a candidate’s grasp of the factual information 
presented.
 
Identify This requires some key information to be selected from a given 
stimulus/resource. 
Interpret Recognise a trend or pattern(s) within a given 
stimulus/resource.
 
Justify Rationalise a decision or action. 
Name Synonymous with ‘Give’.  
Plot Produce, or add detail to, a graph/chart by marking points 
accurately (e.g. line of best fit). 
Predict Articulate an expected result.  
State Synonymous with ‘Give’.  
Suggest Make a proposal/propose an idea in written form. 
To what extent Review information then bring it together to form a judgement 
conclusion, following the provision of a balanced and reasoned 
argument.  
 
 
 
 
Sb241116Z:\LT\PD\GCE 2015 NEW ISSUES9781446942086_GCE2015_AL_PSYCHO_ISS2.DOC.1–85/3 
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office: 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121
