A Level 
Music
Specification
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music (9MU0)
First teaching from September 2016
First certification from 2018
Issue 7
 
  
 
 
Summary of Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in 
Music specification Issue 7 changes  
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this 
current issue  
Page 
number 
In Qualification at a glance, Component 3 section the following has 
been updated: 
‘One audio CD with the extracts to accompany questions on the 
paper will be provided per student.’ to 
‘Audio files with the extracts to accompany questions on the paper 
will be provided to each student.’ 
6 
In Component 1: Performing the following has been updated: 
‘Centres must submit a complete and unedited recording of the live 
performance on an audio CD (finalised and playable on standard 
domestic equipment) or USB stick. Centres are requested to put the 
work of all students to be assessed onto a single CD or USB stick. 
The work of each student should be a separate track, individually 
labelled with their centre number, candidate number and title.’ to 
‘Centres must submit a complete and unedited recording of the live 
performance via the online submission platform Learner Work 
Transfer (LWT). The work of each student should be a separate track, 
individually labelled with their centre number, candidate number 
and title.’ 
17 
In Assessment information the following has been updated: 
‘A complete recording of both pieces on an audio CD or USB stick 
must be submitted. Each composition for each student should be a 
separate track, individually labelled with their centre number, 
candidate number and composition title. The recording can be made 
live or be studio-produced. Each student’s work should be on an 
audio CD or USB stick, clearly labelled with their details. Centres are 
requested to use one recording format for all their students’ 
submissions: audio CD or USB stick.’ to 
‘A complete recording of both pieces must be submitted via the 
online submission platform LWT. Each composition for each student 
should be a separate track, individually labelled with their centre 
number, candidate number and composition title. The recording can 
be made live or be studio-produced.’ 
45, 54 
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this 
current issue  
Page 
number 
In Component 3: Appraising, Assessment information section the 
following has been updated: 
‘Each student will have a CD containing the extracts of music relating 
to the exam, and will be in control of listening to the extracts relating 
to each question.’ 
‘Each student will have access to audio files and an individual audio 
player with the extracts of music relating to the exam, and will be in 
control of listening to the extracts relating to each question.’ 
79 
 
Earlier issues 1-6 show previous changes. 
If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, contact us 
via our website at: qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/contact-us.html. 
  
 
 
Summary of Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music 
specification Issue 6 changes 
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this 
current issue  
Page 
number 
All references to the “suggested wider listening” have been changed 
to “suggested pieces of other music”. 
Multiple 
All references to the area of study for Popular Music have been 
changed to Popular Music and Jazz. 
6, 7, 33, 
39, 42, 
67, 73, 
75, 77, 
99 
In references to the number of set works in each area of study, it has 
been made clear that each area of study has two set works, with the 
exception of Popular Music and Jazz, which has three. 
6, 66, 68 
The set work “Courtney Pine, Back in the Day” has been added to the 
Overview of areas of study and set works table. 
7 
The following set work has been added to the tables on pages 67 and 
77: “Courtney Pine, Back in the Day: Inner state (of mind), Lady Day 
and (John Coltrane), and Love and affection”. 
67, 77 
The final two sentences of the third paragraph on page 68 have been 
amended from “The suggested wider listening will help students to 
relate their learning to other pieces of music, but its study is not 
compulsory. Teachers can identify and teach other pieces of music to 
support their students’ learning” to "Teachers may recommend the 
pieces listed in Appendix 4 or they may make their own selection to 
supplement the areas of study. Please see 'Suggested pieces of other 
music and unfamiliar pieces' section for further information.
 
68 
For the Musical language section, the second sentence of the 
penultimate paragraph has been amended to show there are now 13 
set works in total for the qualification. 
72 
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this 
current issue  
Page 
number 
For Area of Study 4 – Popular Music, the first two sentences of the first 
paragraph have been amended from “The study of popular music 
spans some of the main genres from the 1950s to present day. It is a 
vast field, and honing down to representative works gives a good 
insight to the key defining works” to “The study of popular music and 
jazz spans some of the main genres from the 1950s to songs from 
Courtney Pine’s Back in the Day album of 2000 on to the present day. 
It is a vast field, and honing down to representative works gives a 
good insight to the key defining works in the genres”. 
The following sentence has been added at the beginning of the final 
paragraph: “In terms of jazz music, there are many styles and the cited 
examples of Bix Beiderbecke Jazz Me Blues and Charles Mingus Blues 
and Roots show developments in the music over thirty years or so”. 
The following sentence has been added to the end of the section: 
“Features common to both the popular music works and jazz pieces 
can be studied both in isolation and together”. 
75 
It has been made clear that although the musical pieces listed in 
Appendix 4 for each area of study are designed to provide further 
examples of music from that period or musical tradition and provide 
breadth as well as depth to each area of study, they are not 
compulsory to study. It has also been made clear that teachers may 
use the pieces listed in this appendix, or they may make their own 
selection that relate to each area of study. 
78 
In Section B for Component 3: Appraising, the second and third 
sentences of the third paragraph has been amended from “Students 
must complete one question. This question will ask students to evaluate 
music with reference to music elements, such as melody, structure and 
texture” to “Students must select one option, therefore only needing to 
study a minimum of three areas of study in depth in order to prepare 
for the question. The question will ask students to evaluate music with 
reference to music elements, such as melody, structure and texture”. 
79 
Appendix 4: Suggested wider listening has been changed to  
Appendix 4: Suggested pieces of other music.  
In Appendix 4: Suggested pieces of other music, for Popular Music and 
Jazz, Charles Mingus, Blues and Roots and Bix Beiderbecke, Jazz Me 
Blues have been added. 
99 
  
 
 
Contents 
1 Introduction 2 
Why choose Pearson Edexcel A Level Music? 2 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this qualification 3 
Qualification at a glance 4 
Overview of areas of study and set works 7 
2 Subject content and assessment information 8 
Component 1: Performing 10 
Component 2: Composing 33 
Component 3: Appraising 66 
Assessment Objectives 80 
3 Administration and general information 81 
Entries 81 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special consideration 
and malpractice 82 
Student recruitment and progression 86 
Appendix 1: Performance Authentication Sheet 89 
Appendix 2: Composing Authentication Sheet 89 
Appendix 3: Music vocabulary list 90 
Appendix 4: Suggested pieces of other music 98 
Appendix 5: Command word taxonomy 99 
Appendix 6: The context for the development of this qualification 100 
Appendix 7: Transferable skills 102 
Appendix 8: Level 3 Extended Project qualification 104 
Appendix 9: Codes 106 
Appendix 10: Mark penalty tables for submissions not meeting the 
minimum assessment time 107 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 2 
1 Introduction 
Why choose Pearson Edexcel A Level Music? 
We have listened to feedback from all parts of the music subject community, including 
teachers, subject associations and higher education. We have used this opportunity of 
curriculum change to redesign qualifications that reflect the demands of a truly 
modern and evolving music environment – qualifications that enable your students to 
apply themselves and give them the skills to succeed in their chosen pathway.  
Clear and coherent structure – our qualification has a straightforward structure with 
three engaging components, assessed through practical performances, compositions 
and one externally examined paper.  
Provides a real music focus – the key content of musical elements, contents and 
language are taught through the Areas of Study and set work to show real examples 
of how these are used within different types of music 
Holistic understanding of music – students investigate, analyse and evaluate music 
and its features. Building on this, and by using practical methods, they are 
encouraged to take a more holistic view of their knowledge, performance and 
compositional skills. 
Breadth and depth – the set works enable students to conduct in depth studies into 
different musical styles and genres, and place these within a wider context 
Diverse musical heritage – students will learn to perform, compose and appreciate 
different types of music, developing critical and creative thinking, cultural, aesthetic 
and emotional awareness, and the ability to make music individually and as part of a 
group. 
Continuous progression – the content builds on the understanding developed at 
KS4, avoiding unnecessary repetition while also ensuring that learners new to the 
subject are appropriately supported.  
Progression to Higher Education – the content allows students to develop their 
knowledge and skills of music, enabling them to progress into undergraduate music 
or music related degree courses 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 3 
Supporting you in planning and implementing 
this qualification 
Planning 
● Our Getting Started guide gives you an overview of the new Pearson Edexcel GCE 
Music qualification to help you to get to grips with the changes to content and 
assessment, and to help you understand what these changes mean for you and 
your students. 
● We will give you an editable course planner and scheme of work that you can 
adapt to suit your department. 
● Our mapping documents highlight key differences between your current Pearson 
Edexcel GCE Music specification and our new specification. 
Teaching and learning 
There will be lots of free teaching and learning support to help you deliver the new 
qualifications, including: 
● exemplars and commentaries 
● a student guide 
● materials for your options evenings. 
Preparing for exams 
We will also provide a range of resources to help you prepare your students for the 
assessments, including: 
● marked exemplars of student work with examiner commentaries. 
ResultsPlus 
ResutsPlus provides the most detailed analysis available of your students’ exam 
performance. It can help you identify the topics and skills where further learning 
would benefit your students. 
Get help and support 
Our subject advisor service, support line, ask the expert and online community will 
ensure you receive help and guidance from us and that you can share ideas and 
information with other teachers. You can sign up to receive e-newsletters from the 
subject advisor service to keep up to date with qualification updates and product and 
service news. 
The Music Team can be contacted by email: TeachingMusic@pearson.com and by  
telephone: 0844 463 2935. 
Learn more at qualifications.pearson.com 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 4 
Qualification at a glance 
Content and assessment overview 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music is 100% externally assessed, and 
consists of one written paper and two non-examined assessment components. 
Students must submit their non-examined assessment (NEA) and complete the exam 
in May/June in the year of certification. 
 
Component 1: Performing (*Component code: 9MU0/01) 
Non-examined assessment: externally assessed 
30% of the qualification 
60 marks 
Content overview 
● Approaches to performing 
Assessment overview 
● A public performance of one or more pieces, performed as a recital. 
● Performance can be playing or singing solo, in an ensemble, improvising, or 
realising music using music technology. 
● The total performance time across all pieces must be a minimum of eight 
minutes. 
● Performances must be recorded after 1 March in the year of certification and all 
materials for assessment submitted to arrive by 15 May in the year of 
certification. 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 5 
Component 2: Composing (*Component code: 9MU0/02) 
Non-examined assessment: externally assessed 
30% of the qualification  
60 marks 
Content overview 
● Approaches to composing 
Assessment overview 
● Total of two compositions, one to a brief set by Pearson and one either free 
composition or also to a brief. 
● One composition must be from either a list of briefs related to the areas of 
study, or a free composition, carrying 40 marks for this component. This 
composition must be at least four minutes in duration. 
● One composition must be from a list of briefs assessing compositional 
technique, carrying 20 marks for this component. This composition must be at 
least one minute in duration, unless the brief specifies a longer minimum 
duration. 
● Total time across both submissions must be a minimum of six minutes. 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 6 
Component 3: Appraising (*Component code: 9MU0/03)  
Written examination: 2 hours 10 minutes 
40% of the qualification 
100 marks 
Content overview 
● Knowledge and understanding of musical elements, contexts and language. 
● Application of knowledge through the context of six areas of study, each with 
two set works, with the exception of Popular Music and Jazz, which has three set 
works. 
o Vocal Music,  
o Instrumental Music,  
o Music for Film,  
o Popular Music and Jazz, 
o Fusions,  
o New Directions, 
o Application of knowledge to unfamiliar works. 
The areas of study are: Vocal Music, Instrumental Music, Music for Film, Popular 
Music and Jazz, Fusions, New Directions. 
Full details of the areas of study and set works can be found on pages 73–77. 
Assessment overview 
● One written paper of 2 hours 10 minutes, with a total of 100 marks. 
● Audio files with the extracts to accompany questions on the paper will be 
provided to each student. 
● This paper comprises two sections: A and B. 
Section A: Areas of study and dictation (50 marks) 
● Three questions related to the set works (audio and skeleton score provided). 
● One short melody/rhythm completion exercise. 
Section B: Extended written response 
● Two essay questions – essay one (20 marks) and essay two (30 marks) 
● Essay one asks students to draw links from their study of the set works to the 
music heard as an unfamiliar extract. 
● Essay two gives a choice of four questions that ask students to evaluate the 
musical elements, context and language of one set work. Each option will be 
from a different area of study. 
*See Appendix 9: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to 
this qualification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 7 
Overview of areas of study and set works 
 
Area of study Set works 
Vocal Music ● J. S. Bach, Cantata, Ein feste Burg 
● Vaughan Williams, On Wenlock Edge 
Instrumental 
Music 
● Clara Wieck-Schumann, Piano Trio in G minor, Op. 17: 
movement 1 
● Berlioz, Symphonie Fantastique 
Music for Film ● Danny Elfman, Batman Returns  
● Bernard Herrmann, Psycho 
Popular Music 
and Jazz 
● Kate Bush, Hounds of Love  
● Beatles, Revolver  
● Courtney Pine, Back in the Day 
Fusions ● Debussy, Estampes 
● Anoushka Shankar, Breathing Under Water  
New Directions ● Kaija Saariaho, Petals for Violoncello and Live Electronics 
● Stravinsky, The Rite of Spring 
 
Full details of the exact versions of the scores and recordings for each set work are 
available on our website. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 8 
2 Subject content and assessment information 
This qualification will support students in forming personal and meaningful 
relationships with music through the development of musical knowledge, 
understanding and skills, including performing, composing and appraising. Students 
will be encouraged to engage critically and creatively with a wide range of music and 
musical contexts, develop an understanding of the place of music in different cultures 
and contexts, and reflect on how music is used in the expression of personal and 
collective identities. 
This qualification will also allow students to develop particular strengths and interests, 
encourage lifelong learning and provide access to higher education and university 
degree courses in music and music-related subjects, as well as music-related and 
other careers. 
Qualification aims and objectives 
The aims and objectives of this qualification are to enable students to: 
● actively engage in the process of music study 
● develop performing skills to demonstrate an understanding of musical elements, 
style, sense of continuity, interpretation and expression 
● develop composing skills to demonstrate the manipulation of musical ideas and 
the use of musical devices and conventions 
● recognise the interdependence of musical knowledge, understanding and skills, 
and make links between the integrated activities of performing, composing and 
appraising underpinned by attentive listening 
● broaden musical experience and interests, develop imagination and foster 
creativity 
● develop and extend the knowledge, understanding and skills needed to 
communicate effectively as musicians 
● develop knowledge and understanding of a variety of instruments and styles, and 
of relevant approaches to both performing and composing 
● develop awareness of music technologies and their use in the creation and 
presentation of music 
● appraise contrasting genres, styles and traditions of music, and develop 
understanding of musical contexts and a coherent awareness of musical 
chronology 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 9 
● develop as effective, independent learners and as critical and reflective thinkers 
with enquiring minds 
● reflect critically and make personal judgements on their own and others’ music 
● engage with, and extend appreciation of, the diverse heritage of music in order to 
promote personal, social, intellectual and cultural development. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 10 
Component 1: Performing 
Overview 
The purpose of this component is to assess students’ performing skills in a solo 
and/or ensemble context. They should be given the opportunity to rehearse and 
refine performances on their chosen instrument or voice, developing technical 
control, expression and interpretative skills. 
This component will encourage students to develop creative thinking, aesthetic 
sensitivity, critical awareness, self-confidence, self-motivation and their own musical 
interests and skills, including the ability to make music individually and/or in groups, 
and perform with control, using phrasing and dynamics appropriate to their chosen 
styles and moods of music. 
Students must perform: 
● a minimum of one piece, performed live and uninterrupted as a recital 
● performances can be solo, as part of an ensemble, improvisation, realisation using 
music technology, or a combination of these 
● total performance time across the recital must be a minimum of eight minutes of 
music. 
Timing does not include the time taken to tune the instrument or any gaps between 
pieces. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 11 
Content 
The following content explains what should be learned for each type of performance 
and then explains the possible approaches to performing in general that can be 
applied to each student’s performance as desired and appropriate. 
Students will be required to demonstrate the ability to: 
● make use of musical elements, techniques and resources to interpret and 
communicate musical ideas with technical and expressive control and an 
understanding of style and context. This must be achieved by one or more of the 
following means: playing or singing solo or in ensemble, improvising, or realising 
music using music technology 
● perform music with control and continuity, using appropriate tempi, showing 
critical understanding of the music chosen 
● perform fluently, showing critical understanding of the overall shape, direction and 
style of the music chosen. 
Students should take into account the effect of the purpose and intention of their 
piece of music when performing. They must also consider the effect of audience, time 
and place when they perform their pieces.  
Students should listen to how established performers communicate. They should 
appraise their own use of articulation, phrasing and dynamics in the light of these 
performances and reflect this when shaping their interpretation of their chosen 
music. Students should know and understand the appropriate musical vocabulary and 
terminology related to their performances. 
Students will be assessed on their skills demonstrated during a live, unedited, 
uninterrupted performance. Recordings of performances (using any instruments 
and/or technology) may not be edited afterwards. 
For this component, students can use any instrument for their solo and/or ensemble 
pieces, including those that make use of music technology (e.g. electric guitar). 
For some performance options, students may record their own backing track or 
accompaniment. However, students will only be assessed on their final live 
performance.
 
Students can take one or more of the following approaches to their performance, as 
appropriate:  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 12 
Solo performance 
A solo performance is considered to be a piece in which the student’s part plays a 
significant or leading role. The performance may be on any instrument or voice in any 
style or genre. 
Music that was written with an accompaniment must be performed with that 
accompaniment. The accompaniment should not be altered to double the solo line. 
The usual accompaniment for a solo performance will be by one other performer on a 
contrasting instrument. For instance, a singer, flautist or trombonist may be 
accompanied by a pianist, or a jazz saxophonist may be accompanied by a double 
bass player. However, students are able to perform with a larger ensemble where 
there is a clear solo part throughout and the music was originally written for these 
forces. 
Performances accompanied by backing tracks are acceptable but the part to be 
assessed must not be audible as part of the backing track. 
Ensemble performance 
An ensemble performance must consist of two or more people performing 
undoubled, simultaneously sounding, independent parts, with or without additional 
backing or accompaniment as appropriate. The performance may be on any 
instrument or voice in any style or genre. 
Students who choose to perform in an ensemble should, in addition to accuracy and 
other essentials of effective performance, pay attention to balance and the demands 
of other parts. 
Students are assessed on the whole of the ensemble performance, even points at 
which the individual being assessed is not playing/singing themselves. Therefore 
students should be encouraged to understand how to interact with and react to their 
other ensemble performers. 
Ensemble performances accompanied by backing tracks are acceptable as long as 
there are at least two live performers and the part to be assessed is not audible as 
part of the backing track. 
Improvisation 
Students who choose to improvise should learn to play the music accurately and go 
on to exploit and develop its potential. They should pay attention to intonation, 
tuning, coherence and to structure generally. They should work on their instrumental 
tone and technique and demonstrate their ability to shape the music effectively. They 
should also recognise the importance of fluency and ensure that the overall outcome 
is effective in terms of communication, interpretation and style, for example with jazz 
music. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 13 
Realisation using music technology 
Students may perform using music technology. Music technology may involve the use 
of synthesisers, virtual instruments and amplified instruments, such as guitars using 
pedals (including loop pedals), audio samples, and other processors. 
Students will be assessed on their ability to perform a live solo line, which may (or 
may not) include playing over a pre-recorded/sequenced backing track (which might 
have been created by the student themselves). This pre-recorded/sequenced backing 
track is not assessed. 
Examples of how to play the live solo line might include electric guitar or synthesiser, 
with live use of effects and processes.  
Approaches to performing 
Students will need to understand the following as appropriate for their chosen 
performance. 
● A score can mean staff notation with written instructions for the playing of a piece 
of music. When performing from a score, students should understand the 
contextual influences affecting the composition of the pieces they are performing, 
including the composer’s intentions regarding the venue and nature of the 
performance, and any important cultural influences relating to the composition of 
the piece.  
● Students should learn the importance of attention to intonation, tuning and 
accuracy of pitch and rhythm when performing from a score. They should work on 
their instrumental tone and technique, and ensure that they observe all 
performance directions for phrasing, articulation, dynamics and tempo. They 
should also recognise the importance of fluency and ensure that the overall 
outcome is effective in terms of communication, interpretation and style. 
● For rapping (similar to vocal performances) students should demonstrate clarity of 
diction, secure breath control, tonal contrast and some extended vocal techniques. 
For beatboxing, students choosing to beatbox should create a variety of 
contrasting timbres and demonstrate effective control of rhythm. 
● Students may choose to perform by the oral tradition that does not fall under solo 
improvisation or traditional performances. In this context, oral tradition means 
material and tradition transmitted orally from one generation to another, often 
taking the form of folktales, ballads, songs or chants. 
● Students may perform their own compositions when supported by a score with 
sufficient performance detail to assess accuracy of pitch and rhythm.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 14 
Musical elements 
Depending on the choice of instrument(s) and/or voice(s), and the piece of music 
performed, the student should use the appropriate musical elements in their 
performance. 
The musical elements are listed below: 
● Organisation of pitch  
● Tonality 
● Structure  
● Sonority 
● Texture 
● Tempo, metre and rhythm  
● Dynamics. 
Musical contexts 
Students should take into account the effect of the purpose and intention of their 
piece of music, and the effect of audience, time and place when performing their 
pieces. Students should perform their music with control, expressing the music as 
appropriate to its style and mood. Students should take into account how music is 
created, developed and performed in different historical, social and cultural contexts, 
as well as how music from different historical, social and cultural contexts has 
changed over time. 
Musical language 
Depending on the choice of instrument(s) and/or voice(s), and the piece of music, the 
student should be able to read and play music using the appropriate musical 
language. 
Types of musical language are listed below: 
● reading and writing of staff notation  
● chords and associated chord symbols, and standard harmonic progressions  
● musical vocabulary and terminology related to the areas of study.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 15 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: 2018. 
● This component consists of 60 marks. 
● Students must perform at least one piece of music as a recital, in front of a live 
audience of at least two people  
● The performance must have a total duration of at least eight minutes.  
● For performances that do not meet the total minimum time requirement, the 
performance mark will be reduced proportionally according to how many seconds 
the performance is less than eight minutes. Please see Appendix 10: Mark penalty 
tables for submissions not meeting the minimum assessment time. 
● Performances may use any instrument or voice. 
● Performances can be solo, as part of an ensemble, improvisation, realisation using 
music technology, or a combination of these. 
● The final performance and recording will be carried out after 1 March and all 
materials for assessment submitted to arrive by 15 May in the year of certification. 
● Centres must ensure that the performances submitted are valid for the series in 
which they are submitted. 
Task setting 
Students must select the piece(s) of music that they will perform during the 
assessment following discussion with the centre delivering the assessment. 
Teachers should ensure that the performances are relevant and appropriate to the 
student’s course of learning. Students should have the opportunity to choose 
sources/interpretations, as appropriate. 
Each performance should be of sufficient length and complexity to give the performer 
adequate opportunity to demonstrate their abilities. The teacher should ensure that 
the level of demand is appropriate to allow the student to present a personal and 
meaningful response. 
Teachers may help students to understand rubrics, assessment criteria and controls. 
Teachers may help students with their performance choices, styles and techniques. 
Any additional feedback must be recorded on the Performance Authentication Sheet, 
please see Appendix 1. 
If the student accompanies themselves, for example by singing and playing an 
instrument, then the role to be assessed should be agreed beforehand between the 
teacher and student. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 16 
Task taking 
The final, recorded performance must take place in front of a live audience of at least 
two people. It must be recorded after 1 March and all materials for assessment 
submitted to arrive by 15 May in the year of certification.  
Students must perform continuously and not piece together their submissions from a 
number of recorded performances. However, their whole submission may be re-
performed and re-recorded before submission. 
If a student wishes to perform for longer than eight minutes, to demonstrate their 
performance skills more fully, they may do so. Performances should be of sufficient 
length and complexity to allow students adequate opportunity to showcase their 
abilities. However, a guided maximum of 12 minutes is recommended. 
Submissions over the guided maximum time for combined compositions will still be 
marked. This is guidance for teachers to avoid students submitting excessively long 
submissions which may be self-penalising. 
The performance must last a minimum duration of eight minutes.  
The minimum of eight minutes relates to the length of the student’s performance 
across the piece(s). It does not include pauses between pieces or sections of music 
where the student is not performing.  
Performance assessment 
Authenticity 
Students’ performances must be recorded live, unedited, without interruptions and 
without the teacher giving guidance. If students wish to re-record a performance 
before submission, they must re-record the whole recital performance, and not just 
part of it. The live performance must be in front of an audience of at least two people, 
of which one must be the teacher. 
Resources 
Students must have equal access to IT resources. Students should have access to a 
range of resources/texts to enable them to make choices as required for their tasks. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 17 
Items for submission for assessment 
1. Recording  
Centres must submit a complete and unedited recording of the live performance via 
the online submission platform Learner Work Transfer (LWT). The work of each 
student should be a separate track, individually labelled with their centre number, 
candidate number and title. 
2. Score  
Where a written score or lead sheet exists, this must be submitted with the recording 
of the performance. If a piece has been learnt aurally, a professional reference 
recording may be submitted in addition.  
If a written score or lead sheet does not exist, then appropriate reference material 
must be submitted (a professional reference recording, written commentary, and 
stimulus for improvised performances, track sheets, tables or diagrams). 
The notated music must be provided for all performances from a score. This music 
must contain all the information necessary to assess the accuracy of the performance, 
for example, a guitar tab score with no indication of rhythm is unacceptable: scores 
should use conventional staff notation. Deviations from the score in jazz/rock and 
musical theatre numbers will generally be accepted where they are considered to be 
stylistically convincing. 
For performances from a score/lead sheet, photocopies of the music must be 
submitted with the recording. Only the part performed needs to be submitted, for 
example just the clarinet part in a piece for clarinet with piano accompaniment. 
Original copies should not be supplied. Photocopies will be destroyed by Pearson at 
the end of the examination period.  
For realising music using music technology, a detailed commentary and/or a 
professional reference recording must be submitted alongside a written score/lead 
sheet (if one exists). For sequenced performances, only the recording of the live track 
will be assessed. This track must be indicated when submitting.  
These scores/lead sheets and/or reference materials should include as much detail as 
possible to allow the examiner to make a fair and accurate judgement on the quality 
and accuracy of the performance. The scores/lead sheets and/or reference materials 
are not assessed and receive no marks.  
Performances that are not accompanied by acceptable scores/lead sheets/reference 
materials cannot be assessed. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 18 
3. Performance Authentication Sheet 
The Performance Authentication Sheet (PAS) must be completed by the teacher, and 
signed by the student and teacher, authenticating that the work is the student’s own. 
Please see Appendix 1.  
4. Submissions not meeting minimum time requirement 
The performance time must be at least eight minutes.  
Students submitting performances of less than eight minutes in length will be marked 
against the assessment criteria on the following pages. The performance mark will 
then be reduced proportionally according to how many seconds the performance 
time is less than eight minutes. Please see Appendix 10: Mark penalty tables for 
submissions not meeting the minimum assessment time. 
Gaps between pieces and tuning do not count towards the performance time.  
If students wish to re-record a performance before submission, they must re-record 
the whole performance (either solo or ensemble), and not just part of it. The teacher 
must be present during the recordings. 
Assessment criteria 
Performance recitals will be externally assessed for all students. All assessment 
materials must be sent to the examiner to arrive by 15 May in the year of certification. 
There are 60 marks available for this assessment. Performances will be assessed as a 
whole, regardless of the number of pieces which make up the recital.  
Performances will be marked using the three assessment criteria grids on the 
following pages to give a mark out of 48. There are also a further twelve marks 
available for the difficulty of the piece (totalling 60 marks). Information on difficulty 
levels can be found on pages 29–31. 
These criteria have been developed to assess students’ skills in technique, accuracy 
and fluency, and expressive control, style and context. All performances are able to be 
assessed using the criteria on the following pages, including realising music using 
technology. For ensemble performances, students are to be assessed on their role in 
the whole performances (even during periods when they themselves are not actually 
playing/singing). Some grids contain additional information in italics for use with 
ensemble and/or improvised performances. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 19 
Performance is assessed against AO1: Interpret musical ideas through performing, 
with technical and expressive control and an understanding of style and context. 
● Performance assessment grid 1: Technical control – Technique assesses the 
students’ technical control of the instrument. 
● Performance assessment grid 2: Technical control (Accuracy) and Expressive 
control (Fluency) assesses the students’ ability to use technical control to play the 
pieces accurately, and their ability to use expressive control to play the pieces 
fluently. 
● Performance assessment grid 3: Expressive control, style and context assesses the 
students’ ability to communicate through the use of musical elements and 
interpret ideas with expressive control and an understanding of style and context. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 20 
Performance assessment grid 1: Technical control – Technique 
These marks are awarded for the interpretation of musical ideas with technical 
control. In this grid, this is defined as control of the instrument, for example: 
● coordination between the hands, or of the bow/fingers 
● breath control 
● diction 
● pedalling 
● registration 
● intonation 
● tone quality 
● use of filters and effects 
● control of musical sources.  
This will include making use of musical elements as appropriate to the requirements 
of the instrument(s) and piece performed. For ensemble performances, this grid 
assesses only the student’s individual control of their instrument.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 21 
Level Mark Technical control – technique (AO1)  
 0 No rewardable material 
Level 1 
Poor 
technique 
1–2 ● The performance demonstrates poor technical control, 
as heard in poor coordination, breath control, diction 
and/or pedalling.  
● The demands of the music are beyond the current 
ability of the performer. 
● The handling of sonority is poor, as heard in dull, thin, 
coarse tone quality across the whole range and/or poor 
intonation throughout and/or poor use of filters and 
effects throughout. 
Level 2 
Limited 
technique 
3–5 ● The performance demonstrates limited technical 
control, as heard in limited coordination, breath 
control, diction and/or pedalling.  
● There are several places where the demands of the 
music are beyond the current ability of the performer. 
● The handling of sonority is limited as heard in several 
passages where tone is less than acceptable (dull, 
coarse, thin, uneven) and/or several passages of poor 
intonation and/or limited use of filters and effects 
throughout. 
Level 3 
Basic 
technique 
 
6–8  ● The performance demonstrates basic technical control 
of the instrument, as heard in basic coordination, 
breath control, diction and/or pedalling.  
● There are a few places where the demands of the 
music are beyond the current ability of the performer. 
● The handling of sonority is basic as heard in tone 
quality that is generally acceptable and/or several 
individual notes out of tune and/or basic use of filters 
and effects throughout. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 22 
Level Mark Technical control – technique (AO1)  
Level 4 
Convincing 
technique 
 
9–11 ● The performance demonstrates convincing technical 
control of the instrument, as heard in convincing 
coordination, breath control, diction and/or pedalling. 
● There are only one or two places where the demands 
of the music are beyond the current ability of the 
performer. 
● The handling of sonority is convincing as heard in 
consistently good tone quality and awareness of tonal 
contrast, except at the extremities of the pitch range or 
at moments of technical difficulty, and/or generally 
good intonation with no more than a few out of tune 
notes and/or convincing use of filters and effects 
throughout. 
Level 5 
Assured 
technique 
 
12–14 ● The performance demonstrates assured technical 
control of the instrument, as heard in assured 
coordination, breath control, diction and/or pedalling.  
● The demands of the music are within the current ability 
of the performer. 
● The handling of sonority is assured as heard in very 
good tone quality across the pitch range (satisfying, 
interesting and even as the music demands) and/or 
generally convincing intonation and/or assured use of 
filters and effects throughout. The performance will 
sensitively exploit tonal contrast in places, where 
appropriate. 
Level 6 
Outstanding 
technique 
 
15–16 ● The performance will demonstrate complete control of 
the instrument. 
● The handling of sonority is outstanding as heard in 
excellent tone quality across the pitch range (exciting, 
vibrant, rich, resonant, sensitive and colourful, as the 
music demands) and/or entirely secure intonation 
(within only one or two out of tune notes at the lower 
end of the band) and/or excellent use of filters and 
effects throughout. The performance will sensitively 
exploit tonal contrast. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 23 
Performance assessment grid 2: Technical control (Accuracy) and 
Expressive control (Fluency) 
In this grid, marks are awarded for the interpretation of musical ideas with technical 
control (accuracy), and the expression (fluency) of the performance, as appropriate to 
the chosen instrument(s) and pieces, including making use of musical elements as 
appropriate. The accuracy and fluency of sequenced performances will be assessed 
against the reference recording and any other materials provided as a score. The text 
in italics is to be applied to improvised and/or ensemble performances. 
 
Level Mark Technical control (Accuracy) and Expressive control 
(Fluency) (AO1)  
 0 No rewardable material 
Level 1 
Poor 
accuracy and 
fluency 
1–2 
● Obtrusive errors of pitch and/or rhythm impact on 
many passages. 
● Performances at the lower end of the band are largely 
inaccurate, with many noticeable/obtrusive errors of 
pitch and/or rhythm. 
● Fluency is frequently compromised by breakdowns 
and/or omissions. 
● Improvised performances will demonstrate little accuracy 
when performing the stimulus and little development of 
this material. The improvisation will lack coherence and 
contrast. 
● In ensemble performances there is little awareness of 
balance throughout. 
Level 2 
Limited 
accuracy and 
fluency 
 
3–5 
● Performances in this band will have several 
noticeable/obtrusive errors in pitch and/or rhythm 
which impact on the success of the performance 
overall. 
● Fluency is compromised in several places and 
coherence is often lost. 
● Improvised performances will demonstrate some accuracy 
when performing the stimulus, and will go on to show 
limited development of this stimulus. The overall 
improvisation will sound repetitive, predictable and/or 
formulaic. 
● In ensemble performances there is little awareness of 
balance for the majority of the piece. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 24 
Level Mark Technical control (Accuracy) and Expressive control 
(Fluency) (AO1)  
Level 3 
Basic 
accuracy and 
fluency 
 
6–8 
● Performances in this band will have more than two 
noticeable/obtrusive errors or omissions, or several 
errors that have little or no impact on the success of 
the performance overall, or several errors in just one 
(difficult) passage. 
● There will be moments where coherence is lost but the 
performance will still be reasonably fluent for the 
majority of piece. 
● Improvised performances will demonstrate a mostly 
accurate performance of the stimulus, and will go on to 
show some development of this stimulus. The overall 
improvisation will show some attempt at creating variety 
but may rely heavily on repetition and will be repetitive, 
predictable and/or formulaic in places. 
● In ensemble performances there is some awareness of 
balance. 
Level 4 
Convincing 
accuracy and 
fluency 
 
9–11 ● There will be no more than one or two 
noticeable/obtrusive errors or omissions in pitch 
and/or rhythm, or a few errors that have little or no 
impact on the success of the performance overall. 
● The performance will be mostly fluent despite the 
occasional hesitation and/or omission. 
● Improvised performances will demonstrate a mostly 
accurate performance of the stimulus, and will go on to 
show some development of this stimulus. The overall 
improvisation will sound mostly coherent, well balanced 
and effective, if not always imaginative.  
● In ensemble performances there is a good awareness of 
balance, with only the odd minor misjudgement. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 25 
Level Mark Technical control (Accuracy) and Expressive control 
(Fluency) (AO1)  
Level 5 
Assured 
accuracy and 
fluency 
 
12–14 
● The performance will have a few minor errors in pitch 
and/or rhythm, but these errors will have no impact on 
the success of the performance overall. 
● Performances will be fluent despite the occasional very 
slight hesitation and/or omission. 
● Improvised performances will demonstrate an accurate 
performance of the stimulus, and will go on to produce an 
interesting realisation of this stimulus. The overall 
improvisation will sound coherent, well balanced and 
effective, if not fully exploiting all possibilities. 
● In ensemble performances there is a good awareness of 
balance throughout. 
Level 6 
Outstanding 
accuracy and 
fluency 
 
15–16 
● The performance will demonstrate entirely accurate 
pitch and rhythm, with only one or two insignificant 
errors at the lower end of the band. 
● The performance should be fluent and entirely free 
from hesitation or omission. 
● Improvised performances will demonstrate an accurate 
performance of the stimulus, and will go on to produce an 
ambitious and creative realisation of this stimulus. The 
overall improvisation will sound coherent, well balanced 
and imaginative. 
● In ensemble performances there is an excellent awareness 
of balance throughout. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 26 
Performance assessment grid 3: Expressive control, style and 
context 
In this grid, marks are awarded for communicating through the use of musical 
elements as appropriate to the piece performed, and interpreting ideas with 
expressive control and an understanding of style and context as appropriate to each 
piece. If using pre-recorded or sequenced backing tracks, the assessment of tempo 
reflects how well the performer matches and responds to it. The text in italics is to be 
applied to improvised and/or ensemble performances as appropriate. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 27 
Level Mark Expressive control, style and context (AO1)  
 0 No rewardable material 
Level 1 
Poor 
interpretation 
1–2 Very few interpretative skills evident through: 
● an inconsistent tempo throughout, and in ensemble 
performances there is evidence of difficulty in reacting 
and adjusting to other parts throughout. (Expressive 
control) 
● little or no appropriate dynamic contrast, and little or 
no attention given to phrasing and articulation. (Style 
and context) 
Level 2 
Limited 
interpretation 
 
3–5 An insecure interpretation through: 
● an inconsistent tempo for the majority of the piece, 
and in ensemble performances there is evidence of 
difficulty in reacting and adjusting to the other parts for 
the majority of the piece. (Expressive control) 
● limited use of dynamics, phrasing and articulation to 
shape the performance (Style and context) 
● a performance that struggles to communicate and 
may sound mechanical. (Style and context) 
Level 3 
Basic 
interpretation 
 
6–8 A secure interpretation through: 
● several inconsistencies of tempo (perhaps around 
difficult passages), and in ensemble performance there 
is occasional difficulty in reacting and adjusting to other 
parts. (Expressive control) 
● some use of dynamics, phrasing and articulation to 
shape the performance, but several opportunities, 
notated or otherwise, are missed (Style and context) 
● some involvement with the music, but character and 
style are evident only intermittently. (Style and 
context) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 28 
Level Mark Expressive control, style and context (AO1)  
Level 4 
Convincing 
interpretation 
 
9–11 A confident and engaging interpretation achieved 
through: 
● only a few minor inconsistencies of tempo, and in 
ensemble performances there is generally good reaction 
and, where appropriate, adjustment to other parts, with 
only minor misjudgements. (Expressive control) 
● some use of dynamics, phrasing and articulation to 
shape the performance, but a few opportunities, 
notated or otherwise, are missed (Style and context) 
● fairly successful communication, with one or two less-
successful moments lower in the band. (Style and 
context) 
Level 5 
Assured 
interpretation 
 
12–14 An exciting and communicative interpretation achieved 
through: 
● the tempo being consistent with only one or two 
minor inconsistencies, and in ensemble performances 
there is a good reaction and, where appropriate, 
adjustment to other parts throughout. (Expressive 
control) 
● the frequent use of dynamics, phrasing and 
articulation to shape the performance (Style and 
context) 
● characterful communication that is mostly idiomatic, 
and musically shaped. (Style and context) 
Level 6 
Outstanding 
interpretation 
 
15–16 A mature, individual and imaginative interpretation 
achieved through: 
● the use of tempo that is always consistent, and in 
ensemble performances a consistently responsive 
reaction and, where appropriate, adjustment to other 
parts is evident throughout. (Expressive control) 
● effective communication that is idiomatic, and 
musically shaped, with consistent use of dynamics, 
phrasing and articulation to shape the performance. 
(Style and context) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 29 
Difficulty levels 
Depending on how difficult the piece of music performed is, the marks for its difficulty 
should be applied using this grid. The difficulty level of selected pieces of music can be 
found in the Pearson Edexcel GCSE, AS and A level Music Difficulty Levels Booklet, on the 
Pearson website. These can be used as indicators of the demand of pieces of music 
and should inform the teacher’s judgement in assessing how difficult the pieces 
performed by the students are. 
Examiners will assess the difficulty level of each piece performed, as guided by the 
Pearson Edexcel GCSE, AS and A level Music Difficulty Levels Booklet, and apply a difficulty 
level to the whole performance based on an average, although taking into 
consideration the relative length of pieces where these lengths are unbalanced. 
Once the level of difficulty of the piece(s) performed is decided, the raw mark (the 
total from grids 1, 2 and 3) out of 48 will then be applied to the corresponding 
difficulty level column. This gives the total mark for the recital, out of a maximum of 
60 marks. 
For this A Level Music qualification, pieces identified as level 7 are identified as 
‘standard’; above this (level 8 and above) pieces are ‘more difficult’ and below this 
(levels 1-6) they are ‘less difficult’. For students selecting pieces of music that are 
levels 1–6, they should be advised that to do so may be self-penalising as they may 
restrict their opportunity to access the higher levels and marks in the assessment 
grids for their performances. 
Where instruments other than those listed in the Pearson Edexcel GCSE, AS and A level 
Music Difficulty Levels Booklet are presented, the difficulty level will be assessed at a 
comparable level of demand, including performances where there is no tradition of 
graded examinations for the instrument presented. For example: 
Beatboxing: To achieve Standard level the music must be fast, include much 
syncopation, make consistent use of effects such as echo or reverb, and include a 
wide range of imaginative sounds, including mimcry of standard instruments and 
scratching effects. Submissions not matching this description are assessed as Less 
Difficult. More Difficult submissions will add the impression of contrapuntal or 
melody/accompaniment effects, a variety of styles and textures and some singing 
and/or humming along with the beats. 
Rapping: To achieve Standard level the music will be consistently fast paced, requiring 
control of articulation, make much use of syncopation and have a sung hook. 
Submissions not matching this description are assessed as Less Difficult. More 
Difficult submissions will incorporate elements of vocal percussion and beatboxing, 
and will demand complex breathing and articulation techniques. 
Ensemble performance: In all cases the Difficulty Level for ensemble performance 
must be decided by directly comparing the student’s part with the examples for solo 
performance provided and looking for an equivalent level. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 30 
When performing a live solo line over a pre-recorded/sequenced backing track, the 
level of difficulty is assessed on the live part performed only.  
 
Raw 
mark 
Less 
Difficult 
Standard More 
Difficult 
1 1 1 2 
2 2 3 3 
3 3 4 5 
4 4 5 6 
5 5 6 8 
6 6 8 9 
7 7 9 11 
8 8 10 12 
9 9 11 14 
10 10 13 15 
11 11 14 17 
12 12 15 18 
13 13 16 20 
14 14 18 21 
15 15 19 23 
16 16 20 24 
17 17 21 26 
18 18 23 27 
19 19 24 29 
20 20 25 30 
21 21 26 32 
22 22 28 33 
23 23 29 35 
24 24 30 36 
25 25 31 38 
26 26 33 39 
27 27 34 41 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 31 
Raw 
mark 
Less 
Difficult 
Standard More 
Difficult 
28 28 35 42 
29 29 36 44 
30 30 38 45 
31 31 39 47 
32 32 40 48 
33 33 41 50 
34 34 43 51 
35 35 44 53 
36 36 45 54 
37 37 46 56 
38 38 48 57 
39 39 49 59 
40 40 50 60 
41 41 51 60 
42 42 53 60 
43 43 54 60 
44 44 55 60 
45 45 56 60 
46 46 58 60 
47 47 59 60 
48 48 60 60 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 32 
Security and backups 
It is the centre’s responsibility to keep the work that students have submitted for 
assessment secure. 
Secure storage is defined as a securely-locked cabinet or cupboard.  
For materials stored electronically, centres are strongly advised to utilise firewall 
protection and virus-checking software, and to employ an effective backup strategy, 
so that an up-to-date archive of students’ evidence is maintained. 
Further information 
For up-to-date advice on teacher involvement and administration of non-examination 
assessments, please refer to the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ) document 
Instructions for conducting non-examination assessments (new GCE and GCSE 
specifications) available on the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 33 
Component 2: Composing 
Overview 
The purpose of this component is to assess students’ skills in composing music. It 
allows students to appreciate the process of creating music. Students will learn more 
of the processes involved in creating music through developing the technical and 
expressive skills needed by a composer. 
Composing music is the creative process by which most of the music we experience 
came into being. Students will be encouraged to explore a range of compositional 
starting points, investigate a range of techniques for developing and manipulating 
ideas. They will then turn their ideas into completed pieces of music. 
Students can also explore the skills needed to compose for different musical forces. 
Students must submit two compositions, of a combined duration of at least six 
minutes: 
● one composition (Free choice composition) can be chosen from six briefs relating 
to areas of study, or free composition, carrying 40 of the marks for the composing 
assessment. This composition must be at least four minutes in duration. 
● one composition must be from a list of four briefs assessing technique, carrying 20 
of the marks for the composing assessment. This composition must be at least one 
minute in duration. 
 
Free choice composition (40 marks) Briefs assessing technique (20 marks) 
Briefs relating to areas of study 
1. Vocal Music 
2. Instrumental Music 
3. Music for Film 
4. Popular Music and Jazz 
5. Fusion 
6. New Directions 
OR 
Free composition 
Briefs assessing technique 
1. Bach chorale  
2. Two-part counterpoint 
3. Arrangement  
4. Remix 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 34 
Content 
Skills, knowledge and understanding 
Students will be required to demonstrate the ability to: 
● make use of musical elements, techniques and resources to create and develop 
musical ideas with technical control and expressive understanding, either freely as 
the composer chooses, or by responding to a brief or commission supplied by 
others 
● compose music that develops musical ideas and shows understanding of musical 
devices and conventions in relation to the chosen genre, style and tradition 
● compose music that is musically convincing and shows a sophisticated use of 
musical elements in combination 
● compose music that makes creative use of musical ideas and shows understanding 
of musical devices and conventions in relation to the chosen genre, style and 
tradition. 
Students will also be required to apply, practically, knowledge and understanding of: 
● specialist musical vocabulary and notation appropriate to the context 
● the relationship between compositional devices and techniques, musical elements, 
including harmonic progressions, tonal relationships and musical structures 
appropriate to the context. 
In order to compose in a particular style or genre, it is useful to study examples of that 
style. 
Students should be given a wide range of opportunities to develop their composition 
skills. These could include: 
● writing for instruments and/or voices and/or Digital Audio Workstation (DAW): 
idiomatic and expressive handling of appropriate timbres and textures 
● creating and developing musical ideas within chosen forms and structures and an 
understanding of the principles of harmonic, melodic and rhythmic construction 
appropriate to the composition undertaken 
● working to a set brief: developing the necessary technical skills to meet the 
requirements of a brief and relating it to its intended audience and occasion 
● acquiring a harmonic and tonal vocabulary appropriate to the composition 
undertaken. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 35 
Students need knowledge of the different ways of notating compositions scores, for 
example: 
● staff notation 
● graphic notation 
● written accounts. 
Students should practice composing to a specific brief and within a specified time 
limit. They may work in any style, subject to the brief. 
In order to compose in a particular style or genre, it is useful to study examples of that 
style or genre in some detail. This will enable students to recognise and use 
appropriate musical vocabulary relevant to their compositions. Much listening and 
appraising work will involve analysis of the set works, these could sometimes be used 
as models for composing. 
Students may compose their pieces of music using music technology. 
Composition using a Digital Audio Workstation: students should study how digital 
processing can expand the sonic palette using sampling, synthesis, EQ, compression 
and effects processing such as reverb, delay, flange, distortion, etc. They should learn 
how to integrate samples and synthesised sounds with acoustic and electronic 
instruments. Students will demonstrate that they can create a mood or communicate 
a message or meaning in their music. 
Musical elements 
Depending on the choice of instrument(s) and/or voice(s), and the piece of music 
composed, the student should use the appropriate musical elements in their 
composition. 
The musical elements are listed below: 
● Organisation of pitch  
● Tonality 
● Structure 
● Sonority 
● Texture 
● Tempo, metre and rhythm  
● Dynamics (use of dynamics). 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 36 
Musical contexts 
Students should take into account the effect of the purpose and intention of their 
piece of music, and the effect of audience, time and place when performing their 
pieces. Students should compose their music as appropriate to its style and mood. 
Students should take into account how music is created, developed and performed in 
different historical, social and cultural contexts, as well as how music from different 
historical, social and cultural contexts has changed over time. 
Musical language 
Depending on the choice of instrument(s) and/or voice(s), and the piece of music, the 
student should be able to compose music using the appropriate musical language. 
The musical language includes the following: 
● reading and writing of staff notation, including rhythmic notation in compound 
time and all key signatures  
● chords and associated chord symbols, standard harmonic progressions, for 
example chord inversions, dominant 7th chords and extended chords, for example 
secondary 7ths and 9ths  
● musical vocabulary and terminology related to the areas of study including 
recognition and use of appropriate musical vocabulary and terminology, for 
example glissando, repetition and conjunct and use of sophisticated terminology, 
for example portamento, and ascending minor scale. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 37 
Compositional briefs 
New compositional briefs will be released each year. 
The briefs will: 
● be released on 1 September at the beginning of the year of certification (Free 
choice composition) 
● be released on 1 April in the year of certification (Briefs assessing technique) 
● be released via the Pearson website 
● contain details of audience or occasion within the brief. 
The format of the briefs will always be the same each year but the specific content will 
vary. 
● One composition (Free choice composition) can be chosen from six briefs relating 
to areas of study, or free composition, carrying 40 of the marks for the composing 
assessment. This composition must be at least four minutes in duration. 
● One composition must be from a list of four briefs assessing technique, carrying 20 
of the marks for the composing assessment. This composition must be at least one 
minute in duration. 
● The two compositions combined must be a minimum of six minutes in duration, 
regardless of the combination of compositions chosen. 
The compositional briefs will make compositional demands in terms of the treatment 
of ideas, techniques and structures but between them will be sufficiently open-ended 
to allow students the freedom to work in any style or genre, or for any instrument. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 38 
Briefs relating to areas of study  
The format of these briefs will be the same each year but the specific content will vary. 
Each brief will relate to an audience and/or occasion, and students will then compose 
in a chosen style from one of the areas of study. 
Compositions to these briefs must be a minimum of four minutes in length. 
Students should ensure that their composition to a brief relating to areas of study is 
of sufficient length to meet the minimum overall composition length, given the 
requirements of their chosen brief assessing technique. 
Vocal Music 
Students should investigate the relationship between the structure of vocal pieces 
and the structure of texts by studying a variety of song forms (for example da capo, 
strophic, verse/chorus) and word settings. They should investigate the handling of 
instrumental accompaniments and/or backings. 
They may work in any style, subject to the brief. 
Instrumental Music 
Students should investigate the characteristics of instruments, instrumental 
ensembles and instrumental forms associated with music from the period (for 
example dance suite, sonata, string quartet). They should practice developing musical 
structures, relating these to the brief and working to sustain a piece with a varied and 
creative musical outcome. 
They may work in any style, subject to the brief. 
Music for Film 
Students should study the techniques of underscoring moving images to produce a 
satisfying and flowing succession of musical moods and atmospheres. They should 
learn how to enhance visual or dramatic action in which the narrative and sequencing 
may not follow conventional forms and structures. 
They will not be required to follow exact timings, nor to synchronise with film and/or 
video clips. 
Fusions 
Students should learn how harmony, melody, rhythm and instrumentation combine 
to create a characteristic stylistic ‘feel’ in the music.  
They should investigate examples of world music, for example the music of the Latin 
Americas and the traditional music of the British Isles, and gain practice in the 
handling of the musical elements that characterise them in order to create pieces that 
demonstrate a fusion of styles and stylistic influences. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 39 
Popular Music and Jazz 
Students should study the characteristics of instruments and instrumental 
combinations – acoustic, amplified and synthesised – that are associated with this 
area of study and the relationship between lead lines and backing textures. They 
should investigate common song structures and structural devices (for example 
verse/chorus, 32-bar, middle eight and head arrangements), and the role played by 
technology in the creation and production of popular music. 
New directions 
Students should study how traditional melody, harmony, rhythm and form broke 
down at the beginning of the twentieth century. Composers branched in new 
directions searching for their own musical language. Students should explore atonal 
music and new forms of harmony such as use of a tone row. They should explore new 
timbres through preparing instruments such as prepared piano or through electronic 
means. 
Free composition 
Students may produce one composition that is free, i.e. not related to a set brief. Free 
composition enables students to develop their own ideas outside of a set brief. 
Students are free to draw inspiration or starting points from set works and briefs from 
previous years as well as exploring their own interests and the music from the world 
around them. 
The piece composed by the students may be for any instrument or voice, or 
combination of instruments and/or voices, and in any style. 
Compositions to these briefs must be a minimum of four minutes in length. 
Students should ensure that their free composition is of sufficient length to meet the 
minimum overall composition length, given the requirements of their chosen brief 
assessing technique. 
Briefs assessing technique 
One composition must be to a brief assessing technique. Four briefs will be published 
each year. Compositions in response to these briefs must be completed under 
controlled conditions, with a guided maximum allowed time of 6 hours. 
These briefs give students sufficient material to enable them to compose in the styles 
described below. They will give students opportunities to create music by employing 
and developing specific compositional techniques. 
Each exercise will consist of a stimulus which will form the basis of the study. 
The nature of these briefs means that the length of the compositions will vary, 
although the shortest will be a minimum of one minute in length. This should be 
considered when choosing compositions, as the minimum composition length of six 
minutes across both compositions must be observed. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 40 
Brief 1 – Bach chorale  
Students must learn how to harmonise two chorales in the manner of J.S. Bach by 
adding alto, tenor and bass parts to a given soprano.  
Using an appropriate harmonic vocabulary students need to be familiar with triads in 
root position and first inversion, the tonic triad in second inversion in contexts where 
Bach would have used it, seventh chords and their inversions typical of Bach’s style. 
They must also learn about voice-leading and other procedures typical of Bach’s style 
including modulation to closely-related keys, passing notes and suspensions. 
The given chorales will be between 12 and 18 bars in length each. Modal chorales, and 
chorales in ¾ time will not be set. 
Brief 2 – Two-part counterpoint 
Students must also learn how to complete a two-part baroque texture for bass and 
violin or flute using an appropriate harmonic vocabulary. 
They must be able to construct rhythmically satisfying and stylish melodic lines in 
treble and bass and to follow 18th century conventions with regard to texture, voice 
leading and structure.  
The stimulus will be between 24 and 42 bars in length and students will be required to 
complete passages in both treble and bass. They will not be required to add, or work 
to, a figured bass. 
In each of these studies students should be aware of the context in terms of audience 
and occasion in which they would originally have appeared. For example, the chorale 
was intended to be sung by a congregation during the performance of a longer work, 
and the two-part exercise, drawn from a baroque dance suite would have been 
intended for social occasions. 
Brief 3 – Arrangement 
Students should learn how to harmonise a given melody and extend this to form a 
satisfying arrangement for instruments and/or voices. 
They should study the techniques of writing for different instrumental and/or vocal 
combinations and of extending and varying melodic material to sustain a coherently 
structured piece. 
The given melody will be between 12 and 24 bars in length and the number of 
instrumental/vocal parts that are specified in the brief will be no more than four. The 
brief will specify an audience and occasion.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 41 
Brief 4 – Remix 
Students should learn how to develop a given audio sample into a remix suitable for 
performance in a nightclub setting. They should investigate the stylistic characteristics 
and conventions of electronic dance music. They should learn how to edit and 
manipulate samples, timbres and textures and to extend these into a coherent 
structure by developing the elements of rhythm, melody, harmony and sound 
manipulation.  
The stimulus will be provided as a .wav file. The clarity, mixing and stereo imaging of 
the final recording will form part of the assessment.  
A stereo recording of your remix must be submitted in the following format:  
● wav 
● sample rate: 44.1kHz 
● bit depth: 16-bit. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 42 
Assessment information 
Task setting 
● Free choice composition briefs will be released on 1 September at the beginning of 
the year of certification. Free compositions have no brief and may be started at 
any time.  
● Briefs assessing technique will be released on 1 April in the year of certification. 
Students must compose two pieces, one drawn from each of the following columns: 
 
Free choice composition (40 marks) Briefs assessing technique (20 marks) 
Briefs relating to areas of study 
1. Vocal Music 
2. Instrumental Music 
3. Music for Film 
4. Popular Music and Jazz 
5. Fusion 
6. New Directions 
OR 
Free composition 
Briefs assessing technique 
1. Bach chorale  
2. Two-part counterpoint 
3. Arrangement  
4. Remix 
 
 
Students should choose the composition brief from those released by Pearson and 
decide their free composition with the support of their teacher. 
Free compositions should be worked on and recorded in the student’s intended year 
of certification. 
The overall length of the submission, i.e. both pieces, must total a minimum of six 
minutes. However, if a student wishes to compose for longer than six minutes to 
demonstrate their compositional skills more fully, they may do so. The compositions 
should be of sufficient length and complexity to give the composer adequate 
opportunity to showcase their abilities. 
Group compositions are not acceptable for which the music is the work of more than  
one student. 
The free choice composition must be at least four minutes in duration. The briefs 
assessing technique composition must be at least one minute in duration. The two 
compositions combined must be a minimum of six minutes in duration. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 43 
Students must ensure that that the length of the free choice composition 
complements the chosen brief assessing technique, and that their composition 
choices enable the minimum total duration to be achieved. The Sample Assessment 
Materials for this qualification contain examples of the types of briefs assessing 
technique that will be released on 1 April each year. 
The maximum guided length of compositions is eight minutes. Submissions over the 
guided maximum time for combined compositions will still be marked. This is 
guidance for teachers to avoid students submitting excessively long submissions 
which may be self-penalising. 
Task taking 
● The assessment may take place over multiple sessions. 
● Compositions must be submitted at the end of the course. 
● Centres must ensure that compositions submitted are valid for the series in which 
they are submitted. 
Both compositions must have a combined minimum duration of six minutes.  
Gaps between pieces and tuning do not count towards the composition time. 
Free choice composition 
Controlled conditions 
The student must spend at least 2 hours on the development of the composition, plus 
the final write-up and the recording of their composition, in the centre under the 
teacher’s supervision. 
Teachers must monitor and authenticate preparatory work throughout the 
preparatory period and prior to commencement of the composition period to ensure 
it is the student’s own unaided, personal and independent work.  
Teacher guidance during this period must be restricted to: the availability and 
suitability of sources and materials, the prevention of plagiarism and ensuring the 
work is conducted in accordance with specification requirements and procedures.  
Feedback 
Teachers may help students to understand rubrics, assessment criteria and controls. 
Teachers must not provide students with solutions. Any additional feedback must be 
recorded on the Composing Authentication Sheet, please see Appendix 2. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 44 
Collaboration 
Students may work together on their research, but group compositions are not 
allowed. 
While research may be carried out by the student in or out of the centre, the final 
composition and score or commentary must be completed in the centre under 
teacher supervision. 
Resources 
Students must have equal access to IT resources. Students should have access to a 
range of resources/interpretations/texts to enable them to make choices as required 
for their tasks. 
Composition recording 
Recording the compositions 
Compositions and arrangements may be realised through conventional instruments 
or music technology. The quality of the recording of the performance will not be 
assessed. Only the actual composition itself will be assessed. 
The student does not have to perform the piece of music they have composed (with 
the exception of sequenced parts of a composition using music technology). 
Authenticity 
The final recording and write-up of the score or written account must be completed in 
the centre under teacher supervision. 
If students wish to re-record a composition before submission, they must re-record 
the whole composition, and not just part of it. 
Items for submission for assessment 
1. Score/lead sheet/written account of the composition 
A detailed notated score appropriate to the style of music submitted. It can be 
submitted on manuscript paper or as a printout. ‘Score’ refers to any of the following: 
a full score in conventional staff notation, a lead sheet or chord chart, track sheets, 
tables or diagrams, a screenshot from the music production software, or written 
account of the composition. 
The purpose of the score is to justify the intentions of the piece of music that has 
been composed, so that it may be easily replicated by another performer. 
The score may be handwritten or printed. Students must submit their work in a 
format appropriate to the style. This may be staff notation, lead sheet or chord chart, 
annotated screenshots, annotated track diagrams or tablature or graphic scores. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 45 
Students not enclosing a score must submit a written account of the composition 
instead (no more than 500 words). This piece of writing should give a detailed 
description of the composition (or arrangement) and its purpose and meaning. It 
should refer to the musical content throughout. 
Written accounts must contain similar information to that found in a score: details of 
performance indications and the composer’s intentions. A good account containing 
sufficient information for an acceptable realisation of the composer’s intentions is 
acceptable for any style of music.  
Whichever format or combination of formats is chosen, the presentation must be 
sufficiently clear and detailed enough for the assessor to be able to assess the 
composition or arrangement. 
For music technology briefs, no score should be submitted. A recording should be 
submitted in the following format: 
● wav 
● sample rate: 44.1kHz 
● bit depth: 16-bit. 
The presentation of the score or written account is not assessed but students are 
reminded of the importance of clear and orderly presentation. 
2. Recording 
A complete recording of both pieces must be submitted via the online submission 
platform LWT. Each composition for each student should be a separate track, 
individually labelled with their centre number, candidate number and composition 
title. The recording can be made live or be studio-produced. 
3. Composing Authentication Sheet 
The Composing Authentication Sheet (CAS) must be completed by the teacher, and 
signed by the student and teacher, authenticating that the work is the student’s own. 
Please see Appendix 2. 
4. Submissions not meeting minimum time requirement 
The combined composition time of both compositions must be at least six minutes.  
Students submitting combined compositions of less than six minutes in length will be 
marked against the assessment criteria on the following pages. The total composition 
mark will then be reduced proportionally according to how many seconds the 
combined composition time is less than six minutes. Please see Appendix 10: Mark 
penalty tables for submissions not meeting the minimum assessment time. 
Gaps between pieces and tuning do not count towards the composition time. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 46 
Assessment criteria 
Compositions will be externally assessed for all students. All assessment materials 
must be sent to the examiner to arrive by 15 May in the year of certification. 
There are 60 marks available for this assessment. Of these, there are 40 marks 
available for free choice compositions. 
Compositions will be assessed individually, using the relevant grids given below. 
These criteria have been developed to assess students’ skills in developing musical 
ideas, demonstrating technical control and demonstrating musical coherence. 
Marks for each composition will be added together to give a total mark out of 60 for 
this component. 
Free choice compositions (whether to a brief related to areas of study or free 
compositions) will be marked against 3 grids, each carrying 13–14 marks. These grids 
assess creating and developing musical ideas with coherence, creating and developing 
musical ideas with expressive control, and creating and developing musical ideas with 
technical control. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 47 
Composition assessment grid 1: Creating and Developing Musical 
Ideas with Coherence 
These marks are awarded for the design and management of musical structures, 
ideas and formal processes and the balance between unity and variety. 
 
Level Mark Creating and Developing Musical Ideas with  
Coherence (AO2) 
 0  No rewardable material  
Level 1  1–2 ● There is an attempt to develop and extend musical ideas 
but there are some obtrusive misjudgments that 
compromise the effectiveness of the piece. 
● There is an attempt at basic, balanced structures but 
perhaps repetitive, predictable or showing too great a 
diversity of ideas. 
Level 2  3–5 ● Musical ideas are developed and extended but there are 
some obvious misjudgments and a lack of direction in 
parts. 
● There is an attempt at basic, balanced structures but the 
piece lacks fluency and variety. 
Level 3  6–8  ● Musical ideas are developed and extended in parts and any 
misjudgements do not detract from the overall 
effectiveness of the piece.  
● The piece demonstrates a satisfactory use of basic 
structures; these may be formulaic or standard forms with 
an attempt at some extension and development. Fluency 
and contrast will be maintained for the most part. 
Level 4 9–11 ● Musical ideas are developed and extended effectively for 
most of the piece.  
● Musical elements and ideas all contribute to some sense of 
wholeness with some sense of fluency, and a balance of 
unity and variety that is convincingly maintained. 
Level 5 12–13 ● Musical ideas are created, developed and extended with 
assurance and imagination throughout.  
● Musical elements and ideas all contribute to a sense of 
wholeness with a sophisticated sense of fluency, and a 
mature balance of unity and variety throughout. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 48 
Composition assessment grid 2: Creating and Developing Musical 
Ideas with Expressive Control 
These marks are awarded for the expressive control of the music elements, the pacing 
and management of moods and atmosphere, effects and dramatic flow, appropriate 
to the chosen style and/or genre. 
Marks are also awarded for the response to the brief or, in a free composition, the 
realisation of the intentions of the piece, and the effectiveness with which it meets its 
intended purpose and/or audience. 
 
Level Mark Creating and Developing Musical Ideas with Expressive 
Control (AO2) 
 0  No rewardable material  
Level 1  1–2 ● An attempt to respond to the brief but with limited sense 
of audience and occasion. 
● There are attempts at creating moods, atmosphere and/or 
effects, but these are compromised by obtrusive 
misjudgments or are inconsistently handled. 
● For brief-set composition only: A response to the brief with 
limited sense of audience and occasion.  
Level 2  3–5 ● A response to the brief that lacks sophistication and/or 
detail.  
● The musical elements are used to create some a few 
contrasted and well-paced moods, atmosphere and effects 
but there are some obvious misjudgements. 
● For brief-set composition only: A serious response to the 
brief with an attempt to meet audience and occasion.  
Level 3  6–8  ● A creative response to the brief with some sense of 
audience and occasion.  
● The musical elements are used to create some contrasted 
and well-paced moods, atmosphere and effects that are 
communicated successfully in parts. 
● For brief-set composition only: A creative response to the 
brief with some sense of audience and occasion.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 49 
Level Mark Creating and Developing Musical Ideas with Expressive 
Control (AO2) 
Level 4 9–11 ● An ambitious and creative response to the brief.  
● The musical elements are used to create contrasted and 
well-paced moods, atmosphere and effects that are 
communicated successfully for most of the piece. 
● For brief-set composition only: An ambitious and creative 
response to the brief with a sense of audience and 
occasion.  
Level 5 12–14 ● The musical elements are used with maturity and 
confidence to create contrasted and well-paced moods, 
atmosphere and effects that are communicated 
successfully throughout. 
● For brief-set composition only: A mature and sophisticated 
response to the brief with a well developed sense of 
audience and occasion.  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 50 
Composition assessment grid 3: Creating and Developing Musical 
Ideas with Technical Control 
These marks are awarded for the control of musical elements and of devices and 
conventions appropriate to the chosen style and/or genre. 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 51 
Level Mark Creating and Developing Musical Ideas with Technical 
Control (AO2) 
 0  No rewardable material  
Level 1  1–2 ● There are attempts to control musical elements, and to 
manage appropriate stylistic devices and conventions for 
the chosen genre/style, but these are unconvincing for the 
most part. 
● Misjudgments compromise the success of the piece. 
● There are some significant unplayable/unsingable passages 
and/or the handling is unidiomatic. Textures are largely 
unvaried. 
Level 2  3–5 ● The control of elements and stylistic devices and 
conventions for the chosen genre/style are secure in some 
of the piece, but there are some obvious misjudgements 
and/or inconsistencies. 
● Forces and textures are inconsistently handled with some 
obvious misjudgements. 
Level 3  6–8  ● The control of elements and the control of stylistic devices 
and conventions for the chosen genre/style are generally 
secure and any misjudgements do not detract from the 
overall effectiveness of the piece.  
● Forces and textures are handled without serious 
misjudgement although they lack variety and/or 
development in parts. 
Level 4 9–11 ● The control of elements is secure for most of the piece. Any 
misjudgments are minor.  
● Stylistic devices and conventions for the chosen genre/style 
have been selected appropriately and handled 
convincingly, but with one or two minor misjudgments. 
● The forces and textures are handled idiomatically with 
some development and variety. 
Level 5 12–13 ● The control of musical elements is assured and 
sophisticated throughout.  
● Stylistic devices and conventions for the chosen genre/style 
have been selected appropriately and handled convincingly 
throughout.  
● Forces and textures are handled idiomatically and 
exploited and varied with creativity and authority. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 52 
Briefs assessing technique  
Controlled conditions 
The student must complete their composition under controlled conditions, within 4-6 
hours. This time includes the development of the composition, the final write-up and 
the recording of their composition in the centre under the teacher’s supervision. 
Teacher guidance during this period must be restricted to: the availability and 
suitability of sources and materials, the prevention of plagiarism and ensuring the 
work is conducted in accordance with specification requirements and procedures.  
Compositions can be completed over multiple sessions, but work must be collected 
and kept securely in the centre between sessions. Students must not have access to 
their work between sessions. 
Feedback 
Teachers may help students to understand rubrics, assessment criteria and controls. 
Teachers must not provide students with solutions. Any additional feedback must be 
recorded on the Composing Authentication Sheet, please see Appendix 2. 
Collaboration 
Students may work together on their research, but group compositions are not 
allowed. 
While research may be carried out by the student in or out of the centre, the final 
composition and score or commentary must be completed in the centre under 
teacher supervision. 
Resources 
Students must have equal access to IT resources. Students should have access to a 
range of resources/interpretations/texts to enable them to make choices as required 
for their tasks. 
Composition recording 
Recording the compositions 
Compositions and arrangements may be realised through conventional instruments 
or music technology. The quality of the recording of the performance will not be 
assessed. Only the actual composition itself will be assessed. 
The student does not have to perform the piece of music they have composed (with 
the exception of sequenced parts of a composition using music technology). 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 53 
Authenticity 
Students and teachers must sign the Composing Authentication Sheet, please see  
Appendix 2. Teachers must be satisfied that the work is the student’s own and should 
sign the Composing Authentication Sheet to this effect. 
The final recording and write-up of the score or written account must be completed in 
the centre under teacher supervision. 
If students wish to re-record a composition before submission, they must re-record 
the whole composition, and not just part of it. 
Items for submission for assessment 
1. Score/lead sheet/written account of the composition 
A detailed notated score appropriate to the style of music submitted. It can be 
submitted on manuscript paper or as a printout. ‘Score’ refers to any of the following: 
a full score in conventional staff notation, a lead sheet or chord chart, track sheets, 
tables or diagrams, a screenshot from the music production software, or written 
account of the composition. 
The purpose of the score is to justify the intentions of the piece of music that has 
been composed, so that it may be easily replicated by another performer. 
The score may be handwritten or printed. Students must submit their work in a 
format appropriate to the style. This may be staff notation, lead sheet or chord chart, 
annotated screenshots, annotated track diagrams or tablature or graphic scores. 
Students not enclosing a score must submit a written account of the composition 
instead (no more than 500 words). This piece of writing should give a detailed 
description of the composition (or arrangement) and its purpose and meaning. It 
should refer to the musical content throughout. 
Written accounts must contain similar information to that found in a score: details of 
performance indications and the composer’s intentions. A good account containing 
sufficient information for an acceptable realisation of the composer’s intentions is 
acceptable for any style of music.  
Whichever format or combination of formats is chosen, the presentation must be 
sufficiently clear and detailed enough for the assessor to be able to assess the 
composition or arrangement. 
For music technology briefs, no score should be submitted. A recording should be 
submitted in the following format: 
● wav 
● sample rate: 44.1kHz 
● bit depth: 16-bit. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 54 
The presentation of the score or written account is not assessed but students are 
reminded of the importance of clear and orderly presentation. 
2. Recording 
A complete recording of both pieces must be submitted via the online submission 
platform LWT. Each composition for each student should be a separate track, 
individually labelled with their centre number, candidate number and composition 
title. The recording can be made live or be studio-produced. 
3. Composing Authentication Sheet 
The Composing Authentication Sheet (CAS) must be completed by the teacher, and 
signed by the student and teacher, authenticating that the work is the student’s own. 
Please see Appendix 2. 
Assessment criteria 
Compositions will be externally assessed for all students. All assessment materials 
must be sent to the examiner to arrive by 15 May in the year of certification. 
There are 60 marks available for this assessment. Of these, there are 20 marks 
available for Briefs assessing technique compositions. 
Compositions will be assessed individually, using the relevant grids given below. 
These criteria have been developed to assess students’ skills in developing musical 
ideas, demonstrating technical control and demonstrating musical coherence. 
Marks for each composition will be added together to give a total mark out of 60 for 
this component. 
Briefs assessing technique compositions will be marked against 4 grids, each carrying 
5 marks. Grids 1-3 are common to all briefs assessing technique. These assess 
creating and developing musical ideas with coherence, creating and developing 
musical ideas with expressive control, and creating and developing musical ideas with 
technical control. Grid 4 assesses the students’ response to the brief, and is specific to 
each type of brief assessing technique.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 55 
Composition assessment grid 1: Creating and Developing Musical 
Ideas with Coherence 
Marks are awarded for the organisation of the music: the melodic construction, 
harmony and rhythm. 
 
Level Mark Creating and Developing Musical Ideas with  
Coherence (AO2) 
 0  ● No rewardable material  
Level 1  1 ● Little or no structuring and control of key and modulation. 
● Limited understanding and control of chords and chord 
progressions with many unconvincing moments. 
● Limited sense of melodic shape. Melodies lack direction 
and structure or are inappropriate to the style.  
● Limited control of rhythm. E.g. the stimulus vocal is out of 
time with the instrumental parts.  
● Limited control of harmony detrimental to the music.  
Level 2  2 ● An attempt at structuring and control of key and 
modulation but compromised by insecurities and 
misjudgements. 
● Some control of chords and chord progressions but 
compromised by misjudgements. 
● A serious attempt at writing melodic lines but generally 
stiff, unstylistic and/or repetitive. 
● Repetitive rhythms or a surfeit of rhythmic ideas.  
● Harmony is functional but uninteresting.  
Level 3  3  ● Generally well managed structuring and control of key and 
modulation but with some obvious misjudgements and/or 
missed opportunities. 
● Generally well managed control of appropriate chords and 
chord progressions despite some obvious misjudgements 
and/or limitations. 
● A good melodic sense. Melodies have shape and style. 
● Appropriate use of rhythms with some development as 
appropriate to the style. 
● Harmony is functional but uninteresting. The same chord 
set is used throughout. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 56 
Level Mark Creating and Developing Musical Ideas with  
Coherence (AO2) 
Level 4 4 ● Well managed structuring and control of key and 
modulation, but with one or two misjudgements and/or 
missed opportunities. 
● Convincing control of appropriate chords and chord 
progressions despite a few misjudgements. 
● A strong sense of melodic flow as appropriate to the style.  
● Excellent stylistic rhythmic elements.  
● Appropriately chosen harmonies with some variety of 
chord sets. 
Level 5 5 ● Effective structuring and control of key and modulation 
throughout. 
● Mature and sophisticated control of appropriate chords 
and chord progressions. 
● Excellent and imaginative with a strong sense of melodic 
flow as appropriate to the style.  
● Excellent and imaginative use of stylistic rhythmic 
elements.  
● Imaginative harmony appropriate to the style.  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 57 
Composition assessment grid 2: Creating and Developing Musical 
Ideas with Expressive Control 
Marks are awarded for the control of appropriate and expressive stylistic 
characteristics, idioms, conventions and procedures appropriate to the brief and for 
the awareness of occasion and audience, for example, characteristic cadential devices 
in the Bach chorale, the accurate capture of appropriate dance styles or the handling 
of the chosen style for the arrangement. 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 58 
Level Mark Creating and Developing Musical Ideas with Expressive 
Control (AO2) 
 0  No rewardable material  
Level 1  1 ● Little evidence of control of style and stylistic procedures. 
● The style is recognisable but compromised by serious 
misjudgements. 
● There is no variety and an over- reliance on looping and 
repetition. 
Level 2  2 ● The control of style and stylistic procedures is 
compromised by some significant misjudgements. 
● Some inconsistency of style. Stylistic features have been 
attempted unsuccessfully. 
● Music is unpredictable or overly repetitive. 
Level 3  3  ● Some effective control of style and stylistic procedures but 
with some obvious inconsistencies and/or misjudgements. 
● Generally a convincing sense of style but with some minor 
misjudgements. 
● The structure is functional but uninteresting. 
Level 4 4 ● Generally convincing control of style and stylistic 
procedures but with one or two misjudgements. 
● Most of the features of the style have been included 
successfully. Musical ideas are presented with a sense of 
direction and coherence as appropriate to the style with 
few misjudgements. 
● The structure is stylistic but some sections may not link 
well together. 
Level 5 5 ● Assured control of style and stylistic procedures, applied 
creatively and expressively. 
● All features of the style have been included creatively. 
● The structure is stylistic and sections are well linked.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 59 
Composition assessment grid 3: Creating and Developing Musical 
Ideas with Technical Control 
Marks are awarded for the handling of techniques appropriate to the brief chosen.  
In the Bach chorale and two-part counterpoint, the security of the part writing and 
handling of dissonance. In the arrangement task, the handling of the instrumentation 
and textures, and in the remix task, the handling of timbres, sound manipulation and 
procedures. 
 
Level Mark Creating and Developing Musical Ideas with Technical 
Control (AO2) 
 0  No rewardable material  
Level 1  1 ● Little evidence of control of technical procedures and 
devices 
● Many misjudgements in the control of part writing and 
dissonance.  
● Instrumentation, timbres and sound manipulation lack 
control with many misjudgements 
● The style is recognisable but compromised by serious 
misjudgements. 
● There is no variety and an over- reliance on looping and 
repetition. 
Level 2  2 ● Handling of technical procedures and devices is 
compromised by technical weaknesses 
● Part writing and control of dissonance are compromised by 
some significant errors 
● Instrumentation, timbres and sound manipulation 
compromised by misjudgements and limitations 
● Some inconsistency of style. Stylistic features have been 
attempted unsuccessfully. 
● Music is unpredictable or overly repetitive. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 60 
Level Mark Creating and Developing Musical Ideas with Technical 
Control (AO2) 
Level 3  3  ● Inconsistent handling of technical procedures and devices 
● Part writing and control of dissonance are generally 
successful but with some obvious misjudgements 
● Instrumentation, timbres and sound manipulation 
generally successful but with some obvious 
misjudgements. 
● Generally a convincing sense of style but with some minor 
misjudgements. 
● The structure is functional but uninteresting. 
Level 4 4 ● Generally secure handling of technical procedures and 
devices 
● Part writing ad control of dissonance are successful apart 
from one or two marginal misjudgements 
● Handling of instrumentation, timbres and sound 
manipulation is broadly satisfying despite some minor 
misjudgements 
● Most of the features of the style have been included 
successfully. 
● Musical ideas are presented with a sense of direction and 
coherence as appropriate to the style with few 
misjudgements.  
Level 5 5 ● Distinctive and secure handling of technical procedures 
and devices throughout 
● Part writing and control of dissonance successful 
throughout. 
● Instrumentation, timbres and sound manipulation handled 
with assurance 
● All features of the style have been included creatively. 
● The structure is stylistic and sections are well linked.  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 61 
Composition assessment grid 4.1: Response to the brief – Bach 
Chorale 
1. Bach chorale 
Marks are awarded for the overall response to the brief in terms of creative response 
and development of the given stimulus. 
 
Level Mark Creating and Developing Musical Ideas with Technical 
Control (AO2) 
 0  No rewardable material  
Level 1  1 ● Little evidence of development of, or a controlled response 
to, the stimulus 
● Little evidence of melodic shape. 
Level 2  2 ● An attempt at developing the stimulus but this is 
compromised by technical weaknesses. 
● Lines are often angular and/or lack direction. 
Level 3  3  ● Response to the stimulus is limited in places by missed 
opportunities or a formulaic and/or mechanical approach. 
● Lines lack shape and/or contrast in parts. 
Level 4 4 ● There is some creativity and fluency in the handling of the 
stimulus.  
● Lines are mostly well shaped despite some minor 
misjudgements. 
Level 5 5 ● The stimulus is harmonised with fluency and creativity. 
● Lines are elegant and well shaped. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 62 
Composition assessment grid 4.2: Response to the brief – Two-part 
counterpoint 
2. Two-part counterpoint 
Marks are awarded for the overall response to the brief in terms of creative response 
and development of the given stimulus. 
 
Level Mark Creating and Developing Musical Ideas with Technical 
Control (AO2) 
 0  No rewardable material  
Level 1  1 ● Little evidence of development of, or a controlled response 
to, the stimulus 
● Little evidence of melodic shape and/or rhythmic interest. 
Level 2  2 ● An attempt at developing the stimulus but this is 
compromised by technical weaknesses. 
● Lines are often angular and/or lack direction: Rhythm dull 
and unvaried. 
Level 3  3  ● The stimulus is developed but limited in places by missed 
opportunities or a formulaic and/or mechanical approach. 
● Melodic lines lack shape and/or contrast in parts: rhythmic 
interest inconsistent and/or lacking variety. 
Level 4 4 ● There is some development and fluency in the handling of 
the stimulus.  
● Lines are mostly well shaped and rhythm creatively 
handled despite some minor misjudgements. 
Level 5 5 ● The stimulus is developed with fluency and creativity. 
● Lines are elegant and well shaped with rhythmic interest. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 63 
Composition assessment grid 4.3: Response to the brief – 
Arrangement 
3. Arrangement 
Marks are awarded for the overall response to the brief in terms of creative response 
and development of the given stimulus. 
 
Level Mark Creating and Developing Musical Ideas with Technical 
Control (AO2) 
 0  No rewardable material  
Level 1  1 ● Little evidence of development of, or a controlled response 
to, the stimulus 
Level 2  2 ● There is an attempt at developing the stimulus but this is 
compromised by technical weaknesses. 
● Additional material, where added, is unconvincing. 
Level 3  3  ● The stimulus is developed but limited in places by missed 
opportunities or a formulaic and/or mechanical approach. 
● Additional material, where added, is inconsistently 
handled.  
Level 4 4 ● There is some development and fluency in the handling of 
the stimulus.  
● Additional material is mostly convincing despite some 
minor misjudgements. 
Level 5 5 ● The stimulus is developed with fluency and creativity. 
● Additional material, where appropriate, is convincing and 
enhances the overall impression. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 64 
Composition assessment grid 4.4: Response to the brief – Remix 
4. Remix 
Marks are awarded for the overall response to the brief in terms of creative response 
and development of the given stimulus. 
 
Level Mark Creating and Developing Musical Ideas with Technical 
Control (AO2) 
 0  No rewardable material  
Level 1  1 ● There are rhythm and/or harmony errors in how the 
stimulus has been set, or not all of stimulus used.  
Level 2  2 ● Limited use of the stimulus or simple repetition of the 
given material.  
Level 3  3  ● However, the audio is cut up and re-arranged to fit a new 
structure.  
● The music and stimulus fit but the stimulus audio is 
largely unaltered.  
Level 4 4 ● Makes good use of the stimulus material, developing it in 
a logical but mostly convincing fashion.  
● The vocal part has been edited to create some new 
material. 
Level 5 5 ● Makes imaginative use of the stimulus with extensive and 
convincing development.  
● The vocal part has been reconceptualised/edited to create 
new parts that play simultaneously. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 65 
Security and backups 
It is the centre’s responsibility to ensure that the assignment briefs are kept secure 
until released to students. 
It is also the centre’s responsibility to keep the work that students have submitted for 
assessment secure. Secure storage is defined as a securely-locked cabinet or 
cupboard. 
The rules on storage also apply to electronic data. For example, centres should collect 
memory sticks for secure storage between sessions or restrict student access to 
specific areas of the centre’s IT network. 
For materials stored electronically, centres are strongly advised to utilise firewall 
protection and virus-checking software, and to employ an effective backup strategy, 
so that an up-to-date archive of students’ evidence is maintained. 
Further information 
For up-to-date advice on teacher involvement and administration of non-examination 
assessments, please refer to the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ) document 
Instructions for conducting non-examination assessments (new GCE and GCSE 
specifications) available on the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 66 
Component 3: Appraising 
Overview 
The purpose of this component is for students to develop their listening and 
appraising skills through the study of music across a variety of styles and genres. The 
content is grouped into six areas of study, each of which contains two set works, with 
the exception of Popular Music and Jazz, which has three set works. 
This component gives students the opportunity to reflect on, analyse and evaluate 
music in aural and/or written form. To achieve this objective they need to use their 
knowledge and understanding of musical elements, context and language to make 
critical judgements about the repertoire and context of music within the areas of 
study. These critical judgements will require the use of specific music vocabulary 
associated with a particular style or genre. 
Students will learn the content of musical elements, context and language through six 
compulsory areas of study. The areas of study and set works are given on the next 
page. 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 67 
Area of study Set works 
Vocal Music ● J. S. Bach, Cantata, Ein feste Burg, BWV 80: Movements 1, 2, 8 
● Vaughan Williams, On Wenlock Edge: Nos. 1, 3 and 5 (On 
Wenlock Edge, Is my team ploughing? and Bredon Hill) 
Instrumental 
Music 
● Clara Wieck-Schumann, Piano Trio in G minor, Op. 17: 
movement 1 
● Berlioz, Symphonie Fantastique: Movement I 
Music for 
Film 
● Danny Elfman, Batman Returns: Birth of a Penguin Parts I and II, 
Batman vs the Circus, The Rise and Fall from Grace 
● Bernard Herrmann, Psycho: Prelude, The City, Marion, The 
Murder (Shower Scene), The Toys, The Cellar, Discovery, Finale 
Popular 
Music and 
Jazz 
● Kate Bush, Hounds of Love: Cloudbusting, And dream of sheep, 
and Under ice  
● Beatles, Revolver: Eleanor Rigby, Here, there and everywhere, I 
want to tell you, and Tomorrow never knows 
● Courtney Pine, Back in the Day: Inner state (of mind), Lady Day 
and (John Coltrane), and Love and affection 
Fusions ● Debussy, Estampes: Nos. 1 and 2 (Pagodes and La soirée dans 
Grenade) 
● Anoushka Shankar, Breathing Under Water: Burn, Breathing 
Under Water and Easy 
New 
Directions 
● Kaija Saariaho, Petals for Violoncello and Live Electronics 
● Stravinsky, The Rite of Spring: Introduction, The Augurs of 
Spring, and Ritual of Abduction 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 68 
Full details of the exact versions of the scores and recordings for each set work is 
available on the Pearson website. 
There are two set works in each area of study, with the exception of Popular Music 
and Jazz, which has three set works. The set works will provide students with depth of 
knowledge of musical elements, language and context.  
Other pieces of music 
Students should also study a range of pieces beyond these set works. The suggested 
pieces of other music for each area of study (see Appendix 4) provide students with 
breadth, enabling them to place their knowledge of musical elements, context and 
language in a wider context, and apply their knowledge and understanding to more 
pieces of music. Teachers may recommend the pieces listed in Appendix 4 or they may 
make their own selection to supplement the areas of study. Please see 'Suggested 
pieces of other music and unfamiliar pieces' section for further information. 
Content 
Knowledge and understanding 
Students develop their listening and appraising skills through the study of music 
across a variety of styles and genres. Students will engage critically with music and 
develop an understanding of the place of music in different cultures and contexts. The 
skills of musical analysis and evaluation of music in aural and written form are core to 
this component. 
These skills will be developed through attentive listening coupled with acute aural 
perception skills. Analysis of the key musical elements will lead to an understanding of 
genres, styles and traditions, students will demonstrate specialist musical vocabulary 
and notation skills. With these skills, the expected outcome is the ability to discern the 
relationship between compositional devices and musical techniques. 
Students need to demonstrate knowledge and understanding of musical elements, 
contexts and language in relation to the music they have studied, and to unfamiliar 
music for each of the areas of study. They need to analyse and evaluate music in 
written and aural form in order to make critical judgements about its musical 
elements, context and language within the scope of its area of study. 
These skills are developed through a study of repertoire in the set works. The 
unfamiliar music questions test the ability of students to relate their learning to other 
pieces in a similar style or genre. They will be expected to formulate critical 
judgements, too, on both familiar and unfamiliar music and in doing this to show an 
understanding of the complexity of the interdependencies of musical elements. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 69 
The knowledge and understanding of the study of the set works and other musical 
pieces is achieved primarily through an in-depth examination and exploration of the 
musical elements and their interdependence. In addition, placing the music in its 
intended context and the use of appropriate musical knowledge will deepen 
understanding. 
Students will be required to demonstrate the ability to: 
● analyse and evaluate music in aural and written form, using knowledge and 
understanding of musical elements, musical contexts and musical language to 
make critical judgements about: 
o repertoire within the areas of study 
o musical interpretations (for example how a performer plays a piece of music, 
how a composer responds to a brief or a starting point, or demonstration of 
stylistic understanding) 
o others’ work including unfamiliar music (i.e. individual pieces of music that have 
not been stipulated within the specification) 
● formulate critical judgements, achieved through attentive listening (rather than 
just hearing) and aural perception, and could also be achieved by informed 
discussion (in writing and/or through speech), analysis, evaluation, 
contextualisation and reflection 
● comment on music heard, showing understanding through the genres, styles and 
traditions studied 
● comment in detail on music heard, showing critical understanding across the 
genres, styles and traditions studied 
● use acute aural perception and discrimination skills 
● use appropriate technical musical vocabulary to communicate sophisticated 
judgements 
● show understanding of the complex interdependencies between musical elements 
● show understanding of the sophisticated connections between music and its 
context. 
Students will also be required to apply practically, knowledge and understanding of: 
● specialist musical vocabulary and notation appropriate to the context 
● the relationship between compositional devices and techniques, musical elements, 
including harmonic progressions, tonal relationships and musical structures 
appropriate to the context. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 70 
Musical elements 
Organisation of pitch (melodically and harmonically) 
● Harmonic change, cadences, for example interrupted, and melodic and harmonic 
devices. 
● Complex chord progressions, for example the use of secondary dominant, and 
melodic devices, for example augmentation. 
As well as the study of how melodic lines are constructed and common melodic 
devices, such as sequence, inversion, etc., the study of the harmony in the music is an 
equally important feature. On a basic level this includes the repertoire and types of 
chords as well as their use in formulaic cadential progressions. Harmonic devices and 
more complex chord progressions too should be studied, such as circle of fifths, the 
use of the secondary dominants, etc. 
Tonality 
● How keys are related to each other, for example circle of fifths. 
● Complex and remote key relationships, for example enharmonic. 
In essence, this is the key structure of the music and is often related to the music’s 
form or structure. The relationship between keys is a vital component, such as the 
relative major/minor, dominant, dominant of the dominant, etc. It is expected that the 
study of the set works will encompass complex key relationships and enharmonic 
change. 
Structure (organisation of musical material) 
● Complex structures, for example sonata form. 
● Increasingly complex structures, for example fugue and through-composed music. 
The knowledge of the form or structure of music is inherent in the understanding of 
the composition as a whole. Students will encounter complex structures in the set 
works, such as sonata form, arch form, fugue, etc. It is through the understanding of 
the music’s structure that the organisation of melody and harmony makes sense and 
shows again the independence of the musical elements. 
Sonority 
● Combinations of vocal timbres and instrumental techniques, for example con 
sordino. 
● Further combinations of vocal timbres and instrumental techniques, for example 
sul ponticello. 
This includes an understanding of how sounds might be altered such as con sordini, 
sul ponticello, flutter tonguing, etc. It also requires an understanding of how 
combinations of instruments and/or voices create different sonorities. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 71 
Texture 
● Complex combinations of musical lines (parts), for example homophony and 
polyphony. 
● More complex applications of these, for example fugue. 
This element encompasses common textures of monophony, homophony, 
polyphony, heterophony and fugue. Students should also be able to comment on 
interesting textural features in the music they study. 
Tempo, metre and rhythm (how music is organised in time) 
● Metrical and rhythmic devices, for example changing metres and syncopation. 
● Complex metrical and rhythmic devices, for example additive rhythm and 
polyrhythms. 
As well as general observations regarding these features, students need to study 
more-complex metrical and rhythmic devices, such as additive rhythms, cross 
rhythms and polyrhythms. Many of the more complex uses of these elements will 
feature in the 20th-century areas of study. 
Dynamics (use of dynamics) 
● Expressive devices, for example contrast and extended ranges. 
● Refined control of dynamics and extreme ranges. 
The expressive use of dynamics to enhance music and how this relates to the 
elements listed above. 
These musical elements can be applied to many different types of music but may not 
be applicable to every single area of study or set work to the same degree or extent. 
The use of the musical elements above should be used to understand, as appropriate 
to each area of study and set work, to identify: 
● how instrumentation is used in different combinations (identifying instruments 
and groups of instruments) 
● how instrumentation is used to good effect, including playing techniques, etc. 
associated with a particular instrument or group 
● musical and melodic devices (ornamentation, ostinati, riffs, use of imitation, pedal 
point and sequence) 
● rhythmic devices and features (syncopation, swung rhythms, dotted rhythms and 
triplets), and discriminate between major, minor, modal, pentatonic, chromatic 
tonalities 
● how texture is used, including how the music exploits textural contrasts, with 
reference to monophony, homophony, polyphony, heterophony, etc. 
● how harmony and chord patterns are used in the music. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 72 
Musical contexts 
● The effect of purpose and intention (for example of the composer, performer, 
commissioner) on how music is created, developed and performed in different 
historical, social and cultural contexts. 
● The effect of audience, time and place (for example venue, occasion) on how music 
is created, developed and performed in different historical, social and cultural 
contexts. 
● How music from different historical, social and cultural contexts has changed over 
time. 
Musical language 
This includes: 
● reading and writing staff notation, including rhythmic notation in compound and 
irregular time and all key signatures  
● chords and associated chord symbols including standard harmonic progressions, 
for example chord inversions, dominant 7th chords and extended chords, for 
example secondary 7ths and 9ths  
● musical vocabulary and terminology related to the Areas of Study including 
recognition and use of appropriate musical vocabulary and terminology, for 
example glissando, repetition and conjunct and recognition and use of 
sophisticated terminology, for example portamento, and ascending minor scale. 
Students need to have a grasp of key stylistic features and be able to use appropriate 
music language and terminology in their answers. For example, students should be 
able to describe a repetitive melody in a classical piece as an ‘ostinato’ but also be able 
to use the correct term of ‘riff’ when describing the same feature in a piece of popular 
music. 
In describing musical textures, the description of ‘thick’ or ‘thin’ is not appropriate in 
the description of a homophonic or polyphonic passage. Given the concentration of 
thirteen set works, it should be possible to ensure the correct and appropriate use of 
language and terminology. 
The Music Vocabulary List in Appendix 3 provides a list of vocabulary and terminology 
that supports the learning of musical elements, context and language. This list 
indicates the level and scope of technical language we would expect from students at 
this level. The list is not exhaustive. The words listed may appear in the question 
paper and students should therefore understand them. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 73 
Reading and writing staff notation 
Some of the study of the set works will involve identifying key musical themes, chord 
patterns and rhythms. Examination questions every year will feature musical 
dictation, which could be completing some notes on staff notation/guitar tablature, or 
identifying a particular rhythm or completing a chord sequence. It is, therefore, 
important that students study the various types of notation used in the set works. 
Areas of study 
Students will learn the musical elements, context and language in depth through the 
six compulsory areas of study, each of which consist of set works and other musical 
pieces. 
Areas of study give students a focus to demonstrate in-depth knowledge, 
understanding and skills. The areas of study encompass repertoire that allows the 
musical elements, musical contexts and musical language to be taught in context, and 
provide opportunities for students to demonstrate contextual understanding through 
their performing and composing. 
The areas of study are: 
● Vocal Music 
● Instrumental music 
● Music for Film 
● Popular Music and Jazz 
● Fusions 
● New Directions. 
Teachers should enable students to draw connections and links between the set 
works within each area of study and also to explore the connections with the other 
areas of study and other musical pieces. They can also draw on set works in other 
areas of study. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 74 
Area of Study 1 – Vocal Music 
The pieces selected as set works provide a variety of vocal works from this area of 
study. These range from a Baroque Bach Cantata, as a sacred work designed for 
church performance, to On Wenlock Edge by Vaughan Williams, a 20th-century work 
providing breadth to the study of vocal works. 
Appendix 4 provides a background and context to the set works. As a complement to 
the sacred Bach Cantata, there is an extract an Oratorio, Messiah by Handel. The 
Schubert and Mendelssohn lieder are examples of Romantic forms of writing for solo 
voice that provide background for comparisons to the vocal settings in On Wenlock 
Edge. Romantic operas by Wagner and Verdi show developments in this genre from 
the Classical operas of Mozart. 
Area of Study 2 – Instrumental Music 
The selected set works cover different styles, forms and genres. The Symphonic 
tradition is represented by the programmatic Symphonie Fantastique by Berlioz. 
Chamber music is represented by Clara Schumann's Piano Trio in G Minor. 
Linked to this in two strands Appendix 4 has an early Haydn Symphony, contrasted 
with Amy Beach's Gaelic Symphony, and the programmatic symphonic poem by Liszt, 
Les Préludes. The string quartet medium features in Appendix 4 in the Beethoven 
piece. 
Area of Study 3 – Music for Film 
This area of study encompasses some of the key figures in composing for film, from 
Bernard Herrmann, Psycho and Danny Elfman, Batman Returns as set works to Ennio 
Morricone, John Williams and Debbie Wiseman in Appendix 4. The study of these 
works will give an understanding of how music is composed as sound to picture. 
Appendix 4 provides further examples of music composed for film. These pieces give 
more background to the topic and provide enrichment for the study of music written 
for the moving image. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 75 
Area of Study 4 – Popular Music and Jazz 
The study of popular music and jazz spans some of the main genres from the 1950s to 
songs from Courtney Pine’s Back in the Day album of 2000 on to the present day. It is 
a vast field, and honing down to representative works gives a good insight to the key 
defining works in the genres. The Beatles album Revolver is a key work in the study of 
popular music and the songs represented will provide good focus.  
In terms of jazz music, there are many styles, and the cited examples of Bix 
Beiderbecke Jazz Me Blues and Charles Mingus Blues and Roots show developments 
in the music over thirty years or so. More recent developments in the popular music 
genre are represented by Jay Z's Blueprint 3 and Björk's Vulnicura albums. Features 
common to both the popular music works and jazz pieces can be studied both in 
isolation and together. 
Area of Study 5 – Fusions 
There are many examples of different fusions and this area of study explores how 
different musical cultures or traditions are combined to create a musical fusion. The 
core understanding is to examine how the musical elements are treated in a piece of 
fusion. The early Debussy set work is a good starting point, with the fusion of classical 
music and Indonesian Gamelan (Anoushka Shankar) providing further variety.  
The pieces in Appendix 4 again look at other types of fusion to provide variety and 
breadth to this area of study, from the Portuguese and African rhythms of Sara 
Tavares to the Indian and pop fusions of Jai Ho. 
Area of Study 6 – New Directions 
The study of expressionistic, serialist, experimental and aleatoric music, as well as 
electronic music, is covered in this area of study, as well as several other styles. 
In the set works, there is variety in terms of styles and also in instrumentation, 
including electronics in Saariaho's Petals. The combination of the set works and the 
musical pieces in Appendix 4 provides a good understanding of the rich diversity of 
musical styles in 20th-century music. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 76 
Set works 
Students must study all set works in each area of study. 
It is recommended that students familiarise themselves with each work as a whole, 
before learning to identify important musical features, context and/or elements of 
continuity and change between works. 
Understanding of the musical elements, contexts and language will help to identify 
the historical, social and cultural contexts, and illuminate elements of continuity and 
change between the works. 
Students need to learn how to write perceptively about music, in particular 
comparing, contrasting, assessing, evaluating and commenting, as appropriate. 
The set works have been chosen to be representative of typical pieces from their 
areas of study. These pieces should be studied and analysed so that students have a 
good understanding of the stylistic features and conventions of each piece. 
Students should be encouraged to express their ideas about the set works, using 
correct musical vocabulary. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 77 
Area of study Set works 
Vocal Music ● J. S. Bach, Cantata, Ein feste Burg, BWV 80: Movements 1, 2, 8 
● Vaughan Williams, On Wenlock Edge: Nos. 1, 3 and 5 (On 
Wenlock Edge, Is my team ploughing? and Bredon Hill) 
Instrumental 
Music 
● Clara Wieck-Schumann, Piano Trio in G minor, Op. 17: 
movement 1 
● Berlioz, Symphonie Fantastique: Movement I 
Music for 
Film 
● Danny Elfman, Batman Returns: Birth of a Penguin Parts I and II, 
Batman vs the Circus, The Rise and Fall from Grace 
● Bernard Herrmann, Psycho: Prelude, The City, Marion, The 
Murder (Shower Scene), The Toys, The Cellar, Discovery, Finale 
Popular 
Music and 
Jazz 
● Kate Bush, Hounds of Love: Cloudbusting, And dream of sheep, 
and Under ice  
● Beatles, Revolver: Eleanor Rigby, Here, there and everywhere, I 
want to tell you, and Tomorrow never knows 
● Courtney Pine, Back in the Day: Inner state (of mind), Lady Day 
and (John Coltrane), and Love and affection 
Fusions ● Debussy, Estampes: Nos. 1 and 2 (Pagodes and La soirée dans 
Grenade) 
● Anoushka Shankar, Breathing Under Water: Burn, Breathing 
Under Water and Easy 
New 
Directions 
● Kaija Saariaho, Petals for Violoncello and Live Electronics 
● Stravinsky, The Rite of Spring: Introduction, The Augurs of 
Spring, and Ritual of Abduction 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 78 
Suggested pieces of other music and unfamiliar pieces  
Unfamiliar pieces in relation to question 5 
Students should listen to and be able to appraise unfamiliar pieces of music as part of 
this component. Students can use the examples in Appendix 4 to support their 
preparation for appraising unfamiliar pieces of music or they may make their own 
selection of pieces of music to supplement the areas of study. 
Unfamiliar music will have similar stylistic characteristics to the set works. Studying 
other pieces of music will help to provide breadth to support learning these stylistic 
characteristics. 
Students will need to apply their appraising skills and knowledge of musical elements, 
contexts and language to these pieces of unfamiliar music in the examination. They 
should learn how to listen perceptively to unfamiliar music, developing their skills of 
aural analysis. In particular, they should be able to place the music in a wider context 
and chronology (which could include identifying the genre, composer and date of 
composition), recognise chords and keys, and complete aural dictation tasks. 
The musical pieces listed in Appendix 4 for each area of study are designed to provide 
further examples of music from that period or musical tradition and provide breadth 
as well as depth to each area of study. These works provide a useful framework for 
appraising unfamiliar pieces. They are not compulsory to study. 
Teachers may use the pieces listed in this appendix or they may make their own 
selection that relate to each area of study.  
Other pieces of music in relation to question 6 
The musical pieces listed in Appendix 4 for each area of study are designed to provide 
further examples of music from that period or musical tradition and provide breadth 
as well as depth to each area of study. These works provide a useful framework for a 
wider study of the set works. Their purpose is to show the common features of the set 
works in other music, so that each set work is not just seen in isolation. These are not 
compulsory to study. 
Teachers may use the pieces listed in this appendix or they may make their own 
selection to supplement the areas of study. 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2018. 
● The assessment is 2 hours 10 minutes. 
● The assessment is marked out of 100 marks. 
● There are two sections in the examination: 
o Section A: 50 marks, four questions – three questions based on extracts from 
the set works and one question on dictation 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 79 
o Section B: 50 marks – one essay question on an unfamiliar piece of music 
(Question 5) and one essay chosen from four optional questions on a set work 
(Question 6). 
● Students must answer all questions, with the exception of Question 6 which will 
give a choice of four options, of which students must answer one. 
● The paper will include multiple-choice, short open and extended writing questions. 
● Each student will have access to audio files and an individual audio player with the 
extracts of music relating to the exam, and will be in control of listening to the 
extracts relating to each question. 
Section A 
Students will be assessed on their ability to identify aurally the key musical features in 
some of the set works from the areas of study. They should understand the context 
within which the set works were composed and their place within the area of study as 
a whole. 
Students will also be expected to express and justify opinions on the set work extracts 
and complete short musical dictation and staff notation questions. 
Section A will feature aural listening questions with skeleton scores on set works from 
different areas of study. These questions will include short answer responses and 
some multiple choice questions. There will also be some dictation of pitch and rhythm 
in this section of the paper. The dictation will be from unfamiliar works that feature 
musical elements, language and contexts related to those in the set works. 
Section B 
Section B will feature two extended writing questions – Question 5 (20 marks) and 
Question 6 (30 marks).  
Question 5 will be based on an unfamiliar work related to one of the set works but not 
taken from any of the musical pieces listed in Appendix 4.  
The purpose of this question is for candidates to draw links from their study of the set 
works to the music heard as an unfamiliar extract. Audio will be provided for this 
question. No skeleton score will be provided for this question. 
Question 6 has four optional essay questions, with each optional question assessing a 
different area of study. Students select one option, therefore only needing to study a 
minimum of three areas of study in depth in order to prepare for the question. The 
question will ask students to evaluate music with reference to music elements, such 
as melody, structure and texture. No audio will be provided. An illustrative excerpt of 
several pages of the score will be provided. However, students are expected to use 
their knowledge of the set work as a whole in their answer. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and mark scheme for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 80 
Assessment Objectives 
 
 
Students must: 
% in GCE  
A Level 
AO1 Interpret musical ideas through performing, with technical 
and expressive control and an understanding of style and 
context 
30 
AO2 Create and develop musical ideas with technical and 
expressive control and coherence 
30 
AO3 Demonstrate and apply musical knowledge 10 
AO4 Use analytical and appraising skills to make evaluative and 
critical judgements about music 
30 
Total 100 
 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
Component Assessment Objectives Total % for all 
Assessment 
Objectives AO1 % AO2 % AO3 % AO4 % 
Component 1: Performing 30 0 0 0 30 
Component 2: Composing 0 30 0 0 30 
Component 3: Appraising 0 0 10 30 40 
Total for GCE A Level 30 30 10 30 100 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 81 
3 Administration and general information 
Entries 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for this qualification can be 
found in our UK Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations 
officers and is available on our website: qualifications.pearson.com 
Discount code and performance tables 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more than one GCE qualification 
with the same discount code will have only one of the grades they achieve counted for 
the purpose of the school and college performance tables. This will be the grade for 
the larger qualification (i.e. the A Level grade rather than the AS grade). If the 
qualifications are the same size, then the better grade will be counted (please see 
Appendix 9: Codes). 
Students should be advised that if they take two GCE qualifications with the same 
discount code, colleges, universities and employers they wish to progress to are likely 
to take the view that this achievement is equivalent to only one GCE. The same view 
may be taken if students take two GCE qualifications that have different discount 
codes but have significant overlap of content. Students or their advisers who have any 
doubts about their subject combinations should check with the institution they wish 
to progress to before embarking on their programmes. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 82 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special 
consideration and malpractice 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality policy requires all students 
to have equal opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our 
qualifications to be awarded in a way that is fair to every student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the Equality Act 2010) are 
not, when they are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in 
comparison to students who do not share that characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification 
and that this achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their 
peers. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be available in English. All student work must be 
in English. 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with 
special educational needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to: 
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the 
assessment. 
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an 
individual student with a disability, without affecting the integrity of the assessment. 
Access arrangements are the principal way in which awarding bodies comply with the 
duty under the Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students 
will then know what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for 
assessment.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 83 
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable 
adjustments where a person with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage 
in undertaking an assessment. The awarding organisation is required to take 
reasonable steps to overcome that disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be unique to that individual and 
therefore might not be in the list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of 
factors, which will include: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other 
students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding 
organisation, timeframes or affects the security or integrity of the assessment. This is 
because the adjustment is not ‘reasonable’. 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student's mark or grade 
to reflect temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the 
examination/assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a 
material effect on a candidate’s ability to take an assessment or demonstrate their 
level of attainment in an assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to apply for access 
arrangements and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and 
special consideration, please refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 84 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that compromises or seeks to 
compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in controlled assessments discovered before the candidate has 
signed the declaration of authentication form does not need to be reported to 
Pearson. 
Candidate malpractice found in controlled assessments after the declaration of 
authenticity has been signed, and in examinations must be reported to Pearson on a 
JCQ Form M1 (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice).  
The form should be emailed to candidatemalpractice@pearson.com. Please provide 
as much information and supporting documentation as possible. Note that the final 
decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report candidate malpractice constitutes staff or centre malpractice.  
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and 
maladministration of our qualifications. As with candidate malpractice, staff and 
centre malpractice is any act that compromises or seeks to compromise the process 
of assessment or undermines the integrity of the qualifications or the validity of 
results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported 
immediately, before any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson on a  
JCQ Form M2(a) (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice).  
The form, supporting documentation and as much information as possible should be 
emailed to pqsmalpractice@pearson.com. Note that the final decision regarding 
appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the 
document General and Vocational Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations 
and Assessments Policies and Procedures, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-
office/malpractice. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 85 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to comply with the 
requirements of Ofqual's General Conditions of Recognition. 
The raw marks for components 1, 2 and 3 in this qualification will be scaled by 
Pearson to represent the relative weighting of 30% for Component 1, 30% for 
Component 2 and 40% for Component 3.  
 
Component Weighting  Raw marks Scaling factor Scaling mark 
1 30% 60 1.25 75 
2 30% 60 1.25 75 
3 40% 100 1.00 100 
 
This A Level qualification will be graded and certificated on a six-grade scale from A* 
to E using the total subject mark. Individual components are not graded. 
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum judged by Pearson to  
be of sufficient standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified  
U result. 
The first certification opportunity for this qualification will be 2018. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 86 
Student recruitment and progression 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this qualification. 
Students who would benefit most from studying this qualification are likely to have a 
Level 2 qualification such as a GCSE in Music. 
Progression 
Students can progress from this qualification to: 
● further study of music in higher education 
● vocational courses such as the BTEC National in Music and Music Technology 
● apprenticeships or other training 
● employment in a related sector. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 87 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Performance Authentication Sheet 89 
Appendix 2: Composing Authentication Sheet 89 
Appendix 3: Music vocabulary list 90 
Appendix 4: Suggested pieces of other music 98 
Appendix 5: Command word taxonomy 99 
Appendix 6: The context for the development of this qualification 100 
Appendix 7: Transferable skills 102 
Appendix 8: Level 3 Extended Project qualification 104 
Appendix 9: Codes 106 
Appendix 10: Mark penalty tables for submissions not meeting the minimum 
assessment time 107 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 88 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 89 
Appendix 1: Performance Authentication Sheet 
The Performance Authentication Sheet (PAS) must be completed by the teacher, and 
signed by the student and teacher, authenticating that the work is the student’s own. 
The form includes space to record the total duration of the student’s work, as well as 
the title, composer and instrument to be assessed for each piece.  
Please download the form from our website.  
 
Appendix 2: Composing Authentication Sheet 
The Composing Authentication Sheet (CAS) must be completed by the teacher, and 
signed by the student and teacher, authenticating that the work is the student’s own. 
The form includes space to record the titles of the free piece and/or the chosen 
brief(s), as well as the duration, audience/occasion and intended purpose/style of 
each piece.  
Please download the form from our website
.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 90 
Appendix 3: Music vocabulary list 
This music vocabulary list is vocabulary and terminology that supports the learning 
of musical elements, context and language. This list indicates the level and scope of 
technical language expected from students at this level. The list is not exhaustive. 
The words listed may appear in the question paper and students should, therefore, 
understand them. 
Various words and expressions commonly used in performing, composing and 
appraising music are not included. These include names of note values (crotchet, 
minim, etc.) and common performance directions (Allegro, crescendo, etc.). 
For words and terms not defined below, and/or for further amplification, please 
refer to The Harvard Dictionary of Music (4th edition, editor D.M. Randel, Harvard 
University Press, 2003) and/or The Rhinegold Dictionary of Music in Sound by  
D. Bowman (Rhinegold Education, 2002). 
 
Word Definition 
Organisation of 
pitch (melodically 
and harmonically) 
‘Pitch’ refers how high or low a sound is 
Augmented 6th chord A chord containing the interval of an augmented 6th (e.g.  
A flat to F sharp in the chord A flat, C, E flat, F sharp) 
Cadence  The chords that conclude a musical phrase (e.g. a perfect 
cadence with chords V‒I or an imperfect cadence with I (or 
other non-dominant chord) and V) 
Chord The simultaneous sounding together of two or more notes 
Circle of fifths A chord progression where the root of each chord is a 5th 
lower (or a 4th higher) than its predecessor (e.g. in C major 
with chords of C F Bdim Em Am Dm G C). In practice, 
segments of the circle of 5ths (rather than complete circles) 
are often used 
Chord sequence A series of chords, usually repeated (e.g. in a 12-bar blues) 
Diminished 7th chord A chord consisting of three superimposed minor 3rds (e.g.  
C sharp, E, G, B flat) 
Drone Especially in non-classical genres, the extended sustaining 
or repeating of a note or a harmonic interval (notably a 
perfect 5th) 
Harmony Successions of chords (or sometimes refers to single 
chords) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 91 
Word Definition 
Melody A melody (or ‘melodic line’) is a succession of single sounds 
– most frequently an individual strand or part within a fuller 
musical texture. A melody is usually ‘tuneful’ or otherwise 
prominent or memorable 
Neapolitan 6th chord The first inversion of the triad on the flattened supertonic 
(usually in a minor key – as, for example, D, F, B flat in  
A minor) 
Ornamentation The process of elaborating or decorating musical material 
(particularly a melody). Includes conventional ornaments 
such as trills and turns 
Ostinato A short musical pattern repeated throughout a section or 
complete piece 
Pedal (or Pedal point) A note (usually in the bass, and generally either the tonic or 
dominant of the key) which is sustained or repeated while 
chords change, often resulting in dissonance 
Riff Similar to ostinato, but applied to popular styles of music 
Secondary dominant A dominant seventh chord that resolves onto a scale degree 
other than the tonic (e.g. in C major, the chord consisting of 
D, F sharp (a chromatic note), A and C is ‘V7 of V’, the 
dominant of the dominant  
Sequence Repetition of a melody (or an harmonic progression) but at 
different pitch level(s) rather than at the same pitch 
Theme A melody (or occasionally some other form of musical 
material) on which part or all of a piece is based 
Tonality The relationship of notes within a scale or mode to a 
principal note (the tonic or final). A wider term than key, but 
often used synonymously with it 
Atonal Absence of tonality or key 
Chromatic Chromatic notes are those progressing by semitones, 
especially to a tone having the same letter name, e.g. C to  
C sharp 
Key A form of tonality based on major and minor scales 
Major Based on major scales, with a major 3rd between scale 
degrees 1 and 3 
Minor Based on minor scales, with a minor 3rd between scale 
degrees 1 and 3 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 92 
Word Definition 
Modal Tonality based on modes (precursors of modern scales –  
of several types, each with a different series of tones and 
semitones) 
Modulation Change of key 
Pentatonic Based on a five-note scale (often equivalent to scale 
degrees 1, 2, 3, 5, 6 of a major scale, or 1, 3, 4, 5, (flat) 7 of a 
minor scale) 
Form, structure The overall shape of a composition (e.g. binary, ternary, 
rondo). ‘Form’ and ‘structure’ are largely synonymous 
Arch form A form which is broadly symmetrical. In a sense ternary 
(ABA) is an arch form, but the term is normally applied to 
longer patterns such as ABCBA 
Da capo A da capo song or aria is ternary (ABA), the second A being 
signalled by the words ‘da capo’ (= ‘from the beginning’), 
with ‘Fine’ marking its end 
Fugue A contrapuntal piece for two or more instrumental or vocal 
parts, based on a theme (or ‘subject’) which is imitated at 
different pitches and in different key(s). ‘Fugue’ may be 
regarded as a type of texture rather than as a form 
Sonata form A large-scale form which evolved in the Classical period. It 
combines elements of binary form, and (in having 
exposition, development and recapitulation) ternary form 
Strophic A strophic song has the same (or very similar) music for 
each stanza of the poem being set. (A song in which some 
or all stanzas are set differently is ‘through-composed’) 
Verse/chorus A common pattern in popular songs particularly. There are 
‘verses’ (with different text but the same or similar music) 
and a ‘chorus’ repeated after some or all verses with 
recurring text, and usually a different melody and/or 
different scoring 
Sonority The nature and quality of musical sounds 
Articulation The degree to which a note is separated from the note that 
follows it (ranging from minimal (legato) to much greater 
(staccato or staccatissimo)) 
Timbre The particular tone colour of an instrument or voice 
Texture The number of parts in a piece of music and how they relate 
to one another. Several types of texture are listed below 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 93 
Word Definition 
Accompaniment Musical background to a principal part or parts (e.g. piano 
accompanying a solo singer) 
Fugue See ‘Structure’ 
Heterophony Where two or more parts play the same melodic line 
simultaneously, but there are small individual variations 
Homophony A widely-used type of texture consisting of a melody part 
and other subsidiary (accompanying) parts moving together 
Monophony Music in which only one note is heard at a time – a single 
melodic line 
Polyphony In one sense any texture with two or more parts, but 
commonly used as a synonym for ‘counterpoint’ where 
there are two or more simultaneous and largely 
independent melody lines 
Imitation Two or more parts share the same melodic idea (not 
necessarily in full, exactly or at the same pitch). Each new 
part enters separately, the preceding one continuing with 
shared or new material 
Tempo, metre and 
rhythm 
‘Tempo’ is the speed of the music. ‘Metre’, often indicated by 
a time signature, concerns the pattern and number of 
strong and weak beats (e.g. 2/4 metre has two crotchets per 
bar, the first ‘strong’, the second ‘weak’). 
Additive rhythm Chiefly where bars consist of units of unequal length, either 
in an ‘irregular’ metre such as 7/8, or in a ‘regular’ metre 
such as 4/4 with, for example, groups of 3, 3 and 2 quavers 
Cross rhythm Cross rhythm is the effect produced when two conflicting 
rhythms are heard together 
Dotted rhythm The term ‘dotted rhythm’ is usually applied to a pair of 
notes consisting of a dotted note and a shorter note (the 
two making up a complete beat or number of beats), or to 
several successive such pairs of notes 
Duration In rhythmic terms, the length of a note 
Polyrhythm Simultaneous use of two different metres (or two very 
different rhythms)  
Swung rhythm Two notes of the same value (usually quavers) are played 
with the first lengthened and the second correspondingly 
shortened (as often in jazz) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 94 
Word Definition 
Syncopation A ‘strong’ or stressed note occurs on a part of a bar or beat 
that would normally be ‘weak’ or unstressed 
Triplets Three notes of equal value taking the time normally 
occupied by two notes of the same written value (or by one 
undotted note of the next highest value) 
Dynamics The changes in volume of musical sound(s), and also the 
symbols used in a score to indicate volume (e.g. f and p) 
Other terms (performance, composition, presentation of scores) 
Backing track A recorded musical accompaniment, especially one for a 
soloist to play or sing along with 
Con sordini With the use of a mute 
DJ performances D[isc] J[ockeys] use special musical performance techniques 
(e.g. use of multiple turntables, turntable scratching) that 
are acceptable under the scheme of assessment 
Double (verb) Doubling occurs where one performer consistently plays or 
sings the same notes as another – strictly speaking at the 
same octave, but duplication at the octave may be involved 
Flutter-tonguing Almost self-explanatory: wind players (especially flautists) 
produce a special ‘whirring’ effect by fluttering the tongue 
Forces The instrument(s) and/or voice(s) that perform the music 
Graphic score Graphic scores, particularly used in experimental music, 
employ visual symbols of the composer’s choice instead of 
(or sometimes together with) the traditional musical 
symbols of staff notation 
Improvisation A piece composed as it is performed, although frequently 
based on a pre-conceived ‘stimulus’ such as a melodic 
theme or chord scheme 
Lead sheet An outline form of notation for popular styles of music, with 
the melody (in staff notation), lyrics, and chord symbols 
Live electro-acoustic 
sound diffusions 
Electro-acoustic music involves sounds not available from 
acoustic instruments, accessed via electronic technology. It 
may, however, be performed live via a sound diffusion 
system 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 95 
Word Definition 
MIDI Acronym (Musical Instrument Digital Interface). A means 
whereby devices such as electronic musical instruments 
and computers can connect and communicate with one 
another 
Phrasing The correct observance of divisions between whole phrases 
and sometimes shorter groups of notes (often to accord 
with a composer’s phrase markings) 
Professional 
reference recording 
A recording of a piece submitted for Component 1 in lieu of 
a score – with the performance and the recording of 
professional standard 
Screenshot A recorded image from a computer screen – normally 
requiring some form of labelling or annotation if displaying 
the operations of sequencing software 
Sequenced 
compositions 
Compositions produced mainly or entirely via electronic 
sequencing software 
Solo A complete piece (or a section) for one player or singer with 
no accompaniment, or for one player or singer with 
accompaniment 
Sul ponticello A direction for stringed instruments to play with the bow 
kept near to or on the bridge 
Tab(lature) Notation other than staff notation with letters, numbers or 
other conventional signs – today used particularly by 
guitarists 
Tone quality The quality of a performer’s sound (which may be ‘rich’, 
‘rounded’, ‘thin’, etc.) 
Underscoring In films, the provision of music to accompany dialogue or 
visual scenes and emphasise moods and enhance 
atmosphere 
Vocal score For a work for voices and orchestra, a vocal score has the 
voice parts and a keyboard reduction of the orchestral part 
(the latter often annotated to give some indication of the 
scoring) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 96 
Word Definition 
Historical periods, styles and genres 
Aleatoric In aleatoric (or aleatory) music aspect(s) of composition 
normally under the composer’s control (e.g. aspects of 
pitch, rhythm or even form) are left to chance and/or to the 
choice of the performer(s) 
Ballade  A type of virtuosic one-movement composition for piano 
pioneered by Chopin 
Baroque Refers to music in the Western Classical Tradition from 
c1600 to c1750 
Bhangra Strictly relates to music and dance from the Punjab, but is 
also applied to some related styles of popular music that 
may show the influence of reggae and electronic dance 
music 
Cantata A work (sacred or secular, and particularly associated with 
the baroque period) in several movements for singer(s) and 
instruments 
Chorale A type of hymn traditionally sung in Lutheran churches in 
Germany. Harmonising chorale melodies has long been an 
academic discipline in music 
Classical  
(with upper-case C) 
Refers to music in the Western Classical Tradition from 
c1750 to c1820 
classical  
(with lower-case c) 
Describes music from the Western Classical Tradition 
generally (Baroque, Classical, Romantic, etc.) 
Electronic music Music produced by and for electronic musical instruments 
and other forms of electronic technology, including 
computers 
Expressionist Adjective describing an early 20th-century movement in the 
arts (chiefly in Austria and Germany). Expressionist music 
portrayed extravagant (often dark) emotional states, and is 
often associated with free atonality 
Fusion The blending of more than one musical style or culture to 
create a new ‘fused’ sound (e.g. Afro-Cuban) 
Gamelan Term applied to Indonesian orchestras (largely consisting of 
gongs and metallophones) and to the music composed for 
them 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 97 
Word Definition 
Jazz Originally a fusion of African and North American styles. A 
number of varieties of jazz have developed over time, 
including New Orleans, swing, bebop 
Lied Art song with German text, chiefly from the Romantic 
period. Plural: ‘Lieder’ 
Mélodie Art song with French text, composed chiefly from the mid-
19th century to the early 20th century 
Musical theatre Musical theatre integrates songs, spoken dialogue, acting, 
and dance, within a popular idiom. ‘Musicals’ are extended 
pieces of musical theatre from which favourite songs are 
often performed separately 
Oral tradition Music learnt by listening and repeating, and passed on 
orally 
Oratorio A multi-movement work for soloists, choir and orchestra, on 
a religious text 
Programmatic music A type of art music (sometimes known as ‘programme 
music’) characteristic principally of the Romantic period, and 
generally for orchestra, in which the composer depicts a 
pre-conceived series of extra-musical events or ideas. (The 
opposite of ‘absolute’ music, which is non-representational) 
Rag (Or ‘raga’/’raag’.) In Indian classical music a melodic 
framework on which improvisations and compositions are 
based (not to be confused with ‘rag’ or ‘ragtime’ in Western 
music) 
Rock Emerged in the 1950s as ‘rock and roll’, and subsequently 
developed into a range of different popular styles 
Romantic Refers to music in the Western Classical Tradition from 
c1820 to c1900 
Serial(ist) In a serial composition the composer manipulates a set of 
notes (often all twelve notes of the chromatic scale) to 
establish thematic unity, within a piece, most commonly 
one without a clear sense of traditional tonality. The term 
originated in the early 20th century 
Sonata A composition for one or more solo instruments, usually in 
three or four movements 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 98 
Appendix 4: Suggested pieces of other music 
The suggested pieces of other music provide examples of music from each area of 
study for component 3.  
They are not compulsory to study, however these pieces can support students in 
appraising pieces of unfamiliar music and in understanding the music from the areas 
of study in a wider context. The list is only a suggestion, students can make their own 
selection to supplement their understanding of the areas of study. 
Please download the list from our website. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 99 
Appendix 5: Command word taxonomy 
The following table lists the command words that will appear in question papers, 
along with their definitions. 
 
Command word Definition  
State, give, name, 
identify, list 
Give one or more points. Recall or find factual information 
Complete Dictation questions, for example, to fill in blanks on a score 
Describe Give points which may or may not be linked 
When linked there will be a correct order 
Explain Give points that are linked to a justification or extension 
May be describing the effect something creates 
Compare Make points about the similarities and differences 
Make relative judgements 
Discuss Identify the issue/situation/problem/argument that is being 
assessed within the question 
Explore all aspects of an issue/situation/problem/argument 
Investigate the issue/situation/problem/argument by 
reasoning or argument 
Analyse Examine, dissect musical elements in detail 
Focus on individual musical elements and how they combine 
to create an effect/achieve a purpose 
Evaluate Make judgements against parameters 
Draw conclusions 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 100 
Appendix 6: The context for the development of 
this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] 
and our ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
● reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with 
those taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
● consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including higher 
education academics, teachers and employers to ensure this qualification is 
suitable for a UK context 
● reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in 
their documents GCE Qualification Level Conditions and Requirements and GCE Subject 
Level Conditions and Requirements for Music, published in March 2015. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification Principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
• demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning and measuring higher-order 
skills 
• rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and valid assessment tasks and 
processes, and generating confidence in end users of the knowledge, skills and competencies of certified students 
• inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students develop at different rates and have 
different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
• empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills, see Appendix 7. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 101 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
May 2014 
“ The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important change to the 
education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications will assist them in helping 
their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an ‘Expert 
Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or because of our 
experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the world as diverse as 
Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification development 
process that has included: 
• Extensive international comparability of subject content against the highest-performing 
jurisdictions in the world 
• Benchmarking assessments against UK and overseas providers to ensure that they are at the 
right level of demand 
• Establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-specific 
expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
• Subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual accreditation 
criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future oriented. The 
design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, meaning learner outcomes 
have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a learner’s success 
in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident that we have supported the 
development of qualifications that are outstanding for their coherence, thoroughness and 
attention to detail and can be regarded as representing world-class best practice. 
”  
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Lee Sing Kong  
Director, National Institute of Education, 
Singapore 
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, Switzerland 
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
 
All titles correct as at May 2014 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 102 
Appendix 7: Transferable skills 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently 
flagged the need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable 
them to respond with confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the 
world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines skills, 
or competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that can be 
learned and that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform an 
activity or task and can be built upon and extended through learning.’
[1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected and 
evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this 
process, we identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the most 
evidence-based and robust skills framework. We adapted the framework slightly to 
include the Program for International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT Literacy and 
Collaborative Problem Solving (CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves[2]: 
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve 
general cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and communicate[3]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[1] OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012) 
[2] Koenig J A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop (National Academies Press, 2011) 
[3] PISA – The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy (2011) 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 103 
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, oral communication, written communication, 
assertive communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, service 
orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared 
understanding, taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team 
organisation. 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work 
stress, adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, 
and physical adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual 
teams, work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and 
able to acquire new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher 
education, as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the 
teaching and learning of this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning 
materials, developed with stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 104 
Appendix 8: Level 3 Extended Project qualification 
What is the Extended Project? 
The Extended Project is a standalone qualification that can be taken alongside GCEs. 
It supports the development of independent learning skills and helps to prepare 
students for their next step – whether that be higher education study or 
employment. The qualification:  
● is recognised by higher education for the skills it develops  
● is worth half of an Advanced GCE qualification at grades A*–E  
● carries UCAS points for university entry.  
The Extended Project encourages students to develop skills in the following areas: 
research, critical thinking, extended writing and project management. Students 
identify and agree a topic area of their choice for in-depth study (which may or may 
not be related to a GCE subject they are already studying), guided by their teacher.  
Students can choose from one of four approaches to produce:  
● a dissertation (for example an investigation based on predominately secondary 
research)  
● an investigation/field study (for example a practical experiment)  
● a performance (for example in music, drama or sport)  
● an artefact (for example creating a sculpture in response to a client brief or 
solving an engineering problem).  
The qualification is non-examined-assessment based and students are assessed on 
the skills of managing, planning and evaluating their project. Students will research 
their topic, develop skills to review and evaluate the information, and then present 
the final outcome of their project. 
The Extended Project has 120 guided learning hours (GLH) consisting of a 40-GLH 
taught element that includes teaching the technical skills (for example research 
skills) and an 80-GLH guided element that includes mentoring students through the 
project work. The qualification is 100% internally assessed and externally 
moderated. 
How to link the Extended Project with music  
The Extended Project creates the opportunity to develop transferable skills for 
progression to higher education and to the workplace, through the exploration of 
either an area of personal interest or a topic of interest from within the music 
qualification content.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 105 
Students can use the Extended Project to build in-depth knowledge and 
understanding of a musician or composer, or of a specific style, time period or 
movement. 
Here are some suggestions: 
● In-depth investigation into a musician and the impact they had on music of a 
particular type (such as jazz or pop) 
● Further investigation into the style of one of the A level Music set works 
● Investigating composition methods and traditional sequencing. 
Types of Extended Project related to music 
● How can live performance engage an audience in the current technological age? 
● Is music effective as a tool for motivating workers? 
● How can we make classical texts popular to new audiences? 
● How can we express the rhythms of eastern cultures and communicate them to a 
western audience? 
Using the Extended Project to support breadth and depth  
In the Extended Project, students are assessed on the quality of the work they 
produce and the skills they develop and demonstrate through completing this work. 
Students should demonstrate that they have extended themselves in some 
significant way beyond what they have been studying in music. Students can 
demonstrate extension in one or more dimensions:  
● deepening understanding – where a student explores a topic in greater depth 
than in the specification content. This could be an in-depth exploration of one 
aspect of a composer, musical style or genre. 
● broadening skills – where a student learns or develops a new skill. This might be 
related to performing, composing or appraising, and developing additional skills 
or techniques in these areas. 
● widening perspectives – where the student’s project spans different subjects. A 
student studying music with history may wish to research the impact of major 
historical events on the development of music. 
A wide range of information to support the delivery and assessment of the Extended 
Project, including the specification, teacher guidance for all aspects, an editable 
scheme of work and exemplars for all four approaches, can be found on our 
website. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 106 
Appendix 9: Codes 
 
Type of code Use of code Code 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for 
performance tables is assigned a 
discount code indicating the subject 
area to which it belongs. 
Discount codes are published by 
DfE.  
Please see the GOV.UK 
website* 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework 
(RQF) codes 
Each qualification title is allocated 
an Ofqual Regulated Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) code.  
The RQF code is known as a 
Qualification Number (QN). This is 
the code that features in the DfE 
Section 96 and on the LARA as being 
eligible for 16–18 and 19+ funding, 
and is to be used for all qualification 
funding purposes. The QN will 
appear on students’ final 
certification documentation. 
The QN for this 
qualification is: 
601/7928/4 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres 
to enter students for a qualification. 
Centres will need to use the entry 
codes only when claiming students’ 
qualifications. 
A Level – 9MU0 
Component 
codes 
These codes are provided for 
reference purposes. Students do 
not need to be entered for 
individual components. 
Component 1: 9MU0/01 
Component 2: 9MU0/02 
Component 3: 9MU0/03 
*https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/16-to-19-qualifications-discount-
codes-and-point-scores 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 107 
Appendix 10: Mark penalty tables for submissions 
not meeting the minimum assessment time 
Component 1: Performance  
The minimum assessment time is eight minutes. The following table will be applied 
by Pearson for any work that is below the minimum assessment time. 
 
Total time of the performance(s) 
(minutes and seconds) 
Percentage applied to 
final mark 
7:45 to 7:59 96.88%  
7:30 to 7:44 93.75%  
7:15 to 7:29 90.63%  
7:00 to 7:14 87.50%  
6:45 to 6:59 84.38%  
6:30 to 6:44 81.25%  
6:15 to 6:29 78.13% 
6:00 to 6:14 75.00%  
5:45 to 5:59 71.88%  
5:30 to 5:44 68.75%  
5:15 to 5:29 65.63%  
5:00 to 5:14 62.50%  
4:45 to 4:59 59.38%  
4:30 to 4:44 56.25%  
4:15 to 4:29 53.13%  
4:00 to 4:14 50.00%  
3:45 to 3:59 46.88% 
3:30 to 3:44 43.75% 
3:15 to 3:29 40.63% 
3:00 to 3:14 37.50% 
2:45 to 2:59 34.38% 
2:30 to 2:44 31.25% 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification 
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 108 
Total time of the performance(s) 
(minutes and seconds) 
Percentage applied to 
final mark 
2:15 to 2:29 28.13% 
2:00 to 2:14 25.00% 
1:45 to 1:59 21.88% 
1:30 to 1:44 18.75% 
1:15 to 1:29 15.63% 
1:00 to 1:14 12.50% 
0:45 to 0:59 9.38% 
0:30 to 0:44 6.25% 
0:15 to 0:29 3.13% 
0:00 to 0:14 0.00%  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Music – Specification  
Issue 7 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 109 
Component 2: Composition  
The minimum assessment time is six minutes. The following table will be applied by 
Pearson for any work that is below the minimum assessment time. 
 
Total time of the compositions 
(minutes and seconds) 
Percentage applied to 
final mark 
5:45 to 5:59 95.83%  
5:30 to 5:44 91.67% 
5:15 to 5:29 87.50%  
5:00 to 5:14 83.33%  
4:45 to 4:59 79.17%  
4:30 to 4:44 75.00%  
4:15 to 4:29 70.83%  
4:00 to 4:14 66.67%  
3:45 to 3:59 62.50%  
3:30 to 3:44 58.33%  
3:15 to 3:29 54.17%  
3:00 to 3:14 50.00%  
2:45 to 2:59 45.83% 
2:30 to 2:44 41.67% 
2:15 to 2:29 37.50% 
2:00 to 2:14 33.33% 
1:45 to 1:59 29.17% 
1:30 to 1:44 25.00% 
1:15 to 1:29 20.83% 
1:00 to 1:14 16.67% 
0:45 to 0:59 12.50% 
0:30 to 0:44 8.33% 
0:15 to 0:29 4.17% 
0:00 to 0:14 0.00% 
 
 
Db021221 9781446931912_GCE_AL_2016_L3_MUSIC_SPEC_ISS7.DOCX.1–118/0 

 
 
Edexcel, BTEC and LCCI qualifications 
Edexcel, BTEC and LCCI qualifications are awarded by Pearson, the UK’s largest awarding body offering 
academic and vocational qualifications that are globally recognised and benchmarked. For further 
information, please visit our qualifications website at qualifications.pearson.com. Alternatively, you can 
get in touch with us using the details on our contact us page at qualifications.pearson.com/contactus 
 
About Pearson 
Pearson is the world's leading learning company, with 22,500 employees in more than 70 countries 
working to help people of all ages to make measurable progress in their lives through learning. We put 
the learner at the centre of everything we do, because wherever learning flourishes, so do people. Find 
out more about how we can help you and your learners at qualifications.pearson.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References to third party materials made in this specification are made in good faith. Pearson does not 
endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may be subject to change, or 
any opinions expressed therein. (Materials may include textbooks, journals, magazines and other 
publications and websites.) 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
 
ISBN 978 1 446 93191 2 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2021 
 
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office:  80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121
