A Level 
English 
Language
Specification
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language (9EN0)
First teaching from September 2015
First certification from 2017 Issue 6
 
 
About Pearson 
We are the world’s leading learning company operating in countries all around the 
world. We provide content, assessment and digital services to learners, educational 
institutions, employers, governments and other partners globally. We are 
committed to helping equip learners with the skills they need to enhance their 
employability prospects and to succeed in the changing world of work. We believe 
that wherever learning flourishes so do people. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References to third party materials made in this specification are made in good 
faith. Pearson does not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of 
materials, which may be subject to change, or any opinions expressed therein. 
(Materials may include textbooks, journals, magazines and other publications and 
websites.) 
 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
 
ISBN 978 1 446 94480 6 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2024 
 
 
Summary of Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE 
in English Language specification 
Issue 6 
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this current 
issue  
Page 
number  
Non-examination assessment authentication sheet 
This has been amended to include a statement regarding the use of AI. 
45–46 
 
If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, contact us via 
our website at: qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/contact-us.html. 
 

 
 
 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
May 2014 
“The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important 
change to the education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications 
will assist them in helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an 
‘Expert Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or because of 
our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the world as diverse as 
Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification 
development process that has included: 
● extensive international comparability of subject content against the highest-
performing jurisdictions in the world 
● benchmarking assessments against UK and overseas providers to ensure that 
they are at the right level of demand 
● establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-
specific expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
● subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future 
oriented. The design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, 
meaning learner outcomes have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a 
learner’s success in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident 
that we have supported the development of qualifications that are outstanding for 
their coherence, thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as 
representing world-class best practice.
” 
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Lee Sing Kong 
Director, National Institute of 
Education, Singapore 
  
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
  
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
All titles correct as of May 2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language is designed for use 
in schools and colleges. It is part of a suite of GCE qualifications offered by Pearson. 
Purpose of the specification 
This specification sets out: 
● the objectives of the qualification 
● any other qualification(s) that a student must have completed before taking the 
qualification 
● any prior knowledge and skills that the student is required to have before taking 
the qualification 
● any other requirements that a student must have satisfied before they will be 
assessed or before the qualification will be awarded 
● the knowledge and understanding that will be assessed as part of the 
qualification 
● the method of assessment and any associated requirements relating to it 
● the criteria against which a student’s level of attainment will be measured (such 
as assessment criteria). 
 
 
Rationale 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language meets the 
following purposes, which fulfil those defined by the Office of Qualifications and 
Examinations Regulation (Ofqual) for GCE qualifications in their GCE Qualification 
Level Conditions and Requirements document, published in April 2014. 
The purposes of this qualification are to: 
● define and assess achievement of the knowledge, skills and understanding that 
will be needed by students planning to progress to undergraduate study at a UK 
higher education establishment, particularly (although not only) in the same 
subject area, for example English Language, Linguistics, English  
● set out a robust and internationally comparable post-16 academic course of 
study to develop that knowledge, skills and understanding 
● enable UK universities to accurately identify the level of attainment of students 
● provide a basis for school and college accountability measures at age 18 
● provide a benchmark of academic ability for employers. 
Qualification aims and objectives 
The aims and objectives of the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English 
Language are to enable students to: 
● develop and apply their understanding of the concepts and methods appropriate 
for the analysis and study of language 
● explore data and examples of language in use 
● engage creatively and critically with a varied programme for the study of 
English 
● develop their skills as producers and interpreters of language 
● independently investigate language in use. 
 
 
The context for the development of this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] 
and our ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
● reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with 
those taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
● consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including learned 
bodies, subject associations, higher-education academics, teachers and 
employers to ensure this qualification is suitable for a UK context 
● reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in 
their documents GCE Qualification Level Conditions and Requirements and GCE 
Subject Level Conditions and Requirements for English Language, published in 
April 2014. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
● demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning and 
measuring higher-order skills 
● rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and valid 
assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in end users of the knowledge, skills 
and competencies of certified students 
● inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students develop at 
different rates and have different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
● empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills,  
see Appendix 1. 
 

 
 
Contents 
Qualification at a glance 1 
Assessment Objectives and weightings 5 
Knowledge, skills and understanding 6 
Component 1: Language Variation 6 
Component 2: Child Language 9 
Component 3: Investigating Language 11 
Non-examination assessment – Crafting Language 14 
Marking, standardisation and moderation 23 
Security and backups 23 
Malpractice 23 
Further information 24 
Assessment 25 
Assessment summary 25 
Assessment Objectives and weightings 27 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 28 
Entry and assessment information 29 
Student entry 29 
Forbidden combinations, discount code and performance tables 29 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special 
consideration 29 
Equality Act 2010 and Pearson equality policy 31 
Synoptic assessment 31 
Awarding and reporting 32 
Language of assessment 32 
Other information 33 
Student recruitment 33 
Prior learning and other requirements 33 
Progression 33 
Relationship between Advanced Subsidiary GCE and Advanced GCE 34 
Relationship between GCSE and Advanced GCE 34 
Progression from GCSE to Advanced GCE 34 
Appendix 1: Transferable skills 37 
Appendix 2: Level 3 Extended Project qualification 39 
 
 
Appendix 3: Codes 43 
Appendix 4: Non-examination Assessment Authentication 
Sheet 45 
Appendix 5: English phonemic reference sheet 47 
Appendix 6: Transcription mark key 49 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 1 
Qualification at a glance 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language consists of three 
externally examined components and one non-examination assessment component. 
Students must complete all assessment in May/June in any single year. 
Component 1: Language Variation *Paper code: 9EN0/01  
● Externally assessed 
● Availability: May/June 
● First assessment: 2017 
35% of the 
total 
qualification 
Overview of content 
Students will explore: 
● how language varies depending on mode, field, function and audience 
● how language choices can create personal identities 
● language variation in English from c1550 (the beginnings of Early Modern 
English) to the present day. 
Overview of assessment 
● Written examination, lasting 2 hours 15 minutes. 
● Two sections: students answer the question in Section A and the question in 
Section B. 
● Total of 60 marks available – 30 marks per section. 
● Section A – Individual Variation: one question on two unseen 21st-century 
linked texts/data. Students produce an extended comparative response (AO1, 
AO2, AO3, AO4 assessed). 
● Section B – Variation over Time: one question on two thematically linked 
unseen texts/data, from two different periods. Students produce an extended 
comparative response (AO1, AO2, AO3, AO4 assessed). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
2 
 
Component 2: Child Language *Paper code: 9EN0/02  
● Externally assessed 
● Availability: May/June 
● First assessment: 2017 
20% of the 
total 
qualification 
Overview of content 
Students will explore: 
● spoken language acquisition and how children learn to write between the ages 
of 0 and 8 
● the relationship between spoken language acquisition and literacy skills that 
children are taught, including the beginnings of reading 
● appropriate theories of children’s language development. 
Overview of assessment 
● Written examination, lasting 1 hour 15 minutes**. 
● Total of 45 marks available. 
● One question based on a set of unseen data – either spoken or written. 
Students produce an extended response (AO1, AO2, AO3 assessed). 
**the change to the assessment time will be for the examination in summer 2020 
and for all other examinations thereafter. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 3 
 
Component 3: Investigating Language *Paper code: 9EN0/03 
● Externally assessed 
● Availability: May/June 
● First assessment: 2017 
25% of the 
total 
qualification 
Overview of content 
Students will: 
● select a research focus from five topic areas 
● develop their research and investigation skills 
● undertake a focused investigation 
● apply their knowledge of language levels and key language concepts developed 
throughout the whole course 
● develop their personal language specialism. 
A subtopic will be pre-released on the 1 December*** before the examination. 
The pre-released subtopic will provide a steer for students’ research and 
investigation to enable them to prepare for the external assessment. 
Overview of assessment 
● Written examination, lasting 1 hour 45 minutes. 
● Two sections: students answer one question from Section A and one question 
from Section B. 
● Total of 45 marks available: Section A question is 15 marks and Section B 
question is 30 marks. 
● Section A – one question on unseen data. Students must answer the question 
on the subtopic they have researched (AO1, AO2, AO3 assessed). 
● Section B – one evaluative question. Students must answer the question on 
the subtopic they have researched and must make connections with data from 
their investigation. Students produce an extended response (AO1, AO2, AO3, 
AO4 assessed). 
*** the change to the pre-release materials date will first come into effect for the 
2021 paper: the subtopics for this paper will be released on 1 December 2020.  
All subsequent series of this paper will also have a 1 December pre-release date. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
4 
 
Non-examination assessment: Crafting Language *Code: 9EN0/04 
● Internally assessed, externally moderated 
● Availability: May/June 
● First moderation: 2017 
20% of the 
total 
qualification 
Overview of content 
Students will: 
● research a selected genre 
● demonstrate their skills as writers within their selected genre, crafting texts for 
different audiences and/or purposes 
● reflect on their research and writing in an accompanying commentary. 
Overview of assessment 
Students produce two assignments: 
● Assignment 1: two pieces of original writing from the same genre, 
differentiated by function and/or audience (AO5 assessed).  
● Assignment 2: one commentary, reflecting on the two pieces of original  
writing produced and making connections with research undertaken  
(AO1, AO2, AO3, AO4 assessed). 
● Advisory total word count is 2500–3000 words: Assignment 1 is  
1500–2000 words and Assignment 2 is 1000 words. 
● Total of 50 marks available: Assignment 1 is 30 marks and Assignment 2 is  
20 marks. 
 
*See Appendix 3: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant 
to this qualification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 5 
Assessment Objectives and weightings 
 
Students must: 
% in 
GCE 
AO1 Apply appropriate methods of language analysis, using 
associated terminology and coherent written expression 24.4 
AO2 Demonstrate critical understanding of concepts and issues 
relevant to language use 
24.4 
AO3 Analyse and evaluate how contextual factors and language 
features are associated with the construction of meaning 
24.4 
AO4 Explore connections across texts, informed by linguistic 
concepts and methods 15 
AO5 Demonstrate expertise and creativity in the use of English to 
communicate in different ways 
Note: This Assessment Objective must be targeted with at 
least one of AO2, AO3 or AO4, either in the same task or in 
two or more linked tasks. 
12 
Total 100 
NB: total has been rounded down 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
6 
Knowledge, skills and understanding 
Component 1: Language Variation 
Overview 
This component introduces students to the ways in which language varies, 
depending on the contexts of production and reception. Students will explore and 
critically evaluate how language choices can create personal identities. They will 
also explore and critically evaluate how language varies over time. 
Learning outcomes 
Students are required to appropriately and systematically: 
● apply concepts relating to language variation to data drawn from written, 
spoken and multimodal discourse and from different time periods 
● apply critical skills to description, analysis and evaluation of a range of data and 
discourses, including data from different time periods 
● use and apply linguistic terminology accurately 
● show their understanding of historical, geographical, social and individual 
varieties of English 
● critically evaluate attitudes towards language and its users when discussing 
data, including texts from different time periods 
● synthesise and reflect on language knowledge drawn from different areas of 
their studies of English language. 
Content 
Throughout this component, students will focus on how language varies, depending 
on: 
● mode: the method of communication (spoken, written, multimodal) 
● field: the subject matter 
● function: the purpose 
● audience: the relationship between writers/speakers and readers/listeners. 
Students will study how the key language frameworks contribute to meaning in 
spoken and written English: 
● pragmatics: variation in meaning, depending on context 
● discourse: extended texts (written or spoken) in their context 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 7 
In addition to the key language frameworks, the following language levels also 
contribute to meaning in spoken and written English: 
● graphology: the writing system and the presentation of language 
● phonetics, phonology and prosody: speech sounds, sound effects and 
intonation  
● morphology: the structure of words 
● lexis: the vocabulary of a language and semantics: its meanings 
● syntax: the relationships between words in sentences. 
Please ensure that students are familiar with the English phonemic reference sheet 
in Appendix 5 and the transcription mark key in Appendix 6. The reference sheet 
and the mark key will be given to students in the examination. 
Individual Variation 
Students will explore how language choices reflect and construct the identity or 
identities of the user and vary depending on the contexts of production and 
reception. 
Students will apply appropriate methods of language analysis to a range of written, 
spoken or multimodal data from 21st-century sources, using the key language 
frameworks and levels. 
Students will demonstrate critical understanding of concepts and issues, exploring 
attitudes to language and using a descriptive approach to evaluate how an 
individual’s language choices are affected by: 
● the mode, field, function and audience 
● geographical factors 
● social factors, such as gender, age, ethnicity and other social identities. 
Variation Over Time 
Students will explore variation in the English language from c1550 (the beginnings 
of Early Modern English) to the present day. 
Students will apply appropriate methods of language analysis and demonstrate 
critical understanding of concepts and issues when evaluating a range of data. 
Students will explore: 
● the development of English as the national language 
● the cultural, social, political and technological influences that have changed 
English over time. 
Students will need to consider the effect of language variation over time across the 
language frameworks and levels, for example changes in: 
● the writing and spelling system (graphology and orthography) 
● pronunciation, evident in obsolete spelling and rhyme (phonology) 
● inflections, evident in verb endings and plurals (morphology) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
8 
● sentence structures (syntax) 
● vocabulary, evident in pronoun usage and the incorporation of words from other 
languages (lexis) 
● meaning (semantics) 
● the form (style) and structure of whole texts (discourse). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 9 
Component 2: Child Language 
Overview 
In this component, students will explore and critically evaluate the development of 
both speech and writing in children between the ages of 0 and 8. Students will 
focus on the spoken language acquisition of children and will explore how children 
learn to write. 
Learning outcomes 
Students are required to appropriately and systematically: 
● analyse and evaluate examples of children’s language using a descriptive 
approach 
● apply and evaluate relevant theories associated with the development of spoken 
and written language 
● analyse and evaluate how language development is influenced by the function 
and context of the language used. 
Content 
Students will understand the ways in which speech develops and the relationship 
between spoken language acquisition and the literacy skills children are taught, 
including the beginnings of reading and learning to write. Students will analyse both 
written and spoken data, demonstrating critical understanding of releveant 
children’s language development theories. 
Throughout this component, students will explore the following aspects of children’s 
spoken language acquisition: 
● the beginnings of speech 
● the acquisition and development of the sound system (phonetics) 
● how children understand the structure of words (morphology) 
● the development and extension of vocabulary (lexis) 
● how children understand the meanings of words (semantics) 
● the types of structures used by children at various stages of development and 
how children start to form larger structures (syntax) 
● the way children talk to adults and the way adults talk to children; the 
development of interactive and pragmatic skills (conversation). 
Students will also explore the following aspects of children’s written language 
development: 
● the transition from speech to writing: the use of drawing, gesture and writing to 
create meaning 
● early forms of writing such as drawing, scribbling, letter-like forms, random 
letters 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
10 
● the development of letter forms, capital letters, linearity and directionality; the 
link between letters, sounds and early spelling (graphology) 
● the effect of learnt reading strategies on spelling (morphology) 
● the vocabulary choices (lexis) and sentence structures (syntax) in early writing 
● the development of narrative and descriptive skills (discourse). 
Please ensure that students are familiar with the English phonemic reference sheet 
in Appendix 5 and the transcription mark key in Appendix 6. The reference sheet 
and the mark key will be given to students in the examination. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 11 
Component 3: Investigating Language 
Overview 
In this component, students will have the opportunity to develop their research and 
investigation skills. They will consolidate their knowledge of language frameworks 
and key language concepts gained from components 1, 2 and the non-examination 
assessment. 
Students will apply these skills to an area of language study that particularly 
interests them, selected from pre-released subtopics, in preparation for an 
externally assessed examination. 
This component is skills based, with the content being driven by individual students’ 
interests. Teachers must ensure that students are taught research and investigation 
skills and introduced to the relevant language topic areas. 
Learning outcomes 
Students are required to appropriately and systematically: 
● apply critical skills in description, analysis and evaluation of a range of data and 
discourses 
● use and apply linguistic terminology accurately 
● undertake independent investigations of language, selecting appropriate 
methods and techniques 
● critically evaluate attitudes towards language and its users, making connections 
with their investigation 
● synthesise and reflect on language knowledge drawn from different areas of 
their studies of English language. 
Content 
Students’ investigation skills are developed in the context of one of the following 
five topic areas: 
● Global English 
● Language and Gender Identity 
● Language and Journalism 
● Language and Power 
● Regional Language Variation. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
12 
Pre-release 
On 1 December before the examination, a subtopic will be pre-released on our 
website (www.edexcel.com) for each of the five topic areas *. The five pre-
released subtopics will provide a steer for students’ research and investigation and 
will include: 
● an introduction to the subtopic, for example the subtopic for ‘Global English’ in 
our Sample Assessment Materials is ‘South African English’  
● suggested research resources. 
The ‘suggested resources’ are guidance for students and are not definitive. 
Students can decide which resources to use but they are expected to research and 
investigate the topic beyond the suggested resources. 
The five subtopics for investigation will be different each year. 
Centres must ensure that they use the pre-released subtopic appropriate 
for the examination series their students will be sitting. 
*the change to the pre-release materials date will first come into effect for the 
2021 paper: the subtopics for this paper will be released on 1 December 2020.  
All subsequent series of this paper will also have a 1 December pre-release date. 
Research and investigation 
For this component, teaching should focus on developing students’ research and 
investigation skills. Students will be able to research their chosen subtopic 
independently when it is released in the January before the examination. 
Students should carry out a focused investigation and ensure that they have 
researched the following aspects of their chosen subtopic, as appropriate: 
● the origins/development 
● the main features 
● different varieties 
● changing attitudes 
● the influence of social/historical/cultural factors. 
Students will use their research, the observations made in their investigation and 
the data they gather to inform their response in the examination. 
Students cannot take any of their research or investigation data carried out as part 
of the pre-release into the examination. 
Topic details 
All prescribed subject content is covered in components 1 and 2 and the non-
examination assessment. Therefore, when teaching research and investigation skills 
before the subtopic is pre-released, teachers are welcome to introduce students to 
all five main topic areas below or focus on one or two.  
Global English 
This topic will explore aspects of varieties of global English, including those from 
outside the UK, such as Ireland, the Americas and the Caribbean, the Pacific and 
Australasia, Africa, South and Southeast Asia. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 13 
Language and Gender Identity 
This topic will explore social attitudes and how the forms and conventions of 
written, spoken and multimodal language can construct or reflect gender and 
sexual identities. 
Language and Journalism 
This topic will explore the many varieties of print and online journalism. Students 
will have opportunities to explore the influence of contextual factors, how language 
is crafted to meet the expectations of different audiences and purposes, and to 
consider notions of bias, subjectivity and objectivity. 
Language and Power 
This topic will explore the way language use in society can create and enforce 
power relationships. Students will explore aspects such as instrumental and 
influential power, political discourse, discourses in unequal power relationships, 
persuasion, prestige and politeness. 
Regional Language Variation 
This topic will explore English that varies regionally within the UK. Students will 
explore the historical aspects of regional variation, how and why language varies 
regionally, attitudes to regional variation, and variation within regional varieties. 
Synopticity in assessment 
In this component, students are required to apply their learning from across the 
qualification.  
In Section A students will respond to unseen data from their chosen subtopic. 
Students will synthesise and reflect on the language knowledge and understanding 
drawn from the other components in this qualification and from their research and 
investigation for this component. 
In Section B students will respond to an evaluative question on their chosen 
subtopic. 
Students will also analyse data and apply language concepts and methods of 
analysis to a range of data. They will make connections with their research and the 
observations from their investigation, critically evaluating attitudes towards 
language and its users.  
 
Please ensure that students are familiar with the English phonemic reference sheet 
in Appendix 5 and the transcription mark key in Appendix 6. The reference sheet 
and the mark key will be given to students in the examination. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
14 
Non-examination assessment – Crafting 
Language 
Overview 
In the non-examination assessment, students will develop their research skills as 
they explore their selected writing genre and will demonstrate their skills as writers, 
crafting texts for different audiences and purposes. They will also reflect on their 
work in an accompanying commentary, making connections with their research. 
Learning outcomes 
Students are required to appropriately and systematically: 
● demonstrate expertise and creativity in the use of English to communicate in 
different ways, drawing on their knowledge of the forms and structures of 
spoken or written English for different audiences and purposes 
● select and apply methods of language analysis in order to comment and reflect 
on their own writing using appropriate terminology and coherent, accurate 
written expression 
● demonstrate critical understanding of concepts and issues relevant to language 
use, including register and style 
● analyse and evaluate how contextual factors and language features are 
associated with the construction of meaning in stimulus texts and in their own 
writing 
● explore connections between their research and their writing, informed by 
linguistic concepts 
● synthesise and reflect on language knowledge and understanding drawn from 
different areas of their study of English Language 
● critically evaluate language use in their own texts and style models. 
Content 
Students will produce the following assignments: 
● Assignment 1: two pieces of original writing from the same genre, 
differentiated by function and/or audience (1500-2000 words) 
● Assignment 2: one commentary, reflecting on the two pieces they have 
produced and making connections with their research (1000 words). 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 15 
Assignment 1: Original writing 
Students will select one genre to research for their assignment. They will produce 
two pieces of writing in this genre, differentiated by function and/or audience. 
Examples of genres they might choose include: 
● feature articles 
● journalist interviews 
● speeches 
● scripted presentations 
● dramatic monologues 
● short stories 
● travel writing. 
 
Example 1: a student could choose the genre of ‘short stories’ and produce the 
following two clearly differentiated texts for Assignment 1: 
 
Genre Audience Function Text description 
Short 
stories 
 
Year 6 
students 
Entertain A short story set in a fantasy world. 
Adults Entertain A short story set in a dystopian world. 
 
 
Example 2: a student could choose the genre of ‘travel writing’ and produce the 
following two clearly differentiated texts for Assignment 1: 
 
Genre Audience Function Text description 
Travel 
writing 
 
Gap year 
students 
Inform A magazine feature on top travel 
destinations for your gap year. 
Pensioners Persuade A magazine article to encourage 
pensioners to explore the world. 
 
In preparation for this non-examination assessment, students will explore: 
● distinctive features of a variety of genres 
● texts that exemplify key features of their chosen genre (style models) 
● the effect of language choices and discourse strategies for different contexts. 
They will also develop: 
● the skills of effective and accurate drafting and redrafting. 
It is expected that students will undertake research in order to prepare for the 
writing assignments. While these preparatory stages are not assessed and are not 
required for submission, students will be expected to make connections between 
their research and their original writing in their commentary. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
16 
Students are encouraged to see their writing as work in progress. They should be 
prepared to draft and redraft as part of the writing process and to reflect on and 
critically evaluate this process in their commentary. 
Assignment length should be appropriate to the selected genre and function. For 
example, it is likely that two short stories would require a higher word count than 
two speeches. 
Assignment 2: Commentary 
In their commentary, students will reflect on the writing process. They should: 
● discuss the findings of their initial research into their chosen genre 
● make connections between the techniques used in the style models and those 
they have adopted in their own writing 
● evaluate language choices they made, through the drafting process, to achieve 
effects appropriate to the chosen function and target audience 
Students are expected to use a range of terminology accurately and ensure that 
any texts and other sources used are accurately referenced. 
Assignment setting, taking and marking 
Assignment setting 
When deciding on the assignments they will produce, 
students should be encouraged to draw on their own 
interests and skills, as well as applying what they have 
learned about language. The choice of assignments should 
be made with teacher guidance to ensure that the 
assignments are of an appropriate standard. 
It is advised that because of the personal nature of 
assignment selection each year, students complete different 
assignments from previous years. 
Assignment use 
Teachers should ensure that assignments chosen by 
students are relevant and appropriate to the student’s 
course of learning. Students should have the opportunity to 
choose sources/interpretations/texts as appropriate. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 17 
Assignment research 
Teaching and learning 
Teachers should provide students with a short course of 
study that covers: 
● research and study skills 
● editing and proofreading skills 
● referencing and bibliography skills. 
Collaboration 
Students may work together on their research. 
Feedback 
Teachers may help students to understand rubrics, 
assessment criteria and controls. Teachers must not provide 
students with solutions. For example, teachers may provide 
a simplified student friendly version of the assessment 
criteria, but this must not be specific to the work of 
individual students or a group of students (see the Joint 
Council for Qualifications (JCQ) Instructions for conducting 
non-examination assessments (new GCE and GCSE 
specifications) on the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk). Any 
additional feedback must be recorded in the Non-
examination Assessment Authentication Sheet (see 
Appendix 4). 
Resources 
Students must have equal access to IT resources. Students 
should have access to a range of resources/texts to enable 
them to make choices as required for their assignments. 
Assignment writing 
Authenticity 
Students and teachers must sign the Non-examination 
Assessment Authentication Sheet (see Appendix 4). 
Teachers must review at least one draft to offer support 
and to ensure they can verify that the student’s final work 
is their own. This support may take the form of general 
advice only and work may not be provisionally assessed. 
Please refer to the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ) 
Instructions for conducting non-examination assessments 
(new GCE and GCSE specifications) on the JCQ website 
(www.jcq.org.uk) for further information on the level of 
feedback permitted. 
Students must ensure that all quotations and citations are 
referenced using an established referencing system, such as 
Harvard, and produce a bibliography citing reference texts. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
18 
Collaboration 
Students must not work with others when writing their 
assignments. Centres must ensure that the same teacher 
has reviewed all work from a class in order to be able to 
verify on the Non-examination Assessment Authentication 
Sheet that students’ work is their own. 
Feedback 
Teachers may help students to understand rubrics, 
assessment criteria and controls. Any additional feedback 
must be recorded on the Non-examination Assessment 
Authentication Sheet (see Appendix 4). Please refer to the 
Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ) Instructions for 
conducting non-examination assessments (new GCE and 
GCSE specifications) on the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk 
for further information.  
Word count 
It is strongly recommended that students write between 
1500–2000 words for the original writing and 1000 words 
for the commentary. The advisory total word count for the 
non-examination assessment is between 2500–3000 words. 
This does not include footnotes and bibliographies. 
It is advisable that the upper word limit is adhered to by 
students to enable them to satisfy the requirement to 
produce a concise and coherently structured response.  
Assignment marking 
Teachers should mark the assignments using the 
assessment criteria on the following pages. Teachers may 
annotate students’ work. The marks awarded should be 
justified and teachers should add comments to the Non-
examination Assessment Authentication Sheet (see 
Appendix 4). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 19 
Assessment criteria 
Teachers must mark students’ work using the assessment criteria on pages 20–22. 
Marking guidance  
● All candidates must receive the same treatment. Teachers must mark the last 
candidate in exactly the same way as they mark the first. 
● Mark schemes should be applied positively. Candidates must be rewarded for 
what they have shown they can do rather than be penalised for omissions. 
● All the marks on the mark scheme are designed to be awarded. Teachers should 
always award full marks if deserved, i.e. if the answer matches the mark 
scheme. Teachers should also be prepared to award zero marks if the 
candidate’s response is not worthy of credit according to the mark scheme. 
The marking grids have been designed to assess student work holistically. The grids 
identify which Assessment Objective is being targeted by each bullet point within 
the level descriptors. Each bullet point is linked to one Assessment Objective, 
however please note that the number of bullet points in the level descriptors does 
not directly correlate to the number of marks in the level descriptor. 
When deciding how to reward an answer using a levels-based mark scheme, the 
‘best fit’ approach should be used. To do this teachers should: 
● first decide which level descriptor most closely matches the candidate answer 
and place it in that band 
● decide on the mark awarded within the band based on quality of the answer and 
modify according to how securely all bullet points are displayed at that level 
● remember that in cases of uneven performance, all the above points still apply. 
Candidates are to be placed in the band that best describes their answer 
according to each of the Assessment Objectives described in the level. Marks 
are to be awarded towards the top or bottom of that band depending how they 
have evidenced each of the descriptor bullet points  
● remember that all Assessment Objectives within a level are equally weighted 
and take this into consideration when making their judgements.  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
20 
Please refer to the marking guidance on page 19 when applying this grid. 
 
Level Mark 
Non-examination assessment: Crafting Language – 
Original Writing  
Descriptor (AO5)  
 0 No rewardable material  
Level 1  1–6 Low skill level 
● Writing has frequent errors and technical lapses. Limited 
control of genre and mode, with inappropriate style used 
for audience and function. 
● Writing is formulaic and predictable. 
Level 2  7–12 General/imprecise skills 
● Writing has some errors and technical lapses. Shows 
general understanding of genre, mode and the 
requirements of audience and function. 
● Writing attempts an individual voice. Makes obvious, 
though not always successful, attempts at crafting 
language for effect. 
Level 3  13–18 Clear skills 
● Writing has minor errors and technical lapses. Applies clear 
understanding of genre, mode and the requirements of 
audience and function. 
● Writing has an individual voice, with clear engaging 
attempts at crafting language. 
Level 4 19–24 Controlled skills 
● Writing is precisely edited and controlled. Demonstrates 
effective understanding of genre, mode and the 
requirements of audience and function. 
● Writing uses an effective individual voice, that crafts an 
engaging response. Displays a skilful selection of 
techniques for effect. 
Level 5 25–30 Assured skills 
● Writing is assured, accurate and highly effective. Displays 
an assured control of genre, mode and the requirements of 
audience and function. 
● Writing employs a sophisticated individual voice that 
differentiates in terms of audience and/or function. Crafts a 
highly-engaging response, with sophisticated selection of 
techniques.  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 21 
Please refer to the marking guidance on page 19 when applying this grid. 
 
Level Mark 
Non-examination assessment: Crafting Language – 
Commentary 
AO1 –  
bullet point 1 
AO2 –  
bullet point 2 
AO3 –  
bullet point 3 
AO4 –  
bullet point 4 
Descriptor (AO1, AO2, AO3, AO4)  
 0 No rewardable material  
Level 1  1–4 Descriptive  
● Knowledge of methods is largely unassimilated. Recalls 
limited range of terminology and makes frequent errors and 
technical lapses. 
● Has a descriptive approach with little awareness of concepts 
and issues. Makes simple comments on how and why 
language is used in own writing and style models. 
● Shows limited understanding of contextual factors. Able to 
show in simple ways how audience and function can affect 
the construction of meaning in own writing and style models. 
● Makes limited links between style models and own writing. 
Shows limited understanding of relevant concepts and 
methods. 
Level 2  5–8 General understanding 
● Recalls methods of analysis that show general 
understanding. Organises and expresses ideas with some 
clarity, though has lapses in use of terminology. 
● Shows general understanding of concepts and issues. Able to 
apply some of this understanding when describing language 
use in own writing and style models. 
● Has general understanding of contextual factors. Can explain 
effect of audience and function on construction of meaning in 
own writing and style models, though not always securely 
applied. 
● Describes general links between style models and own 
writing. Shows general understanding of relevant concepts 
and methods. 
Level 3  9–12 Clear relevant application 
● Applies relevant methods of analysis to texts with clear 
examples. Ideas are structured logically and expressed with 
few lapses in clarity and transitioning. Clear use of 
terminology. 
● Clear understanding and application of some concepts and 
issues. Able to explain language use in own writing and style 
models. 
● Able to show clear awareness of contextual factors. Able to 
explain how audience and function affect construction of 
meaning in own writing and style models. 
● Explains clear links between style models and own writing. 
Explains relevant concepts and methods. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
22 
 
Level Mark 
Non-examination assessment: Crafting Language – 
Commentary 
AO1 –  
bullet point 1 
AO2 –  
bullet point 2 
AO3 –  
bullet point 3 
AO4 –  
bullet point 4 
Descriptor (AO1, AO2, AO3, AO4)  
Level 4 13–16 Discriminating controlled approach  
● Applies controlled discussion of methods supported with 
use of discriminating examples. Controls the structure of 
response with effective transitions, carefully chosen 
language and use of terminology. 
● Discriminating selection and application of a range of 
concepts and issues. Able to analyse language use in own 
writing and style models. 
● Makes inferences about contextual factors. Discriminating 
approach to explaining how audience and function affect 
the construction of meaning in own writing and style 
models. 
● Discriminating connections made between style models 
and own writing. Examines in a controlled way links to 
concepts and methods. 
Level 5 17–20 Critical evaluative approach 
● Presents critical application of language analysis with 
sustained examples. Uses sophisticated structure and 
expression with appropriate register and style, including 
use of appropriate terminology. 
● Critical application of a wide range of concepts and issues. 
Evaluates language use in own writing and style models. 
● Exhibits a sophisticated awareness of complex contextual 
factors. Evaluates how contextual factors affect the 
construction of meaning in own writing and style models.  
● Evaluates connections made between style models and 
own writing. Critically examines links to concepts and 
methods. 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 23 
Marking, standardisation and moderation 
The assignments are marked by teachers. Where marking 
for this qualification has been carried out by more than one 
teacher in a centre, there must be a process of internal 
standardisation to ensure that there is a consistent 
application of the assessment criteria. 
Marks awarded by the centre will be subject to external 
moderation by Pearson. Moderation will ensure consistency 
with national standards and will review assignments to 
ensure that the assignment-setting rules have been 
correctly applied by centres. Pearson will notify centres of 
the students whose responses have been selected for 
moderation. This sample will take cohort size into account.  
If the moderation indicates that centre assessment does not 
reflect national standards, an adjustment will be made to 
students’ final marks to compensate. 
Please refer to the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ) 
Instructions for conducting non-examination assessments 
(new GCE and GCSE specifications) on the JCQ website: 
www.jcq.org.uk for further information. The assessment in 
this qualification will comply with these instructions. 
Security and backups 
It is the responsibility of the centre to keep the work that 
students have submitted for assessment secure. 
Secure storage is defined as a securely-locked cabinet or 
cupboard. 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of 
assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in controlled assessments discovered 
before the candidate has signed the declaration of 
authentication form does not need to be reported to 
Pearson. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
24 
Candidate malpractice found in controlled assessments after 
the declaration of authenticity has been signed, and in 
examinations, must be reported to Pearson on a  
JCQ Form M1 (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-
office/malpractice). The form should be emailed to 
candidatemalpractice@pearson.com. Please provide as 
much information and supporting documentation as 
possible. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate 
sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report candidate malpractice constitutes staff or 
centre malpractice.  
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate 
malpractice and maladministration of our qualifications. As 
with candidate malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is 
any act that compromises or seeks to compromise the 
process of assessment or undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and 
maladministration must be reported immediately, before 
any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson 
on a JCQ Form M2(a) (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-
office/malpractice). The form, supporting documentation 
and as much information as possible should be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com. Note that the final decision 
regarding appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More-detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the 
latest version of the document General and Vocational 
Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments Policies and Procedures, available at 
www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice. 
Further information 
For up-to-date advice on teacher involvement and 
administration of non-examination assessments, please 
refer to the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ) document 
Instructions for conducting non-examination assessments 
(new GCE and GCSE specifications) available on the JCQ 
website: www.jcq.org.uk 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 25 
Assessment 
Assessment summary 
Summary of table of assessment 
It is expected that students use a range of terminology accurately in the 
examination and make accurate reference to texts and data. 
Centres are reminded that the marks given are raw marks and as such for results 
purposes will be scaled to reflect the appropriate component weighting. 
Students must complete all assessment in May/June in any single year. 
 
Component 1: Language Variation *Paper code: 9EN0/01 
Written examination consisting of two sections. 
Section A: Individual Variation 
One question on two unseen 21st-century linked texts/data. 
Students produce an extended comparative response (AO1, AO2, 
AO3, AO4 assessed). 
Section B: Variation over Time 
One question on two unseen texts/data, from two different 
periods. Students produce an extended comparative response 
(AO1, AO2, AO3, AO4 assessed). 
● First assessment: May/June 2017. 
● The assessment is 2 hours 15 minutes. 
● The assessment consists of two questions – one per section. 
● The assessment consists of 60 marks – 30 marks per section. 
35% of the 
total 
qualification 
 
 
 
 
Component 2: Child Language *Paper code: 9EN0/02 
Written examination. 
Students answer one question based on a set of unseen data – 
either spoken or written. Students produce an extended response 
(AO1, AO2, AO3 assessed). 
● First assessment: May/June 2017. 
● The assessment is 1 hour 15 minutes**. 
● The assessment consists of one question. 
● The assessment consists of 45 marks. 
20% of the 
total 
qualification 
 
**the change to the assessment time will be for the examination in summer 2020 
and for all other examinations thereafter. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
26 
Component 3: Investigating Language *Paper code: 9EN0/03 
Subtopics pre-released on 1 December*** before examination. 
Written examination consisting of two sections. Students answer 
two questions on their chosen subtopic. 
Section A:  
One question on unseen data. Students must answer the question 
on the subtopic they have researched (AO1, AO2, AO3 assessed.) 
Section B: 
One evaluative question. Students must answer the question on 
the subtopic they have researched and also make connections with 
data from their investigation. Students produce an extended 
response (AO1, AO2, AO3, AO4 assessed). 
● First assessment: May/June 2017. 
● The assessment is 1 hour 45 minutes. 
● The assessment consists of 45 marks – Section A is 15 marks 
and Section B is 30 marks. 
25% of the 
total 
qualification 
 
 
***the change to the pre-release materials date will first come into effect for the 
2021 paper: the subtopics for this paper will be released on 1 December 2020. 
All subsequent series of this paper will also have a 1 December pre-release date. 
Non-examination assessment: Crafting Language *Code: 9EN0/04 
Assessment consists of two assignments. 
Assignment 1: two pieces of original writing from the same genre, 
differentiated by function and/or audience (AO5 assessed).  
Assignment 2: one commentary, reflecting on the two pieces of 
original writing produced and making connections with research 
undertaken (AO1, AO2, AO3, AO4 assessed). 
Advisory word counts: 
Total for assessment – 2500–3000 words. 
Assignment 1 – 1500–2000 words.  
Assignment 2 – 1000 words. 
● First moderation: May/June 2017. 
● This assessment is internally assessed, externally moderated. 
● The assessment consists of 50 marks – Assignment 1 is  
30 marks and Assignment 2 is 20 marks. 
● Assignments must be submitted at the end of the course. 
20% of the 
total 
qualification 
 
*See Appendix 3: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant 
to this qualification. 
The sample assessment materials can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 3  
Advanced GCE in English Language Sample Assessment Materials document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 27 
Assessment Objectives and weightings 
 
Students must: 
% in 
GCE 
AO1 Apply appropriate methods of language analysis, using 
associated terminology and coherent written expression 24.4 
AO2 Demonstrate critical understanding of concepts and issues 
relevant to language use 
24.4 
AO3 Analyse and evaluate how contextual factors and language 
features are associated with the construction of meaning 
24.4 
AO4 Explore connections across texts, informed by linguistic 
concepts and methods 15 
AO5 Demonstrate expertise and creativity in the use of English to 
communicate in different ways 
Note: This Assessment Objective must be targeted with at 
least one of AO2, AO3 or AO4, either in the same task or in 
two or more linked tasks. 
12 
Total 100 
NB: total has been rounded down 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
28 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
 
 Assessment Objectives Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives Paper/component AO1 AO2 AO3 AO4 AO5 
Paper 1:  
Language Variation 8.8% 8.8% 8.8% 8.8% 0% 35% 
Paper 2:  
Child Language 6.6% 6.6% 6.6% 0% 0% 20% 
Paper 3:  
Investigating 
Language 
7% 7% 7% 4% 0% 25% 
Non-examination 
assessment:  
Crafting Language 
2% 2% 2% 2% 12% 20% 
Total for this 
qualification 24.4% 24.4% 24.4% 15% 12% 100% 
NB: totals have been rounded either up or down 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 29 
Entry and assessment information 
Student entry 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for 
this qualification can be found in our UK Information 
Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations 
officers and is available on our website (www.edexcel.com). 
Forbidden combinations, discount code and 
performance tables 
There are no forbidden combinations with this qualification. 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more 
than one GCE qualification with the same discount code will 
have only one of the grades they achieve counted for the 
purpose of the school and college performance tables. This 
will be the grade for the larger qualification (i.e. the A Level 
grade rather than the AS grade). If the qualifications are 
the same size, then the better grade will be counted (please 
see Appendix 3: Codes). 
Students should be advised that if they take two GCE 
qualifications with the same discount code, colleges, 
universities and employers they wish to progress to are 
likely to take the view that this achievement is equivalent to 
only one GCE. The same view may be taken if students take 
two GCE qualifications that have different discount codes 
but have significant overlap of content. Students or their 
advisers who have any doubts about their subject 
combinations should check with the institution they wish to 
progress to before embarking on their programmes. 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and 
special consideration 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. 
They allow students with special educational needs, 
disabilities or temporary injuries to:  
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the 
demands of the assessment.  
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the 
particular needs of an individual student with a disability 
without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
30 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding 
bodies comply with the duty under the Equality Act 2010 to 
make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the 
start of the course. Students will then know what is 
available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for 
assessment.  
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to 
make reasonable adjustments where a person with a 
disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in 
undertaking an assessment. The awarding organisation is 
required to take reasonable steps to overcome that 
disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be 
unique to that individual and therefore might not be in the 
list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will 
depend on a number of factors, which will include: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with 
the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves 
unreasonable costs to the awarding organisation, 
timeframes or affects the security or integrity of the 
assessment. This is because the adjustment is not 
‘reasonable’. 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a 
student's mark or grade to reflect temporary injury, illness 
or other indisposition at the time of the examination/ 
assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have 
had, a material effect on a candidate’s ability to take an 
assessment or demonstrate his or her level of attainment in 
an assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to 
apply for access arrangements and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, 
reasonable adjustments and special consideration, please 
refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 31 
Equality Act 2010 and Pearson equality policy 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality 
policy requires all students to have equal opportunity to 
access our qualifications and assessments, and our 
qualifications to be awarded in a way that is fair to every 
student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by 
the Equality Act 2010) are not, when they are 
undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in 
comparison to students who do not share that 
characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for 
undertaking a qualification and that this achievement 
can be compared fairly to the achievement of their 
peers. 
You can find details on how to make adjustments for 
students with protected characteristics in the policy 
document Access Arrangements, Reasonable Adjustments 
and Special Considerations, which is on our website 
(www.edexcel.com). 
Synoptic assessment 
Synoptic assessment requires students to work across 
different parts of a qualification and to show their 
accumulated knowledge and understanding of a topic or 
subject area. 
Synoptic assessment enables students to show their ability 
to combine their skills, knowledge and understanding with 
breadth and depth of the subject.  
This qualification assesses synoptically through the 
following assessment, Component 3: Investigating 
Language and in the Non-examination assessment: Crafting 
Language. Students draw together skills synoptically in 
their analysis and evaluation of texts.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
32 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to 
comply with the requirements of the current Code of 
Practice, published by the Office of Qualifications and 
Examinations Regulation (Ofqual). 
The Advanced GCE qualification will be graded and 
certificated on a six-grade scale from A* to E using the total 
subject mark. Individual components are not graded. 
The first certification opportunity for the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language will be 2017. 
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum 
judged by Pearson to be of sufficient standard to be 
recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified 
U result. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be available in English. 
All student work must be in English. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 33 
Other information 
Student recruitment 
Students are advised against making entries for more than 
one A level in English. Examinations for A level English 
Language and A level English Language and Literature are 
timetabled at the same time. 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to 
our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of 
reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and 
progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this 
qualification. 
Students who would benefit most from studying an 
Advanced GCE in English Language are likely to have a 
Level 2 qualification such as a GCSE in English Language or 
a GCSE in English Literature. 
Progression 
Students can progress from this qualification to: 
● higher education courses such as degrees in English, 
English language, linguistics, creative writing or in 
related subjects such as English literature, law, 
journalism, media, speech and language therapy, 
teaching, drama, history 
● a wide range of careers either directly related to English 
language, such as speech and language therapist, 
teaching, editor, writer or in areas such as publishing, 
journalism, the media, advertising, marketing, public 
relations, arts administration, record offices, libraries, 
national and local government, civil service. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
34 
Relationship between Advanced Subsidiary GCE and 
Advanced GCE 
The Advanced Subsidiary GCE is a discrete linear 
qualification and comprises two examined components; 
these are built from content that is common with the 
Advanced GCE but they have different assessments that 
take place at the end of the course.  
Relationship between GCSE and Advanced GCE 
This qualification provides progression from GCSE building 
on skills of analysing, evaluating and comparing texts and 
transactional writing skills, including accurate spelling, 
punctuation and grammar. It can, for example, allow 
students to develop a broader and deeper understanding of 
English language as a discipline and allow them to develop 
higher English language skills. 
Progression from GCSE to Advanced GCE 
There is a distinct step up from GCSE in terms of content 
and skills to study English Language as a subject at 
Advanced GCE.  
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 35 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Transferable skills 37 
Appendix 2: Level 3 Extended Project qualification 39 
Appendix 3: Codes 43 
Appendix 4: Non-examination Assessment Authentication Sheet 45 
Appendix 5: English phonemic reference sheet 47 
Appendix 6: Transcription mark key 49 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
36 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 37 
Appendix 1: Transferable skills  
 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently 
flagged the need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable 
them to respond with confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the 
world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines 
skills, or competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that 
can be learned and that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform 
an activity or task and can be built upon and extended through learning.’
 [1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected 
and evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this 
process, we identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the 
most evidence-based and robust skills framework. We adapted the framework 
slightly to include the Program for International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT 
Literacy and Collaborative Problem Solving (CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves: [2] 
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve 
general cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and 
communicate[3]. 
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, oral communication, written 
communication, assertive communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, 
service orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and 
negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared 
understanding, taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team 
organisation. 
 
 
[1]  OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012) 
[2]  Koenig J A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop  
(National Academies Press, 2011) 
[3]  PISA – The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy (2011) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
38 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work 
stress, adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, 
and physical adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual 
teams, work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and 
able to acquire new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher 
education, as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the 
teaching and learning of this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning 
materials, developed with stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 39 
Appendix 2: Level 3 Extended Project 
qualification 
 
What is the Extended Project? 
The Extended Project is a standalone qualification that can be taken alongside 
GCEs. It supports the development of independent learning skills and helps to 
prepare students for their next step – whether that be higher education or 
employment. The qualification: 
● is recognised by higher education for the skills it develops 
● is worth half of an Advanced GCE qualification at grade A*–E  
● carries UCAS points for university entry. 
The Extended Project encourages students to develop skills in the following areas: 
research, critical thinking, extended writing and project management. Students 
identify and agree a topic area of their choice (which may or may not be related to 
a GCE subject they are already studying), guided by their teacher. 
Students can choose from one of four approaches to produce: 
● a dissertation (for example, an investigation based on predominately secondary 
research) 
● an investigation/field study (for example, a practical experiment) 
● a performance (for example, in music, drama or sport) 
● an artefact (for example, a creating a sculpture in response to a client brief or 
solving an engineering problem). 
The qualification is non-examination assessment based and students are assessed 
on the skills of managing, planning and evaluating their project. Students will 
research their topic, develop skills to review and evaluate the information, and then 
present the final outcome of their project. 
Students: what they need to do 
The Extended Project qualification requires students to: 
● select a topic of interest for an in-depth study and negotiate the scope of the 
project with their teacher 
● identify and draft an objective for their project (for example in the form of a 
question, hypothesis, challenge, outline of proposed performance, issue to be 
investigated or commission for a client) and provide a rationale for their choice 
● produce a plan for how they will deliver their intended objective 
● conduct research as required by the project brief, using appropriate techniques 
● carry out the project using tools and techniques safely 
● share the outcome of the project using appropriate communication methods, 
including a presentation. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
40 
Teachers: key information 
● The Extended Project has 120 guided learning hours (GLH) consisting of: 
o a taught 40-GLH element that includes teaching the technical skills  
(for example research skills) 
o a guided 80-GLH element that includes mentoring students through the 
project work. 
● Group work is acceptable, however it is important that each student provides 
evidence of their own contribution and produces their own report. 
● 100% externally moderated. 
● Four Assessment Objectives: manage, use resources, develop and realise, 
review. 
● Can be run over 1, 1½ or 2 years. 
● Can be submitted in January or June. 
How to link Extended Project with English Language 
The Extended Project creates the opportunity to develop transferable skills for 
progression to higher education and to the workplace, through the exploration of 
either an area of personal interest or a topic of interest within the English Language 
qualification content. For example, English Language students could work on the 
writing of a dissertation exploring an aspect of English Language.  
Skills developed 
Through teaching and work on projects, it is expected that Extended Project 
students will develop skills in the following areas. 
● Independent research skills, including skills in primary research and the 
selection of appropriate methods for data collection. 
● Extended reading and academic writing, including reading academic articles. 
● Planning/project management, including the refining of research questions. 
● Source handling and evaluation. 
● Evaluation of arguments and processes, including arguments in favour of 
alternative interpretations of sources and evaluation of the research process. 
● Critical thinking. 
In the context of the Extended Project, critical thinking refers to the ability to 
identify and develop arguments for a point of view or hypothesis and to consider 
and respond to alternative arguments.  
The Extended Project is an ideal vehicle to develop the transferable skills identified 
in Appendix 1.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 41 
Using the Extended Project to support breadth and depth 
There is no specified material that students are expected to study and, in the 
Extended Project, students are assessed on the quality of the work they produce 
and the skills they develop and demonstrate through completing this work. A 
student of English Language should demonstrate that they have extended 
themselves in some significant way by means of their Extended Project. It is 
important that the student shows, at the outset, how their work involves significant 
extension beyond what they have been studying in English Language. Students can 
use the Extended Project to demonstrate extension in one or more dimensions:  
● Deepening understanding: where a student explores a topic in greater depth 
than in the specification content. A student of English Language could choose to 
carry out a deeper, more analytic exploration of a concept which can be 
explored through the lens of linguistic study. For example, questions about the 
nature of language or exploration of a concept such as meaning or translation. 
● Broadening skills: where a student learns a new skill, for example 
performance or creative writing skills 
● Widening perspectives: where the student’s project spans different subjects. 
Cross-curricular exploration which involves examining, for example political, 
social, philosophical or psychological aspects of the question. 
Choosing topics and narrowing down to a question 
Topics or titles linked to the themes from the English Language course could inspire 
a choice of Extended Project topic. 
Students who wish to extend their creative writing skills can produce an artefact. 
The emphasis in the assessment criteria is on the process leading up to the finished 
piece of work. Consider a student who wished to write a short science fiction-story. 
The student wrote a literature review that contained research into genre, 
influences, source materials for the story and the processes and techniques of 
creative writing. As well as submitting the finished story, the student included 
extracts from drafts, which were annotated to show the development of ideas and 
the creative decisions the student took during the development of the work, 
including reflection on alternative possibilities and evaluation of their relative 
merits. 
Example dissertation titles include: 
● How far are we products and how far are we masters of language? 
● Can people think and express themselves without language? 
● Is femininity socially or biologically constructed? 
There is also scope for English Language-based Performance Extended Projects. For 
example, a student might perform a play to explore problems with the concept of 
interpretation of language. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
42 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 43 
Appendix 3: Codes 
 
Type of code Use of code Code number 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for performance 
tables is assigned a discount code 
indicating the subject area to which it 
belongs. 
Discount codes are published by DfE. 
Please see the  
GOV.UK website 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework 
(RQF) codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an 
Ofqual Regulated Qualifications Framework 
(RQF) code. 
The RQF code is known as a Qualification 
Number (QN). This is the code that 
features in the DfE Section 96 and on the 
LARA as being eligible for 16–18 and 19+ 
funding, and is to be used for all 
qualification funding purposes. The QN will 
appear on students’ final certification 
documentation.  
The QN for this 
qualification is: 
601/5009/9 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to 
enter students for a qualification. Centres 
will need to use the entry codes only when 
claiming students’ qualifications. 
GCE – 9EN0 
Paper/component 
code 
These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be 
entered for individual papers/components. 
Paper 1: 9EN0/01 
Paper 2: 9EN0/02 
Paper 3: 9EN0/03 
Non-examination 
assessment: 
9EN0/04 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
44 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 45 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 4: Non-examination 
Assessment Authentication Sheet 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 9EN0/04 
Centre name:  
 
Centre number:  
Candidate name:  
 
Candidate number:  
Assignment Marks 
awarded 
Comments  
1. Original Writing 
 
Text 1 description: 
 
 
Text 2 description: 
  
/30 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Commentary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
/20 
 
 
 
TOTAL 
 
/50 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
46 
Teacher declaration 
I declare that the work submitted for assessment has been carried out without 
assistance other than that which is acceptable according to the rules of the 
specification. I certify that to the best of my knowledge the evidence submitted for 
this assignment is the learner’s own. The learner has clearly referenced any sources 
and any artificial intelligence (AI) tools used in the work. I have not solely used AI to 
mark the learner’s work. I understand that false declaration is a form of malpractice. 
 
Assessor name:   
Assessor signed:  Date:  
 
Candidate declaration 
I certify that the work submitted for this assessment is my own. I have clearly 
referenced any sources and any AI tools used in the work. I understand that false 
declaration is a form of malpractice. I acknowledge that Pearson may use candidate 
work for the purposes of standardisation, training, and exemplar material. 
 
Candidate 
signed:   Date:  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 47 
Appendix 5: English phonemic reference 
sheet  
 
These tables will be available in the examination when data has been transcribed to 
show phonetic pronunciation. 
Centres should make students aware of these tables as they will be given to them 
in the examinations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vowels 
kit dress trap lot strut foot 
ɪ e æ ɒ ʌ ʊ 
letter fleece bath thought goose nurse 
ə i: ɑ: ɔ: u: ɜ: 
Diacritics: = length mark. These vowels may be shorter in some accents and 
will be transcribed without the length mark /:/ in this case. 
Diphthongs 
face goat price mouth choice near square cure 
eɪ ə ʊ ɑɪ ɑʊ ɔɪ ɪə e ə ʊ ə 
Consonants 
pip bid tack door cake good 
p b t d k g 
chain jam fly vase thing this 
tʃ ʤ f v θ ð 
say zoo shoe treasure house mark 
s z ʃ ʒ h m 
not sing lot rose yet witch 
n ŋ l r j w 
Glottal stop Syllabic /l/ bottle Syllabic /n/ fatten 
ʔ ļ ņ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
48 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 49 
 
Appendix 6: Transcription mark key 
 
These are common marks that will be used on any data that has the transcription of 
speech in the examinations. 
There are different and more varied transcription marks available but those given 
below will always be used to ensure a consistent student experience in 
examinations. 
Centres should make students aware of this transcription mark key as it will be 
given to them in the examinations. 
 
bold emphatic stress 
[ _ ] paralinguistic features 
/_ / key phonemic transcription 
// overlapping/simultaneous speech 
(.) micro pause (less than a second) 
(3) longer pause (number of seconds 
indicated) 
? rising intonation 
 
 
 
 
 
Db140824 9781446944806_GCE2015_A_ENGLANG_ISS6.DOC.1–62/0 
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office:  80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121
