A Level 
Biology B
Specification
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B (9BI0)
First teaching from September 2015
First certification from 2017 Issue 4

 
Pearson Edexcel  
Level 3 Advanced GCE  
in Biology B (9BI0) 
Specification 
First certification 2017 
Issue 4 
 
 
 
 

Edexcel, BTEC and LCCI qualifications 
Edexcel, BTEC and LCCI qualifications are awarded by Pearson, the UK’s largest 
awarding body offering academic and vocational qualifications that are globally 
recognised and benchmarked. For further information, please visit our qualifications 
website at qualifications.pearson.com. Alternatively, you can get in touch with us 
using the details on our contact us page at qualifications.pearson.com/contactus 
About Pearson 
Pearson is the world's leading learning company, with 35,000 employees in more 
than 70 countries working to help people of all ages to make measurable progress 
in their lives through learning. We put the learner at the centre of everything we 
do, because wherever learning flourishes, so do people. Find out more about how 
we can help you and your learners at qualifications.pearson.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References to third party material made in this specification are made in good faith. 
Pearson does not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of 
materials, which may be subject to change, or any opinions expressed therein. 
(Material may include textbooks, journals, magazines and other publications and 
websites.) 
 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
 
ISBN 978 1 446 93798 3  
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
May 2014 
  The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important 
change to the education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications 
will assist them in helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an 
‘Expert Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or 
because of our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the 
world as diverse as Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries 
across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification 
development process that has included: 
• extensive international comparability of subject content against the highest-
performing jurisdictions in the world 
• benchmarking assessments against UK and overseas providers to ensure that 
they are at the right level of demand 
• establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-
specific expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
• subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future 
oriented. The design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, 
meaning learner outcomes have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a 
learner’s success in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident 
that we have supported the development of qualifications that are outstanding for 
their coherence, thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as 
representing world-class best practice.  
  
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Lee Sing Kong  
Director, National Institute of 
Education, Singapore 
  
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
  
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
 
All titles correct as at May 2014 
 
“ 
” 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B is designed for use in 
schools and colleges. It is part of a suite of GCE qualifications offered by Pearson. 
Purpose of the specification 
This specification sets out: 
● the objectives of the qualification 
● any other qualification(s) that a student must have completed before taking the 
qualification 
● any prior knowledge and skills that the student is required to have before taking 
the qualification 
● any other requirements that a student must have satisfied before they will be 
assessed or before the qualification will be awarded 
● the knowledge and understanding that will be assessed as part of the 
qualification 
● the method of assessment and any associated requirements relating to it 
● the criteria against which a student’s level of attainment will be measured (such 
as assessment criteria). 
 
 
 
Rationale 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B meets the following 
purposes, which fulfil those defined by the Office of Qualifications and Examinations 
Regulation (Ofqual) for GCE qualifications in their GCE Qualification Level 
Conditions and Requirements document, published in April 2014. 
The purposes of this qualification are to: 
• define and assess achievement of the knowledge, skills and understanding that 
will be needed by students planning to progress to undergraduate study at UK 
higher education institutions, particularly (although not only) in biology 
• set out a robust and internationally comparable post-16 academic course of 
study to develop that knowledge, skills and understanding 
• enable HE institutions to identify accurately the level of attainment of students 
• provide a basis for school and college accountability measures at age 18 
• provide a benchmark of academic ability for employers. 
Qualification aims and objectives 
The aims and objectives of the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
are to enable students to develop: 
● essential knowledge and understanding of different areas of the subject and 
how they relate to each other 
● and demonstrate a deep appreciation of the skills, knowledge and 
understanding of scientific methods 
● competence and confidence in a variety of practical, mathematical and problem-
solving skills 
● their interest in and enthusiasm for the subject, including developing an interest 
in further study and careers associated with the subject 
● understanding of how society makes decisions about scientific issues and how 
the sciences contribute to the success of the economy and society. 
 
 
The context for the development of this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] 
and our ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
• reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with 
those taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
• consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including subject 
associations, higher education academics, teachers and employers to ensure 
this qualification is suitable for a UK context 
• reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in 
their document GCE Qualification Level Conditions and Requirements and by the 
Department for Education (DfE) in their GCE AS and A level regulatory 
requirements for biology, chemistry, physics and psychology document, published 
in April 2014. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
● demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning and 
measuring higher-order skills 
● rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and valid 
assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in end users of the knowledge, skills 
and competencies of certified students 
● inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students develop at 
different rates and have different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
● empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills, see Appendix 1. 
 
 
 
Summary of Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in 
Biology B specification Issue 4 changes  
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this 
current issue 
Page 
number 
‘Subject to confirmation in spring 2015 following trialling’ has been 
deleted. 
37 and 38 
 
If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, contact us via 
our website at: qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/contact-us.html. 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents 
Qualification at a glance 1 
Knowledge, skills and understanding 5 
Science Practical Endorsement 34 
Marking and standardisation 38 
Malpractice 39 
Assessment 41 
Assessment summary 41 
Assessment Objectives and weightings 43 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 43 
Entry and assessment information 44 
Student entry 44 
Discount codes and performance tables 44 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special 
consideration 45 
Equality Act 2010 and Pearson equality policy 46 
Synoptic assessment 46 
Awarding and reporting 47 
Language of assessment 47 
Other information 49 
Student recruitment 49 
Prior learning and other requirements 49 
Progression 49 
Relationship between Advanced Subsidiary GCE and 
Advanced GCE 49 
Progression from Advanced Subsidiary GCE to Advanced 
GCE 49 
Relationship between GCSE and Advanced GCE 50 
Progression from GCSE to Advanced GCE 50 
Appendix 1: Transferable skills 53 
Appendix 2: Level 3 Extended Project qualification 55 
Appendix 3: Codes 59 
Appendix 4: Practical competency authentication 
sheet 61 
Appendix 5: Working scientifically 63 
Appendix 5a: Practical skills identified for indirect 
assessment and developed through teaching and 
learning 65
 
 
 
Appendix 5b: Practical skills identified for direct 
assessment and developed through teaching and 
learning 67 
Appendix 5c: Use of apparatus and techniques 69 
Appendix 5d: Mapping between Appendix 5c and 
core practicals (biology) 71 
Appendix 6: Mathematical skills and 
exemplifications 75 
Appendix 7: Command words used in examination 
papers 81 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
1 
Qualification at a glance 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B consists of three externally 
examined papers and the Science Practical Endorsement. 
Students are expected to carry out the 16 core practical experiments that are 
identified in the content. 
Students must complete all assessment in May/June in any single year. 
 
Paper 1: Advanced Biochemistry, Microbiology and Genetics 
 *Paper code: 9BI0/01 
● Externally assessed 
● Availability: May/June 
● First assessment: 2017 
30% of the 
total 
qualification 
Overview of content 
This paper will examine the following topics: 
● Topic 1: Biological Molecules 
● Topic 2: Cells, Viruses and Reproduction of Living Things 
● Topic 3: Classification and Biodiversity 
● Topic 4: Exchange and Transport 
● Topic 5: Energy for Biological Processes 
● Topic 6: Microbiology and Pathogens 
● Topic 7: Modern Genetics.  
Overview of assessment 
● Assessment is 1 hour 45 minutes. 
● The paper consists of 90 marks. 
● The paper may include multiple-choice, short open, open-response, calculations and 
extended writing questions. 
● The paper will include questions that target mathematics at Level 2 or above (see 
Appendix 6: Mathematical skills and exemplifications). Overall, a minimum of 10% 
of the marks across the three papers will be awarded for mathematics at Level 2 or 
above. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
2 
 
Paper 2: Advanced Physiology, Evolution and Ecology 
 *Paper code: 9BI0/02 
● Externally assessed 
● Availability: May/June 
● First assessment: 2017 
30% of the 
total 
qualification 
Overview of content 
This paper will examine the following topics: 
● Topic 1: Biological Molecules 
● Topic 2: Cells, Viruses and Reproduction of Living Things 
● Topic 3: Classification and Biodiversity 
● Topic 4: Exchange and Transport 
● Topic 8: Origins of Genetic Variation  
● Topic 9: Control Systems 
● Topic 10: Ecosystems. 
Overview of assessment 
● Assessment is 1 hour 45 minutes. 
● The paper consists of 90 marks. 
● The paper may include multiple-choice, short open, open-response, calculations and 
extended writing questions. 
● The paper will include questions that target mathematics at Level 2 or above (see 
Appendix 6: Mathematical skills and exemplifications). Overall, a minimum of 10% 
of the marks across the three papers will be awarded for mathematics at Level 2 or 
above.  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
3 
 
Paper 3: General and Practical Principles in Biology 
 *Paper code: 9BI0/03 
● Externally assessed 
● Availability: May/June 
● First assessment: 2017 
40% of the 
total 
qualification 
Overview of content 
● This paper will include questions from Topics 1−10. 
Overview of assessment 
● Assessment is 2 hours 30 minutes. 
● The paper consists of 120 marks. 
● The paper may include short open, open-response, calculations and extended writing 
questions. 
● The paper will include synoptic questions that may draw on two or more different 
topics. 
● The paper will include questions that target mathematics at Level 2 or above (see 
Appendix 6: Mathematical skills and exemplifications). Overall, a minimum of 10% 
of the marks across the three papers will be awarded for mathematics at Level 2 or 
above. 
● The paper will include questions that target the conceptual and theoretical 
understanding of experimental methods. 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
4 
 
Science Practical Endorsement** 
*Paper code: 9BI0/04 
• Internally assessed and externally monitored by Pearson. 
• Availability: May/June 
• First assessment: 2017 
Overview of content 
The assessment of practical skills is a compulsory requirement of the course of study for 
A level biology. It will appear on all students’ certificates as a separately reported result, 
alongside the overall grade for the qualification.  
Students must carry out a minimum of 12 practical activities which, together, meet the 
requirements of Appendices 5b (Practical skills identified for direct assessment and 
developed through teaching and learning) and 5c (Use of apparatus and techniques) 
from the prescribed subject content.  
The practical activities prescribed in this specification (the "core practicals") provide 
opportunities for demonstrating competence in all the skills identified, together with the 
use of apparatus and techniques for each subject. However, students can also 
demonstrate these competencies in any additional practical activity undertaken 
throughout the course of study which covers the requirements of Appendix 5c. 
Overview of assessment 
Students' practical work will be assessed by teachers, using common practical 
assessment criteria (CPAC) that are consistent across exam boards. These criteria can 
be found on pages 48-49. 
Students who demonstrate the required standard across all the requirements of the 
CPAC will receive a ‘pass’ grade. 
Students may work in groups but teachers who award a pass to their students need to 
be confident of individual students’ competence. 
The correct application of CPAC to students' work will be monitored through a system of 
visits to centres. These visits will be coordinated across the exam boards by JCQ, to 
ensure that all centres are visited regularly, although not necessarily in each science 
subject. 
 
*See Appendix 3: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant 
to this qualification. 
** Students will be assessed separately for the Science Practical Endorsement. The 
Endorsement will not contribute to the overall grade for this qualification, but the 
result will be recorded on the student’s certificate. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
5 
Knowledge, skills and understanding 
Content overview 
Students will be expected to demonstrate and apply the knowledge, understanding 
and skills described in the content for each topic below. In addition, they will be 
expected to analyse, interpret and evaluate a range of scientific information, ideas 
and evidence using their knowledge, understanding and skills. 
To demonstrate knowledge, students should be able to undertake a range of 
activities, including the ability to recall, describe and define, as appropriate. To 
demonstrate understanding, students should be able to explain ideas and use their 
knowledge to apply, analyse, interpret and evaluate, as appropriate. 
Each topic begins with an overview of the wider biological context designed to 
encourage an overarching approach to both the teaching and learning of the 
subject. As such, it will not be directly assessed. 
There are opportunities for students to develop mathematical skills throughout the 
content. They are required to apply the skills to relevant biology contexts. In order 
to be able to develop their skills, knowledge and understanding in science, students 
need to have been taught, and to have acquired competence in, the appropriate 
areas of mathematics relevant to the subject. These skills will be applied in the 
context of biology and will be developed throughout the course. All mathematical 
skills listed in Appendix 6 must be assessed within the lifetime of the qualification. 
Content that is common to the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced Subsidiary GCE in 
Biology B is in Topics 1-4. 
Practical skills 
Practical work is central to any study of biology. For this reason, the specification 
includes 16 core practical activities which form a thread linking theoretical 
knowledge and understanding to practical scenarios. In following this thread, 
students will build on practical skills learned at GCSE, becoming confident practical 
biologists, handling apparatus competently and safely. Using a variety of apparatus 
and techniques, they should be able to design and carry out both the core practical 
activities and their own investigations, collecting data which can be analysed and 
used to draw valid conclusions. 
One important aspect of practical work is the ability to evaluate and manage 
potential risks. The variety of different practical techniques and scenarios in the 
core practical activities give students scope to consider risk management in 
different contexts. 
Students should also consider the ethical issues presented by their work in the 
laboratory, which might include consideration for the ethical use of live subjects, 
the safe disposal of waste materials, and appropriate consideration for other people 
involved in their own work or who are working nearby. 
Also central to the development of practical skills is the ability to communicate 
information and ideas through the use of appropriate terminology and ICT. Being 
able to communicate clearly the findings of practical work is arguably as important 
as the collection of accurate data. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
6 
In carrying out practical activities, students will be expected to use their knowledge 
and understanding to pose scientific questions which can be investigated through 
experimental activities. Such activities will enable students to collect data, analyse 
it for correlations and causal relationships, and to develop solutions to the 
questions posed.  
Questions within written examination papers will aim to assess the knowledge and 
understanding that students gain while carrying out practical activities, within the 
context of the 16 core practical activities, as well as in novel practical scenarios. 
The written papers will test the skills of students in planning practical work – both 
in familiar and unfamiliar applications – including risk management and the 
selection of apparatus, with reasons. As part of data handling, students will be 
expected to use significant figures appropriately, to process data and to plot 
graphs. In analysing outcomes and drawing valid conclusions, students should 
critically consider methods and data, including assessing measurement 
uncertainties and errors.  
Examination papers will also provide the opportunity for students to evaluate the 
wider role of the scientific community in validating new knowledge and the ways in 
which society as a whole uses science to inform decision making. Within this, they 
could be asked to consider the implications and applications of biology in terms of 
associated benefits and risks. Students may also be asked to evaluate 
methodology, evidence and data and resolve conflicting evidence. 
Success in questions that indirectly assess practical skills within written papers will 
come more naturally to those candidates who have a solid foundation of laboratory 
practice and who, having carried them out, have a thorough understanding of 
practical techniques. Therefore, where possible, teachers should consider adding 
additional experiments to the core practical activities. The 16 core practicals will 
provide the basis from which some of the examination questions will be drawn. 
Teachers should note that the completion of the 16 core practical activities can also 
provide evidence of competence for the Science Practical Endorsement (please see  
page 31) and that evidence must be provided for the 12 practical techniques listed 
in Appendix 5c through a minimum of 12 core practical activities. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
7 
Topic 1: Biological Molecules 
This topic introduces the chemicals of life: the organic and inorganic molecules and 
ions that are fundamental to the structure and physiology of living organisms. The 
role of monomers in the synthesis of polymers and how the structure and 
properties of these relate to their functions are considered. An understanding of 
scientific method is developed in the practical investigation of enzyme action. 
Opportunities for developing mathematical skills within this topic include: 
recognising and making use of appropriate units in calculations; using ratios, 
fractions and percentages; constructing and interpreting frequency tables and 
diagrams; translating information between graphical, numerical and algebraic 
forms; understanding that y = mx + c represents a linear relationship; determining 
the intercept of a graph; calculating rate of change from a graph; drawing and 
using the slope of a tangent to a curve as a measure of rate of change. (Please see 
Appendix 6: Mathematical skills and exemplifications for further information.) 
 
Students should: 
1.1 Carbohydrates 
i Know the difference between monosaccharides, disaccharides and 
polysaccharides. 
ii Know the structure of the hexose glucose (alpha and beta) and the pentose 
ribose.  
iii Understand how monosaccharides (glucose, fructose, galactose) join to form 
disaccharides (sucrose, lactose and maltose) and polysaccharides (starch 
formed from amylose and amylopectin; glycogen) through condensation 
reactions forming glycosidic bonds, and how these can be split through 
hydrolysis reactions. 
iv Understand how the structure of glucose, starch, glycogen and cellulose relates 
to their function.  
1.2 Lipids 
i Understand how a triglyceride is synthesised, including the formation of ester 
bonds during condensation reactions between glycerol and three fatty acids. 
ii Know the differences between saturated and unsaturated lipids. 
iii Understand how the structure of lipids relates to their role in energy storage, 
waterproofing and insulation. 
iv Understand how the structure and properties of phospholipids relate to their 
function in cell membranes.
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
8 
 
Students should: 
1.3 Proteins 
i Know the structure of an amino acid (structures of specific amino acids are not 
required). 
ii Understand the formation of polypeptides and proteins (as amino acid 
monomers linked by peptide bonds in condensation reactions). 
iii Understand the role of ionic, hydrogen and disulfide bonding in the structure of 
proteins. 
iv Understand the significance of the primary, secondary, tertiary and quaternary 
structure of a protein in determining the properties of fibrous and globular 
proteins, including collagen and haemoglobin. 
v Understand how the structure of collagen and haemoglobin are related to their 
function. 
1.4 DNA and protein synthesis 
i Know the structure of DNA, including the structure of the nucleotides (purines 
and pyrimidines), base pairing, the two sugar-phosphate backbones, 
phosphodiester bonds and hydrogen bonds. 
ii Understand how DNA is replicated semi-conservatively, including the role of 
DNA helicase, polymerase and ligase. 
iii Know that a gene is a sequence of bases on a DNA molecule coding for a 
sequence of amino acids in a polypeptide chain. 
iv Know the structure of mRNA including nucleotides, the sugar phosphate 
backbone and the role of hydrogen bonds.  
v Know the structure of tRNA, including nucleotides, the role of hydrogen bonds 
and the anticodon. 
vi Understand the processes of transcription in the nucleus and translation at the 
ribosome, including the role of sense and anti-sense DNA, mRNA, tRNA and the 
ribosomes. 
vii Understand the nature of the genetic code, including triplets coding for amino 
acids, start and stop codons, degenerate and non-overlapping nature, and that 
not all the genome codes for proteins. 
viii Understand the term gene mutation as illustrated by base deletions, insertions 
and substitutions. 
ix Understand the effect of point mutations on amino acid sequences, as 
illustrated by sickle cell anaemia in humans.
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
9 
 
Students should: 
1.5 Enzymes 
i Know the structure of enzymes as globular proteins. 
ii Understand the concepts of specificity and the induced fit hypothesis. 
iii Understand that enzymes are catalysts that reduce activation energy. 
iv Understand how temperature, pH, substrate and enzyme concentration affect 
the rate of enzyme activity. 
CORE PRACTICAL 1: Investigate a factor affecting the initial rate of an enzyme– 
controlled reaction. 
v Understand how the initial rate of enzyme activity can be measured and why 
this is important. 
vi Understand how enzymes can be affected by competitive, non-competitive and 
end-product inhibition. 
vii Know that enzymes catalyse a wide range of intracellular reactions as well as 
extracellular ones.
 
1.6 Inorganic ions 
i Understand the role in plants of:  
● nitrate ions – to make DNA and amino acids 
● calcium ions – to form calcium pectate for the middle lamellae 
● magnesium ions – to produce chlorophyll 
● phosphate ions – to make ADP and ATP. 
 
1.7 Water 
i Understand the importance of the dipole nature of water leading to hydrogen 
bonding and the significance of the following to organisms:  
● high specific heat capacity 
● polar solvent 
● surface tension 
● incompressibility 
● maximum density at 4 °C. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
10 
Topic 2: Cells, Viruses and Reproduction of Living Things 
This topic considers the ultrastructure of prokaryotes, eukaryotes and viruses. 
Details of the types of nuclear division are included and how these are involved in 
animal and plant reproduction. Microscopy and observational skills are developed 
through the preparation of stained plant tissue. 
Opportunities for developing mathematical skills within this topic include: 
recognising and using expressions in decimal and standard form; making order of 
magnitude calculations; changing the subject of an equation; plotting two variables 
from experimental or other data. (Please see Appendix 6: Mathematical skills and 
exemplifications for further information.) 
 
Students should: 
2.1 Eukaryotic and prokaryotic cell structure and function 
i Understand that cell theory is a unifying concept that states that cells are a 
fundamental unit of structure, function and organisation in all living organisms.  
ii Understand that in complex organisms, cells are organised into tissues, organs, 
and organ systems.  
iii Know the ultrastructure of prokaryotic cells and the structure of organelles, 
including: nucleoid, plasmids, 70S ribosomes and cell wall. 
iv Be able to distinguish between Gram positive and Gram negative bacterial cell 
walls and understand why each type reacts differently to some antibiotics. 
v Know the ultrastructure of eukaryotic cells and the functions of organelles, 
including: nucleus, nucleolus, 80S ribosomes, rough and smooth endoplasmic 
reticulum, mitochondria, centrioles, lysosomes, Golgi apparatus, cell wall, 
chloroplasts, vacuole and tonoplast. 
vi Know how magnification and resolution can be achieved using light and electron 
microscopy. 
vii Understand the importance of staining specimens in microscopy. 
CORE PRACTICAL 2:
 Use of the light microscope, including simple stage and eyepiece 
micrometers and drawing small numbers of cells from a specialised tissue. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
11 
 
Students should: 
2.2 Viruses 
i Understand that the classification of viruses is based on structure and nucleic 
acid types as illustrated by λ (lambda) phage (DNA), tobacco mosaic virus and 
Ebola (RNA) and human immunodeficiency virus (RNA retrovirus). 
ii Know the lytic cycle of a virus and latency. 
iii Know that viruses are not living cells and so antivirals must work by inhibiting 
virus replication. 
iv Know that as viruses can be difficult to treat once infection has occurred, the 
focus of disease control should be on preventing the spread, as exemplified by 
the 2014 Ebola outbreak in West Africa. 
v Be able to evaluate the ethical implications of using untested drugs during 
epidemics. 
2.3 Eukaryotic cell cycle and division 
i Know that the cell cycle is a regulated process in which cells divide into two 
identical daughter cells, and that this process consists of three main stages: 
interphase, mitosis and cytokinesis. 
ii Understand what happens to genetic material during the cell cycle, including the 
stages of mitosis. 
iii Understand how mitosis contributes to growth, repair and asexual reproduction. 
CORE PRACTICAL 3: Make a temporary squash preparation of a root tip to show stages 
of mitosis in the meristem under the light microscope. 
 
iv Understand how meiosis results in haploid gametes, including the stages of 
meiosis. 
v Understand that meiosis results in genetic variation through recombination of 
alleles, including independent assortment and crossing over. 
vi Understand what chromosome mutations are, as illustrated by translocations. 
vii Understand how non-disjunction can lead to polysomy, including Down’s 
syndrome, and monosomy, including Turner’s syndrome. 
2.4 Sexual reproduction in mammals 
i Understand the processes of oogenesis and spermatogenesis. 
ii Understand the events of fertilisation from the first contact between the 
gametes to the fusion of nuclei. 
iii Understand the early development of the embryo to blastocyst stage. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
12 
 
Students should: 
2.5 Sexual reproduction in plants 
i Understand how a pollen grain forms in the anther and the embryo sac forms in 
the ovule. 
ii Understand how the male nuclei formed by division of the generative nucleus in 
the pollen grain reach the embryo sac, including the roles of the tube nucleus, 
pollen tube and enzymes. 
CORE PRACTICAL 4: Investigate the effect of sucrose concentrations on pollen tube 
growth or germination. 
 
iii Understand the process of double fertilisation inside the embryo sac to form a 
triploid endosperm and a zygote. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
13 
Topic 3: Classification and Biodiversity 
This topic considers the evidence used in the development of models for the 
classification of organisms. It also considers the limitations of these models. The 
topic includes the principles underlying natural selection and how this can lead to 
speciation.  
Opportunities for developing mathematical skills within this topic include the 
principles of sampling as applied to scientific data, and assessment of species 
diversity using a formula to calculate an index of diversity. (Please see Appendix 6: 
Mathematical skills and exemplifications for further information.) 
 
Students should: 
3.1 Classification 
i Know that the classification system consists of a hierarchy of domain, kingdom, 
phylum, class, order, family, genus and species.  
ii Understand the limitations of the definition of a species as a group of 
organisms with similar characteristics that interbreed to produce fertile 
offspring. 
iii Understand why it is often difficult to assign organisms to any one species or to 
identify new species. 
iv Understand how gel electrophoresis can be used to distinguish between species 
and determine evolutionary relationships.  
v Know that DNA sequencing and bioinformatics can be used to distinguish 
between species and determine evolutionary relationships. 
vi Understand the role of scientific journals, the peer review process and scientific 
conferences in validating new evidence supporting the accepted scientific 
theory of evolution. 
vii Understand the evidence for the three-domain model of classification as an 
alternative to the five-kingdom model and the role of the scientific community 
in validating this evidence.  
3.2 Natural selection 
i Understand how evolution can come about through natural selection acting on 
variation bringing about adaptations. 
ii Understand how organisms occupy niches according to physiological, 
behavioural and anatomical adaptations. 
iii Understand how reproductive isolation can lead to allopatric and sympatric 
speciation.  
iv Understand that there is an evolutionary race between pathogens and the 
development of medicines to treat the diseases they cause. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
14 
 
Students should: 
3.3 Biodiversity 
i Know that biodiversity can be assessed at different scales: 
● within a habitat at the species level using a formula to calculate an index 
of diversity: 
( )
( )
NN 1D Σn n 1
−= −
 
 
● within a species at the genetic level by looking at the variety of alleles in 
the gene pool of a population. 
ii Understand the ethical and economic reasons (ecosystem services) for the 
maintenance of biodiversity. 
iii Understand the principles of ex-situ (zoos and seed banks) and in-situ 
conservation (protected habitats), and the issues surrounding each method. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
15 
Topic 4: Exchange and Transport 
This topic considers the requirements for transport mechanisms in cells and mass 
flow systems in organisms. The roles of the components of the mammalian 
circulatory system and the vascular system in plants are studied. Practical skills are 
developed through the investigation of factors that affect membrane permeability 
and water potential of plant tissues. 
Opportunities for developing mathematical skills within this topic include: 
recognising and making use of appropriate units in calculations; recognising and 
using expressions in decimal and standard form; using ratios, fractions and 
percentages; finding arithmetic means; solving algebraic equations; translating 
information between graphical, numerical and algebraic forms; plotting variables 
from experimental data; understanding that y = mx + c represents a linear 
relationship; determining the intercept of a graph; calculating rate of change from a 
graph showing a linear relationship; calculating the circumferences, surface areas 
and volumes of regular shapes. (Please see Appendix 6: Mathematical skills and 
exemplifications for further information.) 
 
Students should: 
4.1 Surface area to volume ratio 
i Understand how surface area to volume ratio affects transport of molecules in 
living organisms. 
ii Understand why organisms need a mass transport system and specialised gas 
exchange surfaces as they increase in size. 
4.2 Cell transport mechanisms 
i Know the structure of the cell surface membrane with reference to the fluid 
mosaic model. 
ii Understand how passive transport is brought about by: 
● diffusion 
● facilitated diffusion (through carrier proteins and protein channels) 
● osmosis. 
 
iii Understand how the properties of molecules affects how they are transported, 
including solubility, size and charge. 
iv Know that large molecules can be transported into and out of cells through the 
formation of vesicles, in the processes of endocytosis and exocytosis. 
CORE PRACTICAL 5: Investigate the effect of temperature on beetroot membrane 
permeability. 
CORE PRACTICAL 6: Determine the water potential of plant cells. 
 
Water potential = turgor pressure + osmotic potential 
 
ψ = 
P + π  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
16 
 
Students should: 
4.2 Cell transport mechanisms (continued) 
v Understand the process of active transport, including the role of ATP. 
vi Know that phosphorylation of ADP requires energy and that hydrolysis of ATP 
provides an accessible supply of energy for biological processes. 
4.3 Gas exchange 
i Understand how insects, fish and mammals are adapted for gas exchange. 
CORE PRACTICAL 7: Dissect an insect to show the structure of the gas exchange 
system, taking into account the safe and ethical use of organisms. 
ii Understand gas exchange in flowering plants, including the role of stomata, gas 
exchange surfaces in the leaf and lenticels. 
4.4 Circulation 
i Know the structure of the heart, arteries, veins and capillaries. 
ii Understand the advantages of a double circulatory system in mammals over the 
single circulatory systems in bony fish, including the facility for blood to be 
pumped to the body at higher pressure and the splitting of oxygenated and 
deoxygenated blood. 
iii Know the sequence of events of the cardiac cycle. 
iv Understand myogenic stimulation of the heart, including the roles of the 
sinoatrial node (SAN), atrioventricular node (AVN) and bundle of His. 
v Be able to interpret data showing ECG traces and pressure changes during the 
cardiac cycle.  
vi Know the structure of blood as plasma and blood cells, to include erythrocytes 
and leucocytes (neutrophils, eosinophils, monocytes and lymphocytes).  
vii Know the function of blood as transport, defence, and formation of lymph and 
tissue fluid. 
viii Understand the role of platelets and plasma proteins in the sequence of events 
leading to blood clotting, including:
 
● platelets form a plug and release clotting factors, including thromboplastin 
● prothrombin changes to its active form, thrombin 
● soluble fibrinogen forms insoluble fibrin to cover the wound. 
 
ix Understand the stages that lead to atherosclerosis, its effect on health and the 
factors that increase the risk of its development. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
17 
 
Students should: 
4.5 Transport of gases in the blood 
i Understand the structure of haemoglobin in relation to its role in the transport of 
respiratory gases, including the Bohr effect. 
ii Understand the oxygen dissociation curve of haemoglobin. 
iii Understand the similarities and differences between the structures and functions 
of haemoglobin and myoglobin. 
iv Understand the significance of the oxygen affinity of fetal haemoglobin as 
compared to adult haemoglobin. 
4.6 Transfer of materials between the circulatory system and cells 
i Understand how the interchange of substances occurs through the formation and 
reabsorption of tissue fluid, including the effects of hydrostatic pressure and 
oncotic pressure. 
ii Know that tissue fluid that is not reabsorbed is returned to the blood via the 
lymph system. 
4.7 Transport in plants 
i Understand the structure of xylem and phloem tissues in relation to their role in 
transport. 
ii Understand how water can be moved through plant cells by the apoplastic and 
symplastic pathways. 
iii Understand how the cohesion-tension model explains the transport of water 
from plant roots to shoots. 
iv Understand how temperature, light, humidity and movement of air affect the 
rate of transpiration.  
v Understand the strengths and weaknesses of the mass-flow hypothesis in 
explaining the movement of sugars through phloem tissue.  
CORE PRACTIAL 8:
 Investigate factors affecting water uptake by plant shoots using a 
potometer. 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
18 
Topic 5: Energy for Biological Processes 
This topic builds on knowledge of carbohydrates and enzymes. It considers the 
sources of energy in living organisms and how energy transfers take place. Details 
of the stages in respiration and photosynthesis, the roles of co-enzymes and 
electrons along with the uses of intermediates are included. Practical skills are 
developed in the investigations of photosynthetic pigments and the factors that 
affect rates of respiration and photosynthesis. 
Opportunities for developing mathematical skills within this topic include: 
translating information between graphical, numerical and algebraic forms; plotting 
variables from experimental data; understanding that y = mx + c represents a 
linear relationship; determining the intercept of a graph; calculating rate of change 
from a graph showing a linear relationship; determining the intercept of a graph; 
drawing and using the slope of a tangent to a curve as a measure of rate of 
change. (Please see Appendix 6: Mathematical skills and exemplifications for 
further information.) 
 
Students should: 
5.1 Aerobic respiration 
i  Know that cellular respiration yields ATP which is used as a source of energy 
for metabolic reactions, and the process also generates heat. 
ii Know the different stages in aerobic respiration, including:  
● glycolysis in the cytoplasm 
● link reaction 
● Krebs cycle 
● oxidative phosphorylation in mitochondria. 
 
5.2 Glycolysis 
i Understand the conversion of monosaccharides to pyruvate during glycolysis 
in the cytoplasm, including: 
● the phosphorylation of hexose molecules by ATP 
● breakdown to glycerate 3-phosphate (GP) 
● production of reduced coenzyme (NADH) and ATP (details of 
intermediate compounds and other reactions are not required). 
 
5.3 Link reaction and Krebs cycle 
i Know that the link reaction and Krebs cycle take place in the mitochondrial 
matrix. 
ii Understand that during the complete oxidation of pyruvate the events of the 
link reaction and the Krebs cycle result in the removal of carbon atoms to 
produce: 
● carbon dioxide 
● reduced coenzyme (NADH) 
● ATP (detailed knowledge of the intermediate compounds in the Krebs 
cycle is not required).  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
19 
 
Students should: 
5.4 Oxidative phosphorylation 
i Know that the electron transport chain takes place in the inner mitochondrial 
membrane. 
ii Understand the role of the electron transport chain in generating ATP 
(oxidative phosphorylation). 
iii Understand the role of oxygen as a terminal electron acceptor forming water. 
iv Understand how ATP is synthesised by chemiosmosis. 
v Understand the importance of mitochondrial membranes in this process. 
5.5 Anaerobic respiration 
i Know that anaerobic respiration is the partial breakdown of hexoses to 
produce a limited yield of ATP in the absence of oxygen. 
ii Understand the difference in ATP yields from one molecule of hexose sugar in 
aerobic conditions compared with anaerobic conditions. 
iii Understand how lactate as a by-product of anaerobic respiration affects 
mammalian muscle contraction. 
iv Understand how anaerobic respiration in plants results in ethanol formation. 
CORE PRACTICAL 9: Investigate factors affecting the rate of aerobic or anaerobic 
respiration using a respirometer, taking into account the safe and ethical use of 
organisms. 
 
5.6 Photosynthetic pigments 
i Understand what is meant by absorption and action spectra. 
CORE PRACTICAL 10: Investigate the effects of different wavelengths of light on the 
rate of photosynthesis. 
 
ii Understand why many plants have a variety of different photosynthetic 
pigments. 
CORE PRACTICAL 11: Investigate the presence of different chloroplast pigments 
using chromatography. 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
20 
 
Students should: 
5.7 Photosynthesis 
i Know the structure of chloroplasts, including: envelope, stroma, grana and 
lamellar structure. 
Light-dependent stage: 
ii Understand the role of the thylakoid membranes in the light-dependent stage 
of photosynthesis.  
iii Understand that the processes of cyclic and non-cyclic photophosphorylation 
result in the production of reduced NADP, ATP and oxygen. 
Light-independent stage: 
iv Understand the role of the stroma in the light-independent stage of 
photosynthesis. 
v Understand how carbon dioxide is fixed by combination with 5C ribulose 
bisphosphate (RuBP) to form glycerate 3-phosphate (GP) using the enzyme 
ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase (RUBISCO). 
vi Understand how reduced NADP and ATP from the light-dependent stage are 
used: 
● to synthesise glyceraldehyde phosphate (GALP) from GP 
● to regenerate 5C ribulose bisphosphate in the Calvin cycle (details of 
intermediate compounds are not required). 
 
vii Understand how GALP is used as a raw material in the production of 
monosaccharides, amino acids and other molecules. 
viii Understand the factors that limit photosynthesis including carbon dioxide, 
light intensity and temperature. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
21 
Topic 6: Microbiology and Pathogens 
This topic builds on knowledge of prokaryotes, eukaryotes, viruses and transport 
systems. It considers how some microorganisms act as pathogens. Details of how 
the human body responds to infection are included. The social, economic and 
ethical implications of the methods of treatment and control of the spread of 
infection are discussed. Microbial techniques are used in the isolation of bacteria 
and the investigation of the factors that affect their rate of growth. 
Opportunities for developing mathematical skills within this topic include: 
recognising and making use of appropriate units in calculations, recognising and 
using expressions in decimal and standard form; using ratios, fractions and 
percentages; estimating results; finding and using power, exponential and 
logarithmic functions; using an appropriate number of significant figures; finding 
arithmetic means; using logarithms in relation to quantities that range over several 
orders of magnitude; translating information between graphical, numerical and 
algebraic forms; plotting two variables from experimental data; determining the 
intercept of a graph; drawing and using the slope of a tangent to a curve as a 
measure of rate of change. (Please see Appendix 6: Mathematical skills and 
exemplifications for further information.) 
 
Students should: 
6.1 Microbial techniques 
i Understand the basic aseptic techniques used in culturing organisms.  
ii Understand the principles and techniques involved in culturing 
microorganisms. 
iii Understand the use of different media (broth cultures, agar and selective 
media). 
iv Understand the different methods of measuring the growth of a bacterial 
culture as illustrated by cell counts, dilution plating, mass and optical 
methods (turbidity). 
v Understand the different phases of a bacterial growth curve (lag phase, log 
phase, stationary phase and death phase) and calculate exponential growth 
rate constants. 
CORE PRACTICAL 12: Investigate the rate of growth of bacteria in liquid culture 
taking into account the safe and ethical use of organisms. 
 
CORE PRACTICAL 13: Isolate individual species from a mixed culture of bacteria 
using streak plating taking into account the safe and ethical use of organisms. 
6.2 Bacteria as pathogens 
i Understand that bacteria can be agents of infection, invading and destroying 
host tissues and producing toxins.  
ii Understand that pathogenic effects can be produced by exotoxins 
(Staphylococcus spp.), endotoxins (Salmonella spp.) and invasion of host 
tissue (Mycobacterium tuberculosis). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
22 
 
Students should: 
6.3 Action of antibiotics 
i Understand the action of bactericidal and bacteriostatic antibiotics, as 
illustrated by penicillin and tetracycline. 
6.4 Antibiotic resistance 
i Understand the development and spread of antibiotic resistance in bacteria. 
ii Understand the methods and difficulties of controlling the spread of antibiotic 
resistance in bacteria. 
6.5 Other pathogenic agents 
i Understand the transmission, mode of infection and pathogenic effect of the 
following: 
● stem rust fungus on cereal crops (Puccinia graminis on wheat)  
● influenza virus 
● the malarial parasite (Plasmodium spp).  
 (Detailed life cycles are not required.) 
 
6.6 Problems of controlling endemic diseases 
i Understand the social and economic and ethical implications of different 
control methods for endemic malaria and the role of the scientific community 
in validating these methods.  
6.7 Response to infection 
i Know the mode of action of macrophages, neutrophils and lymphocytes. 
ii Understand the development of the humoral immune response, including the 
role of: 
● antigen presenting T cells 
● T helper cells and cytokines 
● B cells 
● clonal selection 
● plasma cells 
● antibodies. 
iii Understand the development of the cell-mediated immune response including 
the role of: 
● antigen presenting cells 
● T helper cells and cytokines 
● T killer cells. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
23 
 
Students should: 
6.7 Response to infection continued 
iv Understand the role of T and B memory cells in the secondary immune 
response. 
v Understand how immunity can be natural or artificial, and active or passive. 
vi Understand how vaccination can be used in the control of disease and the 
development of herd immunity.  
vii Understand the potential issues in populations where a proportion choose not 
to vaccinate. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
24 
Topic 7: Modern Genetics 
This topic builds on the knowledge of nucleic acids and proteins and how they are 
involved in gene expression. Knowledge of epigenetics, the use of stem cells and 
how these are contributing to medical advances are considered. The ethical 
implications of the use of gene technology in scientific developments are discussed.  
Opportunities for developing mathematical skills within this topic include: 
recognising and using expressions in decimal and standard form; using an 
appropriate number of significant figures. (Please see Appendix 6: Mathematical 
skills and exemplifications for further information.) 
 
Students should:  
7.1 Using gene sequencing 
i Understand what is meant by the term genome. 
ii Understand how PCR can be used to amplify DNA samples, and how these 
samples can be used: 
● to predict the amino acid sequence of proteins and possible links to 
genetically determined conditions, using gene sequencing. 
● in forensic science, to identify criminals and to test paternity, using DNA 
profiling. 
 
7.2 Factors affecting gene expression 
i Know that transcription factors are proteins that bind to DNA. 
ii Understand the role of transcription factors in regulating gene expression. 
iii Understand how post–transcription modification of mRNA in eukaryotic cells 
(RNA splicing) can result in different products from a single gene. 
iv Understand that gene expression can be changed by epigenetic modification, 
including non-coding RNA, histone modification and DNA methylation.  
v Know that epigenetic modification is important in ensuring cell differentiation. 
7.3 Stem cells 
i Understand what is meant by a stem cell, including the differences between 
totipotent, pluripotent and multipotent stem cells.  
ii Understand that pluripotent stem cells from embryos provide opportunities to 
develop new medical advances although there are ethical considerations. 
iii Understand how epigenetic modifications can result in totipotent stem cells in 
the embryo developing into pluripotent cells in the blastocyst and finally into 
fully differentiated somatic cells. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
25 
 
Students should: 
7.3 Stem cells continued 
iv Understand how differentiated fibroblasts can be reprogrammed to form 
induced pluripotent stem cells (iPS cells) by the artificial introduction of 
named genes. 
v Understand why the use of iPS stem cells may be less problematic than the 
use of embryonic stem cells. 
7.4 Gene technology 
i Understand how recombinant DNA can be produced, including the role of 
restriction endonucleases and DNA ligase. 
ii Understand how recombinant DNA can be inserted into other cells, and the 
use of various vectors such as viruses and gene guns. 
iii Understand how antibiotic resistance marker genes and replica plating are 
used to identify recombinant cells. 
iv Understand how ‘knockout’ mice can be used as a valuable animal model to 
investigate gene function. 
v Understand the process of genetic modification of soya beans and how it has 
been used to improve production, including altering the balance of fatty acids 
to prevent oxidation of soya products. 
vi Understand why the widespread use of genetic modification of major 
commercial crops and other transgenic processes have caused public debate 
of their advantages and disadvantages. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
26 
Topic 8: Origins of Genetic Variation  
This topic builds on the knowledge of meiosis and natural selection. It considers the 
dihybrid inheritance of alleles and genes. The inheritance of unlinked and linked 
genes is studied. The effect of selection pressures on the allele frequencies in gene 
pools and their impact on speciation are discussed.  
Opportunities for developing mathematical skills within this topic include: using 
ratios, fractions and percentages; understanding simple probability; using Chi 
squared tests; understanding measures of dispersion, including standard deviation 
and range; solving algebraic equations; the analysis of allele frequencies using the 
Hardy-Weinberg equation. (Please see Appendix 6: Mathematical skills and 
exemplifications for further information.) 
 
Students should: 
8.1 Origins of genetic variation  
i Understand that mutations are the source of new variations and that the 
processes of random assortment and crossing over during meiosis give rise to 
new combinations of alleles in gametes. 
ii Understand how random fertilisation during sexual reproduction brings about 
genetic variation. 
8.2 Transfer of genetic information 
i Understand the terms ‘genotype and phenotype’,’ homozygote and 
heterozygote’, ‘dominance’, ‘recessive’, ‘codominance’ and ‘multiple alleles’. 
ii Be able to construct genetic crosses and pedigree diagrams. 
iii Understand the inheritance of two non-interacting unlinked genes. 
iv Understand that autosomal linkage results from the presence of alleles on the 
same chromosome and that the results of crosses can be explained by the 
events of meiosis, including black/grey body and long/vestigial wing in 
Drosophila. 
v Understand sex linkage on the X chromosome, including haemophilia in 
humans. 
vi Be able to use chi squared tests to test the significance of the difference 
between observed and expected results.  
8.3 Gene pools 
i Understand that selection pressures acting on the gene pool change allele 
frequencies in the population, including: 
● stabilising selection maintaining continuity in a population 
● disruptive selection leading to changes or speciation. 
 
ii Understand that sometimes changes in allele frequencies can be the result of 
chance and not selection, including genetic drift. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
27 
 
Students should: 
8.3 Gene pools continued 
iii Understand that allele frequencies can be influenced by: 
● population bottlenecks 
● founder effect. 
 
iv Understand how the Hardy-Weinberg equation can be used to monitor 
changes in the allele frequencies in a population. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
28 
Topic 9: Control Systems 
This topic builds on knowledge of transport mechanisms and considers the 
processes of chemical and nervous coordination. Details of the role of plant growth 
substances and hormonal control in mammals are included. Osmoregulation in 
mammals adapted to dry environments is considered. Details of the effect of drugs 
on the transmission of nerve impulses are studied. Practical skills are developed in 
the investigation of the effect of gibberellin on germination. 
Opportunities for developing mathematical skills within this topic include: making 
use of appropriate units in calculations; using expressions in decimal and standard 
form; using ratios, fractions and percentages; interpreting frequency tables and 
diagrams, bar charts and histograms; understanding simple probability; translating 
information between graphical, numerical and algebraic forms; plotting variables 
from experimental data; understanding that y = mx + c represents a linear 
relationship; determining the intercept of a graph; calculating rate of change from a 
graph; using the slope of a tangent to a curve as a measure of rate of change. 
(Please see Appendix 6: Mathematical skills and exemplifications for further 
information.) 
 
Students should: 
9.1 Homeostasis 
i Know that homeostasis is the maintenance of a state of dynamic equilibrium. 
ii Understand the importance of maintaining pH, temperature and water 
potential in the body.  
iii Understand what is meant by negative feedback and positive feedback 
control. 
9.2 Chemical control in mammals 
i Understand the principles of mammalian hormone production by endocrine 
glands and their mode of action involving receptors on target cells. 
ii Know that there are two main modes of action in hormones: 
● hormones attach to receptor sites and trigger the release of a second 
messenger that activates specific enzymes in the cell, including 
adrenaline 
● hormones enter cells and bind directly to transcription factors, including 
oestrogen. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
29 
 
Students should: 
9.3 Chemical control in plants  
i Understand that chemical control in plants is brought about by plant growth 
substances such as auxins, cytokinins and gibberellins. 
CORE PRACTICAL 14: Investigate the effect of gibberellin on the production of 
amylase in germinating cereals using a starch agar assay. 
 
ii Know that auxin has several effects, including cell elongation, suppression of 
lateral buds (apical dominance) and promoting root growth. 
iii Understand that plant growth substances often interact with each other as 
shown by the antagonistic actions of cytokinin and auxin on apical 
dominance. 
iv Understand how phytochrome controls flowering and photomorphogenesis. 
9.4  Structure and function of the mammalian nervous system 
i Know that the mammalian nervous system is composed of the central and 
peripheral nervous systems.  
ii Know the structure of the spinal cord. 
iii Know the location and main functions of:  
● the medulla oblongata – controls breathing and heart rate 
● cerebellum – controls balance and coordination of movement 
● cerebrum – initiates movement 
● hypothalamus – temperature regulation and osmoregulation.  
 
iv Know that the peripheral nervous system is divided into autonomic and 
voluntary systems. 
v Understand why the autonomic nervous system is divided into sympathetic 
and parasympathetic systems, which act antagonistically. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
30 
 
Students should: 
9.5  Nervous transmission 
i Understand how the properties of the axon membrane and the transport of 
Na+ ions and K+ ions result in a resting potential. 
ii Understand how an action potential is formed and how it is propagated along 
an axon. 
iii Understand why the speed of transmission along myelinated axons is greater 
than along non-myelinated axons, including the role of saltatory conduction. 
iv Understand the structure and function of a synapse, including the role of 
transmitter substances limited to acetylcholine and noradrenaline. 
v Understand the formation and effects of excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic 
potentials. 
9.6  Effects of drugs on the nervous system 
i Understand how the effects of drugs can be caused by their influence on 
synaptic transmission, including: 
● nicotine (mimicking effects of acetylcholine) 
● lidocaine (blocking voltage gated Na+ ion channels) 
● cobra venom (blocking acetylcholine receptors). 
 
9.7  Detection of light by mammals 
i Know the structure of the human retina. 
ii Understand the role of the rhodopsin in initiating action potentials. 
iii Understand how the distribution of human rod and cone cells maintain vision 
in different light intensities. 
9.8 Control of heart rate in mammals 
i Understand how the autonomic nervous system controls heart rate including: 
● aortic and carotid baroreceptors and chemoreceptors 
● cardiac centre in the medulla oblongata 
● sympathetic nerve stimulated to release noradrenaline at the SAN 
● parasympathetic nerve stimulated to release acetylcholine at the SAN.  
 
ii Understand the role of the autonomic nervous system in causing the release 
of adrenaline to increase heart rate. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
31 
 
Students should: 
9.9 Osmoregulation and temperature regulation 
i Know the gross and microscopic structure of the mammalian kidney. 
ii Understand how urea is produced in the liver from excess amino acids (details 
of the ornithine cycle are not required) and how it is removed from the 
bloodstream by ultrafiltration. 
iii Understand how solutes are selectively reabsorbed in the proximal tubule and 
how the Loop of Henle acts as a counter-current multiplier to increase the 
reabsorption of water. 
iv Understand how the pituitary gland and osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus, 
combined with the action of antidiuretic hormone (ADH) bring about negative 
feedback control of mammalian plasma concentration. 
v Understand how the kidney of a kangaroo rat (Dipodomys sp.) is adapted for 
life in a dry environment. 
vi Understand that an endotherm is able to produce heat through metabolic 
processes but an ectotherm must rely on the external environment.  
vii Understand how an endotherm is able to regulate its temperature through 
behaviour, and also physiologically through the autonomic nervous system, 
including the role of thermoreceptors, hypothalamus and the skin. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
32 
Topic 10: Ecosystems 
This topic considers the interactions between the organisms and the environment 
within an ecosystem. It includes details of how biotic and abiotic factors are 
involved in the development of ecosystems over time. Human influences on 
ecosystems are also discussed along with the need for conservation.  
Opportunities for developing mathematical skills within this topic include: 
estimating results; constructing and interpresting frequency tables and diagrams, 
bar charts and histograms; understanding principles of sampling, including use of a 
formula to calculate an index of diversity; understanding the terms mean, median 
and mode; selecting and using statistical tests, including the Chi squared test, 
Student’s t-test of difference, Spearman’s rank, correlation coefficient; standard 
deviation and range. (Please see Appendix 6: Mathematical skills and 
exemplifications for further information.) 
 
Students should: 
10.1 The nature of ecosystems 
i Understand what is meant by the term ecosystem and that they range in size. 
ii Understand what is meant by trophic levels. 
iii Understand the advantages and disadvantages of pyramids of numbers, 
biomass (dry) and energy as useful representations of ecosystem structure 
and how biomass and energy are transferred within them.  
iv Know the ecological techniques used to assess abundance and  distribution of 
organisms in a natural habitat, including types of quadrat, transects, ACFOR 
scales, percentage cover and individual counts. 
v Be able to select appropriate ecological techniques according to the 
ecosystem and organisms to be studied. 
CORE PRACTICAL 15: Investigate the effect of different sampling methods on 
estimates of the size of a population taking into account the safe and ethical use of 
organisms. 
 
vi Be able to use statistical tests to analyse data, including t-test and Spearman 
rank correlation coefficient. 
10.2 Energy transfer through ecosystems 
i Understand how energy is transferred between trophic levels using the terms 
‘net primary productivity’ and ‘gross primary productivity’. 
ii Be able to calculate the efficiency of energy transfer between different trophic 
levels and account for the loss of energy at each level. 
iii Understand the significance of microorganisms in the recycling of nutrients 
within an ecosystem. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
33 
 
Students should: 
10.3 Changes in ecosystems 
i Understand how ecosystems can develop over time, including use of the 
terms colonisation and succession and types of climax communities. 
ii Understand the effects of biotic and abiotic factors on population size. 
CORE PRACTICAL 16: Investigate the effect of one abiotic factor on the distribution or 
morphology of one species taking into account the safe and ethical use of organisms. 
 
10.4 Human effects on ecosystems 
i Understand data relating to human influences on ecosystems, including 
climate change and depletion of biological resources, including overfishing. 
ii Understand the effect that treaties such as CITES have had on global 
biodiversity.  
iii Understand the idea that sustainability of resources depends on effective 
management of the conflict between human needs and conservation, as 
illustrated by attempts to conserve fish stocks and reduce possible causes of 
climate change. 
iv Understand the role of the scientific journals, the peer review process and 
scientific conferences in validating evidence related to the debate about 
climate change.
 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
34 
 
Science Practical Endorsement 
Overview 
The assessment of practical skills is a compulsory 
requirement of the course of study for A level qualifications 
in biology, chemistry and physics. It will appear on all 
students’ certificates as a separately reported result, 
alongside the overall grade for the qualification. The 
arrangements for the assessment of practical skills will be 
common to all awarding organisations. These arrangements 
include: 
● A minimum of 12 practical activities to be carried out by 
each student which, together, meet the requirements of 
Appendices 5b (Practical skills identified for direct 
assessment and developed through teaching and 
learning) and 5c (Use of apparatus and techniques) 
from the prescribed subject content, published by the 
Department for Education. The required practical 
activities will be defined by each awarding organisation. 
● Teachers will assess students against Common Practical 
Assessment Criteria (CPAC) issued by the awarding 
organisations. The CPAC are based on the requirements 
of Appendices 5b and 5c of the subject content 
requirements published by the Department for 
Education, and define the minimum standard required 
for the achievement of a pass.  
● Each student will keep an appropriate record of their 
practical work, including their assessed practical 
activities 
● Students who demonstrate the required standard across 
all the requirements of the CPAC will receive a ‘pass’ 
grade 
● There will be no separate assessment of practical skills 
for AS qualifications. 
● Students will answer questions in the AS and A level 
examination papers that assess the requirements of 
Appendix 5a (Practical skills identified for indirect 
assessment and developed through teaching and 
learning) from the prescribed subject content, published 
by the Department for Education. These questions may 
draw on, or range beyond, the practical activities 
included in the specification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
35 
 
Setting practical work 
Teaching and learning 
Teachers should ensure that the core practicals listed in the 
subject content are incorporated into teaching and learning 
and that students carry them out. This is to support 
development of competency for the practical endorsement 
but also because students will be indirectly assessed on 
their practical skills in the examinations. Teachers should 
consider setting additional practical work to support 
teaching and learning.  
Teachers must devise and retain a teaching plan that shows 
when practicals will be covered in teaching and learning.  
Students should attempt all 16 practicals given in the 
qualification content. 
Conditions for assessing practical work 
Authenticity 
Students and teachers must sign the Practical competency 
authentication sheet (see Appendix 4). 
Collaboration 
Students may work in pairs on some practicals, where this 
is appropriate, provided they are able to produce individual 
evidence to meet the competency statements.  
Feedback 
Teachers may help students to understand instructions and 
may provide feedback to support development of the 
competencies. Teachers should be confident that students 
have developed their skills and thus students should be able 
to demonstrate the competencies independently by the end 
of the course. 
Resources 
Students must have access to the equipment needed to 
carry out the core practicals. Students must also have 
access to IT and internet facilities. 
Supervision 
Teachers must ensure that students are supervised 
appropriately. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
36 
Evidence of practical work 
Evidence should be collected of practical work that is 
sufficient to show that the competencies have been 
achieved. Evidence may take a variety of forms. 
The practical activities prescribed in the specification 
provide opportunities for demonstrating competence in all 
the skills identified, together with the use of apparatus and 
techniques for each subject. However, students can also 
demonstrate these competencies in any additional practical 
activity undertaken throughout the course of study which 
covers the requirements of Appendix 5c. 
Observations and notes by teachers 
Teachers should observe sufficient student practicals to 
ensure that competencies have been achieved. 
Student records  
Students should keep notes of their practical work sufficient 
to show evidence of the practical competencies on making 
and recording observations and researching, referencing 
and reporting. 
Assessing practical work 
Teachers should make a judgement of student practical 
competence using the Common Practical Assessment 
Criteria on the following pages. Teachers should include any 
comments on the Practical competency authentication sheet 
(see Appendix 4) to justify the decision made. 
In order to achieve a pass, students will need to: 
● develop these competencies by carrying out a minimum 
of 12 practical activities, which allow acquisition of the 
techniques outlined in the requirements of the 
specification 
● consistently and routinely exhibit the competencies 
listed in the CPAC before the completion of the A-level 
course 
● keep an appropriate record of their practical work, 
including their assessed practical activities  
● be able to demonstrate and/or record independent 
evidence of their competency, including evidence of 
independent application of investigative approaches and 
methods to practical work. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
37 
Common Practical Assessment Criteria (CPAC) 
Teachers must assess student practicals against the following competencies. 
 
Criteria for the assessment of GCE Science practical competency for 
Biology, Chemistry and Physics 
Competency The criteria for a pass 
In order to be awarded a Pass a learner must, by the end 
of the practical science assessment, consistently and 
routinely meet the criteria in respect of each competency 
listed below. 
A learner may demonstrate the competencies in any 
practical activity undertaken as part of that assessment 
throughout the course of study. 
Learners may undertake practical activities in groups. 
However, the evidence generated by each learner must 
demonstrate that he or she independently meets the 
criteria outlined below in respect of each competency. 
Such evidence: 
(a) will comprise both the learner’s performance during 
each practical activity and his or her contemporaneous 
record of the work that he or she has undertaken during 
that activity, and 
(b) must include evidence of independent application of 
investigative approaches and methods to practical work. 
1. Follows written 
procedures 
a) Correctly follows written instructions to carry out the 
experimental techniques or procedures. 
2. Applies 
investigative 
approaches and 
methods when 
using instruments 
and equipment 
a) Correctly uses appropriate instrumentation, apparatus 
and materials (including ICT) to carry out investigative 
activities, experimental techniques and procedures with 
minimal assistance or prompting. 
b) Carries out techniques or procedures methodically, in 
sequence and in combination, identifying practical issues 
and making adjustments when necessary. 
c) Identifies and controls significant quantitative variables 
where applicable, and plans approaches to take account 
of variables that cannot readily be controlled. 
d) Selects appropriate equipment and measurement 
strategies in order to ensure suitably accurate results. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
38 
 
Criteria for the assessment of GCE Science practical competency for 
Biology, Chemistry and Physics 
3. Safely uses a range of 
practical equipment and 
materials 
a) Identifies hazards and assesses risks associated 
with these hazards, making safety adjustments as 
necessary, when carrying out experimental 
techniques and procedures in the lab or field. 
b) Uses appropriate safety equipment and 
approaches to minimise risks with minimal 
prompting. 
4. Makes and records 
observations 
a) Makes accurate observations relevant to the 
experimental or investigative procedure. 
b) Obtains accurate, precise and sufficient data for 
experimental and investigative procedures and 
records this methodically using appropriate units 
and conventions. 
5. Researches, references 
and reports 
a) Uses appropriate software and/or tools to process 
data, carry out research and report findings. 
b) Cites sources of information demonstrating that 
research has taken place, supporting planning and 
conclusions. 
 
Marking and standardisation 
The practical work is assessed by teachers. Pearson Edexcel 
will support teachers in making judgements against the 
criteria for assessment.  
In coordination with other exam boards, Pearson will 
monitor how schools provide students with opportunities to 
develop and demonstrate the required practical skills and 
how they mark the assessments. 
Every school will be monitored at least once in a two-year 
period in respect of at least one of the A level science 
subjects. These monitoring visits will be coordinated by 
JCQ, who will undertake communications with centres to 
facilitate the allocation of exam board monitoring visits.  
In common with other exam boards, Pearson will require 
centres to provide a statement confirming they have taken 
reasonable steps to secure that students: 
● undertook the minimum number of practical activities, 
and  
● made a contemporaneous record of their work. 
If a school fails to provide a statement, or provides a false 
statement, this will be treated as malpractice and/or 
maladministration. 
Students will only get a certificate for the practical 
assessment if they achieve at least a grade E in the 
examined part of the qualification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
39 
Students who do not pass the practical assessment will 
have a ‘Not Classified’ outcome included on their certificate 
unless they were exempt from the assessment because of a 
disability. 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of 
assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in controlled assessments discovered 
before the candidate has signed the declaration of 
authentication form does not need to be reported to 
Pearson. 
Candidate malpractice found in controlled assessments after 
the declaration of authenticity has been signed, and in 
examinations must be reported to Pearson on a  
JCQ Form M1 (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-
office/malpractice
). The completed form can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to Investigations 
Team, Pearson, 190 High Holborn, London, WC1V 7BH. 
Please provide as much information and supporting 
documentation as possible. Note that the final decision 
regarding appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report candidate malpractice constitutes staff or 
centre malpractice.  
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate 
malpractice and maladministration of our qualifications. As 
with candidate malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is 
any act that compromises or seeks to compromise the 
process of assessment or undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and 
maladministration must be reported immediately, before 
any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson 
on a JCQ Form M2(a) (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-
office/malpractice). The form, supporting documentation 
and as much information as possible can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to Investigations 
Team, Pearson, 190 High Holborn, London, WC1V 7BH. Note 
that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies 
with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
40 
More-detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the 
latest version of the document JCQ General and Vocational 
Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments Policies and Procedures, available at 
www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
41 
 
Assessment 
Assessment summary 
Summary of table of assessment 
Students must complete all assessment in May/June in any single year. 
 
Paper 1: Advanced Biochemistry, Microbiology and Genetics 
 *Paper code: 9BI0/01 
● Questions draw on content from Topics 1–7. 
● Questions are broken down into a number of parts. 
● Availability: May/June  
● First assessment: 2017 
● The assessment is 1 hour 45 minutes. 
● The assessment consists of 90 marks. 
30% of the 
total 
qualification 
 
 
Paper 2: Advanced Physiology, Evolution and Ecology 
 *Paper code: 9BI0/02 
● Questions draw on content from Topics 1–4 and Topics 8–10. 
● Questions are broken down into a number of parts. 
● Availability: May/June  
● First assessment: 2017 
● The assessment is 1 hour 45 minutes. 
● The assessment consists of 90 marks. 
30% of the 
total 
qualification 
 
 
Paper 3: General and Practical Principles in Biology 
 *Paper code: 9BI0/03 
● Questions draw on content from across all topics, Topics 1–10. 
● Questions are broken down into a number of parts. 
● The paper will include synoptic questions that may draw on two 
or more different topics. 
● Availability: May/June  
● First assessment: 2017 
● The assessment is 2 hours 30 minutes. 
● The assessment consists of 120 marks. 
40% of the 
total 
qualification 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
42 
 
Science Practical Endorsement** 
*Paper code: 9BI0/04 
• Internally assessed and externally moderated by Pearson. 
• Availability: May/June 
• First assessment: 2017 
• The practical endorsement is teacher assessed against the Common Practical 
Assessment criteria (CPAC).  
 
The sample assessment materials can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 
Advanced GCE in Biology B Sample Assessment Materials document.  
*See Appendix 3: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant 
to this qualification. 
** Students will be assessed separately for the Science Practical Endorsement. The 
Endorsement will not contribute to the overall grade for this qualification, but the 
result will be recorded on the student’s certificate. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
43 
Assessment Objectives and weightings 
 
Students must: 
% in 
GCE 
AO1 Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of scientific ideas, 
processes, techniques and procedures 31-33 
AO2 Apply knowledge and understanding of scientific ideas, 
processes, techniques and procedures: 
• in a theoretical context 
• in a practical context 
• when handling qualitative data 
• when handling quantitative data 
41-43 
AO3 Analyse, interpret and evaluate scientific information, ideas and 
evidence, including in relation to issues, to: 
• make judgements and reach conclusions  
• develop and refine practical design and procedures 
25-27 
Total 100% 
 
 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
 
Paper AO1 AO2 AO3 
Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives 
Paper 1: Advanced 
Biochemistry, Microbiology 
and Genetics 
11-13% 12-14% 5-7% 30% 
Paper 2: Advanced 
Physiology, Evolution and 
Ecology 
11-13% 12-14% 5-7% 30% 
Paper 3: General and 
Practical Principles in Biology 8-10% 16-18% 13-15% 40% 
Total for this qualification 31-33% 41-43% 25-27% 100% 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
44 
Entry and assessment information 
Student entry 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for 
this qualification can be found in our UK Information 
Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations 
officers and is available on our website at: 
www.edexcel.com/iwantto/Pages/uk-information-
manual.aspx. 
Discount codes and performance tables 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more 
than one GCE qualification with the same discount code will 
have only one of the grades they achieve counted for the 
purpose of the school and college performance tables. This 
will be the grade for the larger qualification (i.e. the A Level 
grade rather than the AS grade). If the qualifications are 
the same size, then the better grade will be counted (please 
see Appendix 3: Codes). 
Students should be advised that if they take two GCE 
qualifications with the same discount code, the colleges, 
universities and employers to which they wish to progress 
are likely to take the view that this achievement is 
equivalent to only one GCE. The same view may be taken if 
students take two GCE qualifications that have different 
discount codes but which have significant overlap of 
content. Before embarking on their programmes, students 
or their advisers who have any doubts about their subject 
combinations should check with the institution to which 
they wish to progress. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
45 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and 
special consideration 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. 
They allow students with special educational needs, 
disabilities or temporary injuries to:  
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the 
demands of the assessment.  
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the 
particular needs of an individual disabled student without 
affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding 
organisations comply with the duty under the Equality 
Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the 
start of the course. Students will then know what is 
available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for 
assessment.  
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to 
make reasonable adjustments where a person with a 
disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in 
undertaking an assessment. The awarding organisation is 
required to take reasonable steps to overcome that 
disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be 
unique to that individual and therefore might not be in the 
list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will 
depend on a number of factors, which will include: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with 
the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves 
unreasonable costs to the awarding organisation, 
timeframes or affects the security or integrity of the 
assessment. This is because the adjustment is not 
‘reasonable’. 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a 
student's mark or grade to reflect temporary injury, illness 
or other indisposition at the time of the examination/ 
assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
46 
had, a material effect on a candidate’s ability to take an 
assessment or demonstrate his or her level of attainment in 
an assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to 
apply for access arrangements and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, 
reasonable adjustments and special consideration, please 
refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk. 
Equality Act 2010 and Pearson equality policy 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality 
policy requires all students to have equal opportunity to 
access our qualifications and assessments, and our 
qualifications to be awarded in a way that is fair to every 
student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by 
the Equality Act 2010) are not, when they are 
undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in 
comparison to students who do not share that 
characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for 
undertaking a qualification and that this achievement 
can be compared fairly to the achievement of their 
peers. 
You can find details on how to make adjustments for 
students with protected characteristics in the policy 
document Access Arrangements, Reasonable Adjustments 
and Special Considerations, which is on our website, 
www.edexcel.com/Policies.
 
Synoptic assessment 
Synoptic assessment requires students to work across 
different parts of a qualification and to show their 
accumulated knowledge and understanding of a topic or 
subject area. 
Synoptic assessment enables students to show their ability 
to combine their skills, knowledge and understanding with 
breadth and depth of the subject.  
In this qualification, synoptic assessment can be found in  
Paper 3: General and Practical Principles in Biology. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
47 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to 
comply with the requirements of the current Code of 
Practice published by the Office of Qualifications and 
Examinations Regulation (Ofqual). 
This qualification will be graded and certificated on a six-
grade scale from A* to E using the total subject mark. 
Individual papers are not graded. 
The first certification opportunity for the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B will be 2017. 
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum 
judged by Pearson to be of sufficient standard to be 
recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U 
result. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be available in English. 
All student work must be in English. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
48 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
49 
Other information 
Student recruitment 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to 
our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of 
reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and 
progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this 
qualification. 
Students who would benefit most from studying this 
qualification are likely to have a Level 2 qualification such 
as a GCSE in Additional Science or Biology.  
Progression 
Students can progress from this qualification to: 
● a range of different relevant academic or vocational 
higher education qualifications 
● employment in a relevant sector 
● further training. 
Relationship between Advanced Subsidiary GCE and 
Advanced GCE 
The content for Advanced GCE in Biology B includes all the 
content studied at Advanced Subsidiary GCE. The Advanced 
GCE in Biology B builds on the knowledge, skills, and 
understanding achieved when studying the Advanced 
Subsidiary GCE in Biology B. 
Progression from Advanced Subsidiary GCE to 
Advanced GCE 
Students who have achieved the Advanced Subsidiary GCE 
in Biology B can progress to the Advanced GCE in Biology B. 
They would have covered Topics 1-4 which are common to 
both qualifications but the additional Topics 5-10 will need 
to be covered and then all the assessment for the Advanced 
GCE qualification must be taken at the end of the course.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
50 
Relationship between GCSE and Advanced GCE  
Students cover Key Stage 4 fundamental core concepts in 
sciences at GCSE and continue to cover these concepts and 
additional subject material in the Advanced GCE at  
Key Stage 5. 
Progression from GCSE to Advanced GCE  
Students will draw on knowledge and understanding 
achieved in GCSE Additional Science or GCSE Biology to 
progress on to an Advanced GCE in Biology B qualification. 
 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
51 
 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Transferable skills 53 
Appendix 2: Level 3 Extended Project qualification 55 
Appendix 3: Codes 59 
Appendix 4: Practical competency authentication sheet 61 
Appendix 5: Working scientifically 63 
Appendix 5a: Practical skills identified for indirect assessment 
and developed through teaching and learning 65 
Appendix 5b: Practical skills identified for direct assessment 
and developed through teaching and learning 67 
Appendix 5c: Use of apparatus and techniques 69 
Appendix 5d: Mapping between Appendix 5c and core 
practicals (biology) 71 
Appendix 6: Mathematical skills and exemplifications 75 
Appendix 7: Command words used in examination papers 81 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
52 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
53 
Appendix 1: Transferable skills 
 
 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently 
flagged the need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable 
them to respond with confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the 
world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines 
skills, or competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that 
can be learned and that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform 
an activity or task and can be built upon and extended through learning.’ [1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected 
and evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this 
process, we identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the 
most evidence-based and robust skills framework. We adapted the framework 
slightly to include the Program for International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT 
Literacy and Collaborative Problem Solving (CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves: [2]  
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve 
general cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and 
communicate.[3] 
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, oral communication, written 
communication, assertive communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, 
service orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and 
negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared 
understanding, taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team 
organisation. 
                                          
 
[1]  OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012) 
[2]  Koenig J A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop (National 
Academies Press, 2011) 
[3]  PISA – The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy (2011) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
54 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work 
stress, adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, 
and physical adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual 
teams, work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and 
able to acquire new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher 
education, as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the 
teaching and learning of this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning 
materials, developed with stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
55 
 
Appendix 2: Level 3 Extended Project 
qualification 
 
What is the Extended Project? 
The Extended Project is a standalone qualification that can be taken alongside 
GCEs. It supports the development of independent learning skills and helps to 
prepare students for their next step – whether that be higher education or 
employment. The qualification: 
● is recognised by higher education for the skills it develops 
● is worth half of an Advanced GCE qualification at grades A*–E 
● carries UCAS points for university entry. 
The Extended Project encourages students to develop skills in the following areas: 
research, critical thinking, extended writing and project management. Students 
identify and agree a topic area of their choice (which may or may not be related to 
a GCE subject they are already studying), guided by their teacher. 
Students can choose from one of four approaches to produce: 
● a dissertation (for example an investigation based on predominately secondary 
research) 
● an investigation/field study (for example a practical experiment) 
● a performance (for example in music, drama or sport) 
● an artefact (for example a creating a sculpture in response to a client brief or 
solving an engineering problem). 
The qualification is coursework based and students are assessed on the skills of 
managing, planning and evaluating their project. Students will research their topic, 
develop skills to review and evaluate the information, and then present the final 
outcome of their project. 
Students: what they need to do 
The Extended Project qualification requires students to: 
● select a topic of interest for an in-depth study and negotiate the scope of the 
project with their teacher 
● identify and draft an objective for their project (for example in the form of a 
question, hypothesis, challenge, outline of proposed performance, issue to be 
investigated or commission for a client) and provide a rationale for their choice 
● produce a plan for how they will deliver their intended objective 
● conduct research as required by the project brief, using appropriate techniques 
● carry out the project using tools and techniques safely 
● share the outcome of the project using appropriate communication methods, 
including a presentation. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
56 
Teachers: key information 
● The Extended Project has 120 guided learning hours (GLH) consisting of: 
o a 40-GLH taught element that includes teaching the technical skills (for 
example research skills) 
o an 80-GLH guided element that includes mentoring students through the 
project work. 
● Group work is acceptable, however it is important that each student provides 
evidence of their own contribution and produces their own report. 
● 100% externally moderated. 
● Four Assessment Objectives: manage, use resources, develop and realise, 
review. 
● Can be run over 1, 1½ or 2 years. 
● Can be submitted in January or June. 
How to link Extended Project with biology 
The Extended Project creates the opportunity to develop transferable skills for 
progression to higher education and to the workplace through the exploration of 
either an area of personal interest, or a topic of interest, from within the 
qualification content. 
For example, biology students could choose to carry out an investigation that would 
enable them to develop their skills in data collection, the development and testing 
of hypotheses and the application of mathematical models in data analysis. 
Skills developed 
Through the Extended Project students will develop skills in the following areas: 
● independent research, including skills in primary research and the selection of 
appropriate methods for data collection 
● extended reading and academic writing, including reading scientific literature 
and writing about trends or patterns in data sets 
● planning/project management, including the refining of hypotheses to be tested 
in investigations 
● data handling and evaluation, including the comparison of data from primary 
research with published data and exploration of the significance of results 
● evaluation of arguments and processes, including arguments in favour of 
alternative interpretations of data and evaluation of experimental methodology 
● critical thinking. 
In the context of the Extended Project, critical thinking refers to the ability to 
identify and develop arguments for a point of view or hypothesis and to consider 
and respond to alternative arguments. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
57 
Using the Extended Project to support breadth and depth 
There is no specified material that students are expected to study and, in the 
Extended Project, students are assessed on the quality of the work they produce 
and the skills they develop and demonstrate through completing this work. 
Students can use the Extended Project to demonstrate extension in one or more 
dimensions: 
● deepening understanding: where a student explores a topic in greater depth 
than in the specification content 
● broadening skills: the student learns a new skill. In a biology-based project, 
this might involve learning to assemble and manipulate an unfamiliar piece of 
apparatus or learning advanced data-handling techniques 
● widening perspectives: the student’s project spans different subjects. This 
might involve discussing historical, philosophical or ethical aspects of a biology-
based topic or making links with other subject areas such as chemistry or 
geography. 
Choosing topics and narrowing down to a question 
A dissertation, typically around 6000 words in length, involves addressing a 
research question through a literature review and argumentative discussion while 
an investigation/field study involves data collection and analysis, leading to a 
written report of around 5000 words. 
For example, consider a student with an interest in genetic testing. After some 
initial research, the student decided to explore the risks and benefits associated 
with direct to consumer genetic testing. In the literature review of the project, the 
student researched the background to genetic testing and looked at the work of 
some of the companies which offer to do tests. The student created a questionnaire 
survey to elicit information about people’s attitudes towards testing and their 
knowledge of the potential risks and benefits. The survey was piloted then repeated 
with a sample of 50 people. The student’s data from this survey were compared 
with published data, and the trends and patterns in data analysed, with 
consideration of the significance of the results obtained. Finally, the student’s 
project ended with a review of the effectiveness of the investigation and an oral 
presentation of the main findings and arguments considered. 
Biology-based dissertation projects can cover a wide variety of topics, as these 
examples illustrate: 
● Is it ethical to use stem cells for medical purposes? 
● Should restrictions be placed on research into genetic enhancement? 
● Is the use of animal experimentation justifiable? 
● Is autism genetic? 
Examples of biology-based investigations include: 
● Can changing owl behaviour be monitored through pellet studies? 
● How has marina development affected local marshland biodiversity? 
● Can pollution be effectively monitored by water quality in a local stream? 
● Can monitoring a fitness programme help improve hurdling performance? 
There is also scope for biology-based artefact Extended Projects. For example, a 
student might set out to design, make and test an item of apparatus. Extended 
Projects involving a performance can also be biology based, for example, a social 
issue relating to biology could be explored through drama. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
58 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
59 
 
Appendix 3: Codes 
 
Type of code Use of code Code number 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for performance 
tables is assigned a discount code indicating 
the subject area to which it belongs. 
Discount codes are published by DfE. 
Please see the GOV.UK 
website* 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an Ofqual 
Regulated Qualifications Framework (RQF) 
code. 
The RQF code is known as a Qualification 
Number (QN). This is the code that features 
in the DfE Section 96 and on the LARA as 
being eligible for 16–18 and 19+ funding, 
and is to be used for all qualification 
funding purposes. The QN is the number 
that will appear on the student’s final 
certification documentation. 
The QN for the 
qualification in this 
publication is: 
601/5301/5 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to 
enter students for a qualification. Centres 
will need to use the entry codes only when 
claiming students’ qualifications. 
Advanced GCE – 9BI0 
Paper code These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be 
entered for individual papers. 
Paper 1: 9BI0/01 
Paper 2: 9BI0/02 
Paper 3: 9BI0/03 
Science Practical 
Endorsement: 9BI0/04 
 
*www.gov.uk/government/publications/key-stage-4-qualifications-discount-codes-
and-point-scores 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
60 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
61 
 
Appendix 4: Practical competency 
authentication sheet 
 
For students to gain the Science Practical Endorsement, centres will need to: 
● ensure that there is evidence that students have completed the necessary 
practical activities, meeting the requirements of Appendix 5c,  
● ensure that there is evidence that students have met the requirements of each 
of the CPAC statements, in accordance with the guidelines provided for 
achieving the 'pass' standard, - complete an authentication sheet for their 
students. 
Centres will also need to have had a satisfactory monitoring visit, according to the 
guidelines for monitoring visits, as set down by the JCQ. 
Evidence for meeting practical attendance and CPAC competency may be provided 
in a variety of formats using student lab books or practical portfolios; and registers 
or tracking spreadsheets.  
A final version of the authentication statement will be made available to schools in 
time for the first submission of entries in 2017. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
62 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
63 
 
Appendix 5: Working scientifically 
 
Appendices 5, 5a, 5b and 5c are taken from the document GCE AS and A level 
regulatory requirements for biology, chemistry, physics and psychology published 
by the DfE April 2014. Working scientifically is achieved through practical activities. 
 
Specifications in biology, chemistry and physics must encourage the development 
of the skills, knowledge and understanding in science through teaching and learning 
opportunities for regular hands-on practical work. 
In order to develop the necessary skills, knowledge and understanding, students 
studying biology, chemistry and physics will be required to have carried out a 
minimum of 12 practical activities, which will contribute towards the Practical 
Endorsement. These skills, knowledge and understanding will also be assessed in 
written examinations in the context of these, and other, practical activities. 
The skills can be split into those which can be assessed through written 
examinations (Appendix 5a); and those that will be assessed by teachers through 
appropriate practical activities (Appendix 5b). 
The practical activities highlighted as the minimum requirement within 
specifications must cover the use of apparatus and practical techniques identified 
for each science (Appendix 5c). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
64 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
65 
 
Appendix 5a: Practical skills identified for 
indirect assessment and developed 
through teaching and learning 
 
Question papers will assess the student’s following abilities: 
a) Independent thinking 
• solve problems set in practical contexts 
• apply scientific knowledge to practical contexts. 
b) Use and application of scientific methods and practices 
• comment on experimental design and evaluate scientific methods 
• present data in appropriate ways 
• evaluate results and draw conclusions with reference to measurement 
uncertainties and errors 
• identify variables including those that must be controlled. 
c) Numeracy and the application of mathematical concepts in a practical 
context 
• plot and interpret graphs 
• process and analyse data using appropriate mathematical skills as 
exemplified in the mathematical appendix for each science 
• consider margins of error, accuracy and precision of data. 
d) Instruments and equipment 
• know and understand how to use a wide range of experimental and practical 
instruments, equipment and techniques appropriate to the knowledge and 
understanding included in the specification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
66 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
67 
 
Appendix 5b: Practical skills identified for 
direct assessment and developed through 
teaching and learning 
 
Practical work carried out throughout the course will enable students to develop the 
following skills: 
a) Independent thinking 
• apply investigative approaches and methods to practical work. 
b) Use and apply scientific methods and practices 
• safely and correctly use a range of practical equipment and materials 
• follow written instructions 
• make and record observations 
• keep appropriate records of experimental activities 
• present information and data in a scientific way 
• use appropriate software and tools to process data, carry out research and 
report findings. 
c) Research and referencing 
• use online and offline research skills including websites, textbooks and other 
printed scientific sources of information 
• correctly cite sources of information. 
d) Instruments and equipment 
• use a wide range of experimental and practical instruments, equipment and 
techniques appropriate to the knowledge and understanding included in the 
specification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
68 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
69 
Appendix 5c: Use of apparatus and 
techniques 
 
Use of apparatus and techniques – biology 
Specifications for biology must give students opportunities to use relevant 
apparatus to develop and demonstrate these techniques. 
All of the techniques listed below will be assessed through a minimum of 16 
identified practical activities within each specification. These ‘core’ practicals must 
allow students to demonstrate all of the practical skills given in Appendix 5b. 
Practical techniques to be completed by candidates. 
1. use appropriate apparatus to record a range of quantitative measurements (to 
include mass, time, volume, temperature, length and pH) 
2. use appropriate instrumentation to record quantitative measurements, such as 
a colorimeter or potometer 
3. use laboratory glassware apparatus for a variety of experimental techniques to 
include serial dilutions 
4. use of light microscope at high power and low power, including use of a 
graticule 
5. produce scientific drawing from observation with annotations 
6. use qualitative reagents to identify biological molecules 
7. separate biological compounds using thin layer/paper chromatography or 
electrophoresis 
8. safely and ethically use organisms to measure: 
 - plant or animal responses 
 - physiological functions 
9. use microbiological aseptic techniques, including the use of agar plates and 
broth 
10. safely use instruments for dissection of an animal organ, or plant organ 
11. use sampling techniques in fieldwork 
12. use ICT such as computer modelling, or data logger to collect data, or use 
software to process data. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
70 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
71 
 
Appendix 5d: Mapping between 
Appendix 5c and core practicals (biology) 
 
This qualification gives students opportunities to use relevant apparatus to develop 
practical skills and demonstrate competency in a range of practical techniques. 
All of the techniques listed in Appendix 5c will be assessed through a series of core 
practical activities within this specification. 
To achieve the Science Practical Endorsement, students need to show competence 
in the 12 practical techniques listed in Appendix 5c: Use of apparatus and 
techniques. 
The following table shows how each core practical activity, listed in the content, 
maps to the required practical techniques in Appendix 5c: Use of apparatus and 
techniques. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
72 
 
Biology B Core Practical Practical technique in Appendix 5c 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
1: Investigate a factor 
affecting the initial rate of 
an enzyme controlled 
reaction. 
            
2: Use of the light 
microscope, including simple 
stage and eyepiece 
micrometers and drawing 
small numbers of cells from 
a specialised tissue. 
            
3: Make a temporary squash 
preparation of a root tip to 
show stages of mitosis in 
the meristem under the light 
microscope. 
            
4: Investigate the effect of 
sucrose concentrations on 
pollen tube growth. 
            
5: Investigate the effect of 
temperature on beetroot 
membrane permeability. 
   
         
6: Determine the water 
potential of plant cells.    
         
7: Dissect an insect to show 
the structure of the gas 
exchange system. 
            
8: Investigate factors 
affecting water uptake by 
plant shoots using a 
potometer. 
   
         
9: Investigate factors 
affecting the rate of 
respiration using a 
respirometer. 
  
          
10: Investigate the effects 
of different wavelengths of 
light on the rate of 
photosynthesis. 

            
11: Investigate the presence 
of different chloroplast 
pigments using 
chromatography. 

            
12: Investigate the rate of 
growth of bacteria in liquid 
culture. 
            
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
73 
 
Biology B Core Practical Practical technique in Appendix 5c 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
13: Isolate individual 
species from a mixed 
culture of bacteria using 
streak plating. 
            
14: Investigate the effect of 
gibberellin on the 
production of amylase in 
germinating cereals using a 
starch agar assay. 
            
15: Investigate the effect of 
different sampling methods 
on estimates of the size of a 
population. 
           
 
16: Investigate the effect of 
one abiotic factor on the 
distribution or morphology 
of one species. 
            
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
74 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
75 
 
Appendix 6: Mathematical skills and 
exemplifications 
 
The information in this appendix has been taken directly from the document GCE 
AS and A level regulatory requirements for biology, chemistry, physics and 
psychology published by the Department for Education (April 2014). 
In order to be able to develop their skills, knowledge and understanding in science, 
students need to have been taught, and to have acquired competence in, the 
appropriate areas of mathematics relevant to the subject as indicated in the table 
of coverage below. 
The assessment of quantitative skills will include at least 10% Level 2 or above 
mathematical skills for biology and psychology, 20% for chemistry and 40% for 
physics. These skills will be applied in the context of the relevant science A Level. 
All mathematical content must be assessed within the lifetime of the specification. 
The following tables illustrate where these mathematical skills may be developed 
and could be assessed in each of the sciences. Those shown in bold type would only 
be tested in the full A Level course. 
This list of examples is not exhaustive. These skills could be developed in other 
areas of specification content.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
76 
 
 Mathematical skills Exemplification of mathematical skill in the 
context of A Level biology (assessment is 
not limited to the examples given below) 
(i)  A.0 — arithmetic and numerical computation 
A.0.1 Recognise and make use of 
appropriate units in calculations 
Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
● convert between units, e.g. mm3 to cm3 as 
part of volumetric calculations 
● work out the unit for a rate, e.g. breathing 
rate  
A.0.2 Recognise and use expressions in 
decimal and standard form  
Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
● use an appropriate number of decimal 
places in calculations, e.g. for a mean 
● carry out calculations using numbers in 
standard and ordinary form, e.g. use of 
magnification 
● understand standard form when applied to 
areas such as size of organelles 
● convert between numbers in standard and 
ordinary form 
● understand that significant figures need 
retaining when making conversions between 
standard and ordinary form,  
e.g. 0.0050 mol dm
-3 is equivalent to  
5.0 x 10-3 mol dm-3 
A.0.3 Use ratios, fractions and 
percentages 
Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
● calculate percentage yields 
● calculate surface area to volume ratio 
● use scales for measuring 
● represent phenotypic (monohybrid and 
dihybrid crosses) 
A.0.4 Estimate results  Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
● estimate results to sense check that the 
calculated values are appropriate 
A.0.5 Use calculators to find and use 
power, exponential and 
logarithmic functions 
Candidates may be tested on their ability 
to: 
● estimate the number of bacteria grown 
over a certain length of time 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
77 
 
 Mathematical skills Exemplification of mathematical skill in the 
context of A Level biology (assessment is 
not limited to the examples given below) 
(ii)  A.1 — handling data 
A.1.1 Use an appropriate number of 
significant figures 
Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
● report calculations to an appropriate 
number of significant figures given raw data 
quoted to varying numbers of significant 
figures 
● understand that calculated results can be 
reported only to the limits of the least 
accurate measurement 
A.1.2 Find arithmetic means  Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
● find the mean of a range of data, e.g. the 
mean number of stomata in the leaves of a 
plant 
A.1.3 Construct and interpret frequency 
tables and diagrams, bar charts 
and histograms 
Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
● represent a range of data in a table with 
clear headings, units and consistent decimal 
places 
● interpret data from a variety of tables, e.g. 
data relating to organ function 
● plot a range of data in an appropriate 
format, e.g. enzyme activity over time 
represented on a graph 
● interpret data for a variety of graphs, e.g. 
explain electrocardiogram traces 
A.1.4 Understand simple probability Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
● use the terms probability and chance 
appropriately 
● understand the probability associated with 
genetic inheritance 
A.1.5 Understand the principles of 
sampling as applied to scientific 
data 
Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
● analyse random data collected by an 
appropriate means, e.g. calculate an index 
of diversity to compare the biodiversity of a 
habitat 
A.1.6 Understand the terms mean, 
median and mode 
Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
● calculate or compare the mean, median and 
mode of a set of data, e.g. height/mass/size 
of a group of organisms  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
78 
 
 Mathematical skills Exemplification of mathematical skill in the 
context of A Level biology (assessment is 
not limited to the examples given below) 
(ii)  A.1 — handling data 
A.1.7 Use a scatter diagram to identify 
a correlation between two 
variables 
Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
● interpret a scattergram, e.g. the effect of 
life style factors on health 
A.1.8 Make order of magnitude 
calculations 
Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
● use and manipulate the magnification 
formula 
magnification =  size of image 
size of real object 
A.1.9 Select and use a statistical test Candidates may be tested on their ability to 
select and use: 
● the Chi squared test to test the significance 
of the difference between observed and 
expected results 
● the Student’s t-test 
● the correlation coefficient 
A.1.10 Understand measures of 
dispersion, including standard 
deviation and range 
Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
● calculate the standard deviation 
● understand why standard deviation might 
be a more useful measure of dispersion for 
a given set of data, e.g. where there is an 
outlying result 
A.1.11 Identify uncertainties in 
measurements and use simple 
techniques to determine 
uncertainty when data are 
combined 
Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
● calculate percentage error where there are 
uncertainties in measurement 
(iii) A.2 – algebra 
A.2.1 Understand and use the symbols: 
=, <, <<, >>, >, ∝, ~ 
No exemplification required 
A.2.2 Change the subject of an equation Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
● use and manipulate equations,  
e.g. magnification 
A.2.3 Substitute numerical values into 
algebraic equations using 
appropriate units for physical 
quantities 
Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
● use a given equation e.g. a formula to 
calculate an index of diversity  
( )
( )
NN 1D Σn n 1
−= −
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
79 
 
 Mathematical skills 
 
Exemplification of mathematical skill in the 
context of A Level biology (assessment is 
not limited to the examples given below) 
A.2.4 Solve algebraic equations Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
● solve equations in a biological context, e.g. 
cardiac output = stroke volume x heart rate 
A.2.5 Use logarithms in relation to 
quantities that range over 
several orders of magnitude 
Candidates may be tested on their ability 
to: 
● use a logarithmic scale in the context of 
microbiology, e.g. growth rate of a 
microorganism such as yeast 
(iv) A.3 – graphs 
A.3.1 Translate information between 
graphical, numerical and algebraic 
forms 
Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
● understand that data may be presented in a 
number of formats and be able to use these 
data, e.g. dissociation curves 
A.3.2 Plot two variables from 
experimental or other data 
Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
● select an appropriate format for presenting 
data, bar charts, histograms, graphs and 
scattergrams 
A.3.3 Understand that y = mx + c 
represents a linear relationship 
Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
● predict/sketch the shape of a graph with a 
linear relationship, e.g. the effect of 
substrate concentration on the rate of an 
enzyme-controlled reaction with excess 
enzyme 
A.3.4 Determine the intercept of a 
graph 
Candidates may be tested on their ability 
to: 
● read off an intercept point from a 
graph, e.g. compensation point in 
plants 
A.3.5 Calculate rate of change from a 
graph showing a linear 
relationship 
Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
● calculate a rate from a graph, e.g. rate of 
transpiration 
A.3.6 Draw and use the slope of a 
tangent to a curve as a measure 
of rate of change 
Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
● use this method to measure the gradient of 
a point on a curve, e.g. amount of product 
formed plotted against time when the 
concentration of enzyme is fixed 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
80 
 
 Mathematical skills Exemplification of mathematical skill in the 
context of A Level biology (assessment is 
not limited to the examples given below) 
(v)  A.4 — geometry and trigonometry 
A.4.1 
 
Calculate the circumferences, 
surface areas and volumes of 
regular shapes 
Candidates may be tested on their ability to: 
● calculate the circumference and area of a 
circle 
● calculate the surface area and volume of 
rectangular prisms, of cylindrical prisms and 
of spheres 
● e.g. calculate the surface area or volume of 
a cell 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
81 
Appendix 7: Command words used in 
examination papers 
 
The following table lists the command words used in the external assessments. 
 
Command word Definition 
Add/Label Requires the addition or labelling to a stimulus material given 
in the question, for example labelling a diagram or adding 
units to a table. 
Assess Give careful consideration to all the factors or events that 
apply and identify which are the most important or relevant. 
Make a judgement on the importance of something, and 
come to a conclusion where needed. 
Calculate Obtain a numerical answer, showing relevant working. If the 
answer has a unit, this must be included. 
Comment on Requires the synthesis of a number of variables from 
data/information to form a judgement.  
Compare and 
contrast 
Looking for the similarities and differences of two (or more) 
things. Should not require the drawing of a conclusion. 
Answer must relate to both (or all) things mentioned in the 
question.  
The answer must include at least one similarity and one 
difference. 
Complete Requires the completion of a table/diagram. 
Criticise Inspect a set of data, an experimental plan or a scientific 
statement and consider the elements. Look at the merits and 
faults of the information presented and support judgements 
made by giving evidence.  
Deduce Draw/reach conclusion(s) from the information provided. 
Describe To give an account of something. Statements in the response 
need to be developed as they are often linked but do not 
need to include a justification or reason.  
Determine The answer must have an element which is quantitative from 
the stimulus provided, or must show how the answer can be 
reached quantitatively. To gain maximum marks there must 
be a quantitative element to the answer. 
Devise Plan or invent a procedure from existing principles/ideas. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Biology B 
Specification – Issue 4 – November 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018 
82 
 
Command word Definition 
Discuss ● Identify the issue/situation/problem/argument that is 
being assessed within the question 
● Explore all aspects of an 
issue/situation/problem/argument 
● Investigate the issue/situation etc by reasoning or 
argument 
Draw Produce a diagram either using a ruler or using freehand. 
Evaluate Review information then bring it together to form a 
conclusion, drawing on evidence including strengths, 
weaknesses, alternative actions, relevant data or 
information. Come to a supported judgement of a subject’s 
qualities and relation to its context. 
Explain An explanation requires a justification/exemplification of a 
point. The answer must contain some element 
of reasoning/justification, this can include mathematical 
explanations.  
Give/State/Name All of these command words are really synonyms. They 
generally all require recall of one or more pieces of 
information. 
Give a 
reason/reasons 
When a statement has been made and the requirement is 
only to give the reasons why. 
Identify Usually requires some key information to be selected from a 
given stimulus/resource. 
Justify Give evidence to support (either the statement given in the 
question or an earlier answer) 
Plot Produce a graph by marking points accurately on a grid from 
data that is provided and then drawing a line of best fit 
through these points. A suitable scale and appropriately 
labelled axes must be included if these are not provided in 
the question. 
Predict Give an expected result. 
Show that Verify the statement given in the question. 
Sketch Produce a freehand drawing. For a graph this would need a 
line and labelled axis with important features indicated, the 
axis are not scaled. 
State what is meant 
by 
When the meaning of a term is expected but there are 
different ways of how these can be described. 
Write When the questions ask for an equation. 
 
 
 
Sb211118Z:\LT\PD\GCE 2015 NEW ISSUES\978144693798_GCE2015_AL_BIOB_ISSUE4.DOC.1–93/1 

For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office:  80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121
