A Level
Design and
Technology
Speciﬁ  cation 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology
(Product Design) (9DT0)
First teaching from September 2017
First certiﬁ  cation from 2019 Issue 2
 
 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and 
Technology (Product Design) specification changes  
 
Issue 2 Changes 
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this current issue  Page 
number  
Portfolio guidance and Photographic evidence sections amended with updated 
information on how to submit portfolios and accompanying evidence 
35 
 
If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, contact us via our 
website at: qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/contact-us.html. 

 
 
Contents 
1 Introduction 2 
Why choose Pearson Edexcel A Level Design and Technology (Product 
Design) 2 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this qualification 3 
Qualification at a glance 4 
2 Subject content 6 
Component 1: Principles of Design and Technology 8 
Component 2: Independent Design and Make Project 21 
Assessment Objectives 49 
3 Administration and general information 50 
Entries 50 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special consideration and 
malpractice 50
 
Student recruitment and progression 53 
Appendix 1: Mathematical skills requirement 57 
Appendix 2: Calculators 58 
Appendix 3: Science knowledge and skills requirement 59 
Appendix 4: Links to other relevant subjects 60 
Appendix 5: Command word definitions 62 
Appendix 6: The context for the development of this 
qualification 64 
Appendix 7: Transferable skills 66 
Appendix 8: Level 3 Extended Project qualification 67 
Appendix 9: Codes 69 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design)  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
2 
 
1 Introduction 
Why choose Pearson Edexcel A Level Design and 
Technology (Product Design) 
We’ve listened to feedback from all parts of the design and technology subject community, 
including higher education. We’ve used this opportunity of curriculum change to redesign 
qualifications that reflect the demands of a truly modern and evolving society – qualifications 
that enable your students to apply themselves and give them the skills to succeed in their 
chosen pathway. 
Equipping students with design skills for the future - Students will be able to recognise 
design needs and develop an understanding of how current global issues, including 
integrating technology, impacts on today’s world. 
Encourages creativity and innovation - At A level students will have the confidence to 
innovate and produce creative design solutions as they develop their own design brief with a 
client/end user. 
Clear routes through the specification - We’ve listened to your feedback and our 
specification aims to demystify the new rules around the new qualification requirements to 
make sure you know precisely what you have to teach. 
Progression from GCSE and beyond to HE/Careers - We’ve designed the GCSE and 
A level qualifications together to ensure clear progression of knowledge, understanding and 
design/making skills so that students will have a coherent experience of moving from the 
breadth of the GCSE to the specialisation depth of A level and beyond. 
Support with new content - To help you plan for first teaching with confidence, we’ll be 
running training events to support you in delivering this new qualification and the new 
requirements for the first time. We’ll also give you practical free resources to minimise your 
lesson planning and allow more productive time in the classroom with your students. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design) –  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
3 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this 
qualification 
Planning 
● Our Getting Started guide gives you an overview of the new A Level qualification to help 
you to get to grips with the changes to content and assessment and to help you 
understand what these changes mean for you and your students. 
● We will give you an editable course planner and scheme of work that you can adapt to 
suit your department. 
● Our mapping documents highlight key differences between the new and current 
qualifications. 
Teaching and learning 
There will be lots of free teaching and learning support to help you deliver the new 
qualification, including: 
● A guide on graphics content. 
● A co-teachability guide. 
● Hints on delivering mathematical skills. 
Preparing for exams 
We will also provide a range of resources to help you prepare your students for the 
assessments, including: 
● additional assessment materials to support formative assessments and mock exams 
● marked exemplars of student work with examiner commentaries. 
ResultsPlus 
ResultsPlus provides the most detailed analysis available of your students’ exam 
performance. It can help you identify the topics and skills where further learning would 
benefit your students.  
Get help and support 
Our support line will ensure you receive help and guidance from us and that you can share 
ideas and information with other teachers. The Design and Technology team can be 
contacted via: 
● teachingdesignandtechnology@pearson.com  
● +44 (0) 207 010 2166  
● @PearsonTeachDT 
 
Learn more at qualifications.pearson.com. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design)  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
4 
Qualification at a glance 
Content and assessment overview 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design) 
consists of one externally-examined paper and one non-examined assessment component. 
Students must complete all assessment in May/June in any single year. 
 
Component 1: Principles of Design and Technology (Paper code: 9DT0/01)* 
Written examination: 2 hours 30 minutes 
50% of the qualification 
120 marks 
Content overview 
Topic 1: Materials 
Topic 2: Performance characteristics of materials 
Topic 3: Processes and techniques 
Topic 4: Digital technologies 
Topic 5: Factors influencing the development of products 
Topic 6: Effects of technological developments 
Topic 7: Potential hazards and risk assessment 
Topic 8: Features of manufacturing industries 
Topic 9: Designing for maintenance and the cleaner environment 
Topic 10: Current legislation 
Topic 11: Information handling, Modelling and forward planning 
Topic 12: Further processes and techniques. 
Assessment overview 
● The paper includes calculations, short-open and open-response questions, as well as 
extended-writing questions focused on: 
o analysis and evaluation of design decisions and outcomes, against a technical principle, 
for prototypes made by others 
o analysis and evaluation of wider issues in design technology, including social, moral, 
ethical and environmental impacts. 
● Students must answer all questions. 
● Students must have calculators and rulers in the examination. 
Calculators may be used in the examination. Information on the use of calculators during the 
examinations for this qualification can be found in Appendix 2: Calculators. 
 
*See Appendix 9: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to this 
qualification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design) –  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
5 
 
Component 2: Independent Design and Make Project (Paper code: 9DT0/02) 
Non-examined assessment 
50% of the qualification 
120 marks 
Content overview 
● Students individually and/or in consultation with a client/end user identify a problem 
and design context. 
● Students will develop a range of potential solutions which include the use of computer 
aided design and evidence of modelling. 
● Students will be expected to make decisions about the designing and development of 
the prototype in conjunction with the opinions of the client/end user. 
● Students will realise one potential solution through practical making activities with 
evidence of project management and plan for production. 
● Students will incorporate issues related to sustainability and the impact their prototype 
may have on the environment 
● Students are expected to analyse and evaluate design decisions and outcomes for 
prototypes/products made by themselves and others 
● Students are expected to analyse and evaluate of wider issues in design technology, 
including social, moral, ethical and environmental impacts.  
Assessment overview 
● The investigation report is internally assessed and externally moderated. 
● Students will produce a substantial design, make and evaluate project which consists of 
a portfolio and a prototype 
● The portfolio will contain approximately 40 sides of A3 paper (or electronic equivalent) 
● There are four parts to the assessment: 
o Part 1: Identifying and outlining possibilities for design 
Identification and investigation of a design possibility, investigation of client/end user 
needs, wants and values, research and production of a specification 
o Part 2: Designing a prototype 
Design ideas, development of design idea, final design solution, review of 
development and final design and communication of design ideas 
o Part 3: Making a final prototype 
Design, manufacture and realisation of a final prototype, including tools and 
equipment and quality and accuracy 
o Part 4: Evaluating own design and prototype 
Testing and evaluation 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design)  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
6 
2 Subject content 
The subject content sets out the knowledge, understanding and skills relevant to this 
qualification. Together with the assessment information, it provides the framework within 
which centres create their programmes of study, so ensuring the possibilities for progression 
to higher education. 
Qualification aims and objectives 
The aims and objectives of this qualification are to enable students to:  
● use creativity and imagination when applying iterative design processes to develop and 
modify designs, and to design and make prototypes that solve real world problems, 
considering their own and others’ needs, wants, aspirations and values 
● identify market needs and opportunities for new products, initiate and develop design 
solutions, and make and test prototypes 
● acquire subject knowledge in design and technology, including how a product can be 
developed through the stages of prototyping, realisation and commercial manufacture 
● take every opportunity to integrate and apply their understanding and knowledge from 
other subject areas studied during Key Stage 4, with a particular focus on science and 
mathematics, and those subjects they are studying alongside A Level Design and 
Technology 
● be open to taking design risks, showing innovation and enterprise while considering their 
role as responsible designers and citizens 
● develop intellectual curiosity about the design and manufacture of products and systems, 
and their impact on daily life and the wider world 
● work collaboratively to develop and refine their ideas, responding to feedback from users, 
peers and expert practitioners 
● gain an insight into the creative, engineering and/or manufacturing industries 
● develop the capacity to think creatively, innovatively and critically through focused 
research and exploration of design opportunities arising from the needs, wants and values 
of clients/end users 
● develop an in-depth knowledge and understanding of materials, components and 
processes associated with the creation of products that can be tested and evaluated in use 
● be able to make informed design decisions through an in-depth understanding of the 
management and development of taking a design through to a prototype 
● be able to create and analyse a design concept and use a range of skills and knowledge 
from other subject areas, including mathematics and science, to inform decisions in design 
and the application or development of technology 
● be able to work safely and skilfully to produce high-quality prototypes 
● have a critical understanding of the wider influences on design and technology, including 
cultural, economic, environmental, historical and social factors 
● develop the ability to draw on and apply a range of skills and knowledge from other 
subject areas, including the use of mathematics and science for analysis and informing 
decisions in design. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design) –  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
7 
Mathematics 
Maths skills are fundamental to design and technology. These will be embedded within the 
examination for this qualification. Please see Appendix 1: Mathematical skills requirements 
for full details of these. 
Scientific skills, knowledge and understanding 
Science skills, knowledge and understanding underpin the theory and practice of design and 
technology. These science skills will be embedded within the examination of this 
qualification. Please see Appendix 3: Science knowledge and skills requirements for full 
details of these. 
Links to other relevant subjects 
In addition to maths and science, the A Level GCE in Design and Technology embeds 
knowledge, techniques and practices from a wide range of subjects including art and design, 
business, computer science and geography (see Appendix 4). 
How to use Appendices 1, 3 and 4 
As part of the delivery of this qualification, teachers should use these appendices to ensure 
students gain an awareness and appreciation for the ways in which skills and knowledge 
from maths, science and other subjects inform decisions in design and the application or 
development of technology. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design)  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
8 
Component 1: Principles of Design and Technology 
Overview 
Students will be required to apply knowledge and understanding of a wide range of 
materials; including modern and smart materials, and processes used in product design and 
manufacture. They will be required to develop an understanding of contemporary industrial 
and commercial practices applied to designing and manufacturing products, and to 
appreciate the risks involved. Students should have a good working knowledge of health and 
safety procedures and relevant legislation. 
Students must have a sound working knowledge of the use of ICT and systems and control, 
including modern manufacturing processes and systems, and students will be expected to 
understand how these might be applied in the design and manufacture of products. 
Designers from the past provide inspiration for present and future designing. Students 
should be aware of the important contribution that key historical movements and figures 
have on modern design thinking. 
It is increasingly important that students develop an awareness of wider issues in design and 
technology, that design and technological activities can have a profound impact on the 
environment and on society and that these, together with sustainability, are key features of 
design and manufacturing practice. 
Mathematical and scientific principles are an important part of designing and developing 
products and students will be expected to apply these principles when considering the 
designs of others. Please see Appendix 1: Mathematical skills requirement and Appendix 3: 
Science knowledge and skills requirement. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design) –  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
9 
Content 
Topic What students need to learn: 
1 
Materials 
 
To apply a knowledge and understanding of working properties, 
characteristics, applications, advantages and disadvantages of the 
following types of materials in order to discriminate between them 
and select appropriately. 
1.1 Woods: 
a) hardwoods – oak, mahogany, beech, jelutong, balsa 
b) softwoods – pine, cedar, larch, redwood. 
1.2  Metals: 
a) ferrous metals – mild steel, carbon steels, cast iron 
b) non-ferrous metals – aluminium, copper, zinc, tin 
c) alloys (ferrous and non-ferrous) – stainless steel, 
duralumin, brass. 
1.3 Polymers: 
a) thermoplastics – acrylic, polyethylene, polyethylene 
terephthalate (PET), polyvinyl chloride (PVC), 
polypropylene (PP), acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) 
b) thermosetting plastics – epoxy resins (ER), urea 
formaldehyde (UF), polyester resin (PR). 
c) elastomers – rubber. 
1.4  Composites: 
a) composites – carbon fibre (CFRP), glass fibre (GRP), 
Medium Density Fibre Board (MDF), hardboard, 
chipboard, plywood. 
1.5 Papers and boards: 
a) drawing papers – layout, tracing, copier, cartridge 
b) commercial printing papers – bond, coated 
c) boards – mounting board, corrugated board, foam board, 
folding box board, foil-lined board. 
1.6  Textiles: 
a) natural fibres – cotton, linen, wool 
b) manmade fibres – nylon, polypropylene, polyester 
c) textile treatments – flame resistant, 
polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design)  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
10 
 
Topic What students need to learn: 
 1.7 Smart and modern materials: 
a) thermo-ceramics 
b) shape memory alloys (SMA) 
c) reactive glass 
d) liquid crystal displays (LCD) 
e) photo-chromic materials 
f) thermo-chromic materials 
g) quantum tunnelling composites. 
 
Topic What students need to learn:  
2 
Performance 
characteristics of 
materials 
 
2.1 Performance characteristics of woods, metals, polymers, 
smart and modern materials, papers, boards, textiles and 
composites in order to discriminate between materials and 
select appropriately: 
a) conductivity 
b) strength 
c) elasticity 
d) plasticity 
e) malleability 
f) ductility 
g) hardness 
h) toughness 
i) durability 
j) biodegradability. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design) –  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
11 
 
Topic What students need to learn: 
3 
Processes, 
techniques and 
specialist tools 
3.1 Processes, applications, characteristics, advantages and 
disadvantages of the following, in order to discriminate 
between them and select appropriately including the 
selection of specific and relevant tools to be used for 
domestic, commercial and industrial products and systems, 
and use safely when experimenting, improving and refining 
in order to realise a design: 
a) heat treatments – hardening and tempering, case 
hardening, annealing, normalising (including use of 
specialist tools) 
b) alloying (including use of specialist tools) 
c) printing – offset lithology, flexography, screen-printing, 
gravure (including use of specialist tools) 
d) casting – sand (to include investment), die, resin, plaster 
of Paris (including use of specialist tools) 
e) machining – milling/routing, drilling, turning, stamping, 
pressing (including use of specialist tools) 
f) moulding – blow moulding, injection moulding, vacuum 
forming, extrusion, rotational moulding (including use of 
specialist tools) 
g) lamination (including use of specialist tools) 
h) marking out techniques – woods, metals, polymers, 
paper and boards (including use of specialist tools). 
3.2 Application of specialist measuring tools and equipment to 
determine and apply the accuracy and precision required for 
products to perform as intended. 
a) marking, cutting and mortise gauges 
b) odd leg, internal and external callipers 
c) squares (set, try, engineers and mitre) 
d) micrometer and vernier callipers 
e) densitometer 
f) dividers 
g) jigs and fixtures 
h) go and no-go gauges 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design)  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
12 
 
Topic What students need to learn: 
3 
Processes, 
techniques and 
specialist tools 
continued 
3.3 
 
 
Use of media to convey design decisions, to record to 
recognised standards, explain and communicate information 
and ideas using the following methods and techniques: 
a) pictorial drawing methods for representing 3D forms – 
isometric, 2-point perspective 
b) working drawings for communicating 2D technical 
information – 3rd angle orthographic projection, 
triangulation 
c) nets (developments) for communicating information 
about 3D forms in a 2D format 
d) translation between working drawings, pictorial drawings 
and nets (developments) 
e) report writing. 
3.4 Uses, characteristics, advantages and disadvantages of the 
following permanent and semi-permanent joining techniques 
in order to discriminate between them, select appropriately 
and use safely: 
a) adhesives – contact adhesive, acrylic cement, epoxy 
resin, polyvinyl acetate (PVA), hot melt glue, 
cyanoacrylate (superglue), polystyrene cement (including 
use of specialist tools) 
b) mechanical – screws, nuts, bolts, washers, rivets,  
press (including use of specialist tools) 
c) heat – oxy-acetylene welding, MIG welding, brazing, 
hard soldering, soft soldering (including use of specialist 
tools) 
d) jointing – traditional wood joints, knock-down fittings 
(including use of specialist tools). 
3.5 Application, advantages and disadvantages of the following 
finishing techniques and methods of preservation in order to 
discriminate between them and select appropriately for use, 
including for the prevention of degradation: 
a) finishes – paints, varnishes, sealants, preservatives, 
anodising, electro-plating, powder coating, oil coating, 
galvanisation, cathodic protection (including use of 
specialist tools) 
b) paper and board finishing process – laminating, 
varnishing, hot foil blocking, embossing (including use of 
specialist tools). 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design) –  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
13 
 
Topic What students need to learn: 
4 
Digital 
technologies 
 
4.1 Set up, safe and accurate operation, advantages and 
disadvantages of the following digital technologies: 
a) computer-aided design (CAD) – 2D and 3D design to 
create and modify designs and create simulations, 3D 
modelling for creating ‘virtual’ products 
b) computer-aided manufacture (CAM) and rapid 
prototyping – CNC lathes, CNC routers, CNC milling 
machine, CNC laser, CNC vinyl cutters, rapid prototyping. 
 
Topic What students need to learn: 
5 
Factors 
influencing the 
development of 
products 
 
5.1  The importance and influence of user centred design in 
ensuring products are fit-for-purpose and meet the criteria of 
specifications when designing, making and evaluating in 
relation to: 
a)  user needs, wants and values 
b)  purpose 
c)  functionality 
d)  innovation 
e) authenticity. 
5.2 Principles, applications and the influence on design of 
anthropometrics and ergonomics: 
a) sources and applications of anthropometric data 
b) ergonomic factors for a designer to consider when 
developing products and environments with which 
humans react. 
5.3 The influence of aesthetics, ergonomics and anthropometrics 
on the design, development and manufacture of products: 
a) form over function 
b) form follows function. 
5.4 Design theory through the influences and methods of the 
following key historical movements and figures: 
a) Arts and Crafts – William Morris 
b) Art Nouveau – Charles Rennie Mackintosh 
c) Bauhaus Modernist – Marianne Brandt 
d) Art Deco – Eileen Gray 
e) Post Modernism – Philippe Starck 
f) Streamlining – Raymond Lowey 
g) Memphis – Ettore Sottsass. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design)  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
14 
 
Topic What students need to learn: 
6 
Effects of 
technological 
developments 
 
6.1 Current and historical technological developments that have 
had an effect on the work of designers and technologists and 
their social, moral and ethical impacts: 
a) mass production – the consumer society, built-in 
obsolescence, the effect mass production has on 
employment 
b) the ‘new’ industrial age of high-technology production – 
computers and the development and manufacture of 
products, miniaturisation of products and components, 
the use of smart materials, products from innovative 
applications 
c) the global marketplace – multinational companies in 
developed and developing countries, manufacturing
 
‘offshore’ in developing countries and local and global 
production. 
 
Topic What students need to learn: 
7 
Safe working 
practices, 
potential hazards 
and risk 
assessment 
 
7.1 Adopting safe working practices, recognise and react to 
potential hazards: 
a)   understanding safe working practices for yourself and 
others when designing and making, including when 
selecting and safely using machinery, equipment and 
tools in order to ensure safe working environments 
b)   understanding the need for risk assessments – 
identification of potential hazards, identification of people 
at risk, evaluation of risks, implement control measures, 
recording and storing of risk assessment documentation. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design) –  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
15 
 
Topic What students need to learn: 
8 
Features of 
manufacturing 
industries 
 
8.1 Characteristics and stages of the following methods of 
production when applied to products and materials: 
a) one-off production 
b) batch production 
c) high-volume production. 
8.2 Characteristics, application, advantages and disadvantages of 
the following types of quality monitoring systems: 
a) quality control – the monitoring and achieving of high 
standards and degree of tolerance by inspection and 
testing, computer-aided testing 
b) quality assurance – monitoring the quality of a product 
from its design and development stage, through its 
manufacture, to its end-use performance and degree of 
customer satisfaction 
c) Total Quality Management (TQM) – when applied to 
quality assurance procedures and its impact on 
employees at every stage of the production process,  
ISO 9000. 
8.3 Characteristics, processes, application, advantages and 
disadvantages and the importance of considering accuracy of 
production and efficiency of modern manufacturing methods 
and systems when designing for manufacture for small, 
medium and large scale production: 
a) production scheduling and production logistics 
b) robotics in production – robots on fully-automated 
production and assembly lines/cells 
c) materials handling systems – automated storage and 
retrieval systems (ASRS), automatic guided vehicles 
(AGVs) 
d) flexible manufacturing systems (FMS), modular/cell 
production systems 
e) lean manufacturing using just-in-time (JIT) systems 
f) standardised parts, bought-in components 
g) quick response manufacturing (QRM) 
h) data integration – product data management (PDM), 
enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems 
i) concurrent manufacturing. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design)  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
16 
 
Topic What students need to learn: 
9 
Designing for 
maintenance and 
the cleaner 
environment 
9.1 Characteristics, application, advantages and disadvantages of 
‘cleaner’ design and technology – a product’s life cycle in 
relation to the following sustainable development issues: 
a) material selection – source, quantity, quality, range, 
recyclability, biodegradability 
b) manufacture – minimising energy use, simplification of 
processes, achieving optimum use of materials and 
components, giving consideration to material form, cost 
and scale of production 
c) distribution – efficient use of packaging, reduction of 
transport, alternatives to fossil fuels 
d) use – repair versus replacement, energy efficiency, 
efficiency ratings 
e) repair and maintenance – standardisation, modular 
construction, bought in parts 
f) end of life – design for disassembly, recovered material 
collection, sorting and re-processing methods, energy 
recovery, environmental implications of disposal to 
landfill. 
9.2 The wider issues of using cleaner technologies: 
a) cost implications to the consumer and manufacturer 
b) sustainability – designing without jeopardising the 
potential for people in the future to meet their needs. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design) –  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
17 
 
Topic What students need to learn: 
10 
Current legislation 
 
10.1 From the consumer’s point of view the implications of 
consumer rights legislation to consumers and manufacturers: 
a) Consumer Rights Act (2015) 
b) Sale of Goods Act (1979). 
10.2 The principles and applications of health and safety laws and 
regulations and their impact on the designing and making 
process, including the consequences of non-adherence: 
a) health and safety regulation – the Health andSafety 
Executive and an awareness of relevant regulations to 
manufacturing industries 
b) Health and Safety at Work etc Act (1974) – the 
procedures to safeguard the risk of injury to people: 
personal protective equipment (PPE), signage, warning 
symbols 
c) Control of Substances Hazardous to Health (COSHH) 
regulations – the storage and use of solvent-based 
substances containing volatile organic compounds 
(VOCs). 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design)  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
18 
 
Topic What students need to learn: 
11 
Information 
handling, 
modelling and 
forward planning 
 
11.1 
 
Collection, collation and analysis of information and the use 
of this to make informed decisions: 
a) marketing – marketing analysis, research techniques, 
raw data/analysed data to enable enterprise to be 
encouraged 
b) innovation management – cooperation between 
management, designers and production engineers, the 
encouragement of creativity 
c) the use of feasibility studies on the practicability of 
proposed solutions. 
11.2 Modelling the costing of projects to achieve an optimum 
outcome: 
a) budgets – undertake financial forecasts 
b) planning for production – allocation of: 
o employees 
o materials 
o scale of production 
c) selection of appropriate tools, machines and 
manufacturing processes. 
11.3 The importance, implications and ways of protecting the 
intellectual property rights of designers, inventors and 
companies: 
a) patents 
b) copyrights 
c) design rights 
d) trademarks. 
11.4 Implication to designers, manufacturers and consumers of 
the following standards when developing designs and 
manufacturing products: 
a) British Standards (BSI and kite mark) 
b) European (CEN and CE) 
c) International Standards (ISO). 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design) –  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
19 
 
Topic What students need to learn:  
12 
Further processes 
and techniques 
 
12.1 Strategies, techniques and approaches to explore, create and 
evaluate design ideas: 
a) user-centred design: 
o framework process 
o problem solving 
o user needs, wants and values 
o limitations of end user consideration 
b) circular economy – biologically-based systems and an 
understanding of how waste and pollution can be 
eliminated 
c) systems thinking – the influence of systems on 
commercial activity to enable all elements of a 
manufacturing enterprise to work together. 
12.2 Applications, characteristics, advantages and disadvantages 
of the following project management strategies: 
a) critical path analysis – the handling of complex and time 
sensitive operations 
b) scrum – how flexible, holistic product development is 
achieved 
c) Six Sigma – the improvement of output quality of a 
process by identifying and removing the causes of 
defects and setting value targets of: 
o reduce process cycle time 
o reduce pollution 
o reduce costs 
o increase customer satisfaction 
o increase profits. 
12.3 The cost, sales, profit and market implications to the 
designer and manufacturer of the stages of a product’s life 
cycle: 
● Introduction Stage 
● Growth Stage 
● Maturity Stage 
● Decline Stage.  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design)  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
20 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2019. 
● The assessment is 2 hours and 30 minutes. 
● The assessment is out of 120 marks. 
● Students must answer all questions. 
● The paper will include calculations, short-open, open-response and extended-writing 
questions. 
● The paper will include questions that target mathematics at higher-tier level in a GCSE 
Qualification in Mathematics. 
● Students must have calculators and rulers in the examination. Information regarding the 
use of calculators during the examinations for this qualification can be found in  
Appendix 2: Calculators. 
Synoptic assessment 
Synoptic assessment requires students to work across different parts of a qualification and to 
show their accumulated knowledge and understanding of a topic or subject area. 
Synoptic assessment enables students to show their ability to combine their skills, knowledge 
and understanding with breadth and depth of the subject.  
This component assesses synopticity. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and mark scheme for this component can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design) Sample Assessment 
Materials (SAMs) document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design) –  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
21 
Component 2: Independent Design and Make Project 
Overview 
The purpose of this component is to undertake a substantial design, make and evaluate 
project which will test students’ skills in designing and making a prototype. The term 
‘prototype’ means an appropriate working solution to a need or want that is sufficiently 
developed to be tested and evaluated (for example, full-sized products, scaled working 
models or functioning systems). 
Students are required to individually and in consultation with a client/end user identify a 
design possibility and design context from which they develop a range of potential solutions 
and then realise one through practical making activities. The project must allow candidates 
to apply knowledge and understanding in a product development process to design, make 
and evaluate prototypes. 
In this project, students will be encouraged to use creativity and imagination when applying 
iterative design processes to develop and modify designs, and to design and make 
prototypes that solve real world problems, considering others’ needs, wants and values. 
There are no limits to project selection beyond the time and resources available and the 
appropriateness of selection in matching individual students’ potential. Students are 
expected to take ownership of all aspects of their work in this project, in order to allow them 
total control of their responses and to target assessment criteria effectively, and to maximise 
their achievements. In order to reach high attainment levels, students must adopt a 
commercial design approach to their work, reflecting how a professional designer might deal 
with a design problem and its resolution. 
Mathematical and scientific principles are an important part of designing and developing 
products and students will be expected to be able to apply these principles when considering 
their designs and the designs of others. Please see Appendix 1: Mathematical skills 
requirement and Appendix 3: Science knowledge and skills requirement. 
This project will require students to follow the iterative design processes of exploring, 
creating and evaluating. The content and assessment criteria are set out in a linear format to 
show what is required of the total project. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design)  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
22 
Content 
The tables below show each assessment area of a typical design and make project and the 
relevant skills and evidence expected to support this within the student's portfolio. 
Part 1: Identifying and outlining possibilities for design 
1. Identification and investigation of a design possibility 
Content Skills and Evidence 
a) Investigation of the needs, wants and 
values of the client/end user. 
b) Identification, investigation and 
justification of a design possibility. 
Investigate client/user needs, wants and values 
– ask pertinent questions and seek answers to 
learn about a broad range of user needs, wants 
and values that could be addressed and gain an 
understanding of related design considerations in 
order to support the informed identification of a 
design possibility 
Identify and investigate a design possibility – 
refine the scope of possibilities down to a focused 
area based on investigations. Conduct further 
investigation of the chosen area of focus to 
support a full understanding of the relevant 
design factors and the needs, wants and values of 
end users  
Justify design possibility – provide a rationale as 
to how and why the design possibility has been 
identified, supported by evidence from 
investigations. Provide evidence of the factors 
that have been considered and how their 
importance has been gauged.
  
 
Investigation of client/end user requirements is 
initially likely to be in the form of a series of 
questions that will consider the key factors that 
will influence the design decisions and allow for 
the design needs to be established. 
 
Justification of the design possibility will establish 
a preliminary design brief and may include 
evidence of investigations conducted through the 
internet, interviews, newspaper clippings or user 
centre-based information. 
 
This section will be evidenced through any form 
of appropriate effective communication. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design) –  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
23 
2. Investigation of needs and research 
Content Skills and Evidence 
a) Assess the needs, wants and values of 
the client/end user and the needs of 
the prototype. 
b) Research of existing commercial 
products, ergonomic information and 
standards relevant to the design 
possibility, using knowledge and 
understanding of designing and 
making. 
c) Consideration of user-centred design, 
taking into account the investigation of 
the identified design possibility, design 
context, and the needs, wants and 
values of the client/end user. 
d) Consideration of levels of production 
and potential methods to improve the 
sustainability of the prototype across 
its life cycle. 
 
Assess client/user needs, wants and values and 
the needs of the prototype – consider all of the 
factors that have been investigated, weighing up 
their importance and making decisions about how 
they will be addressed through the design brief 
and specification 
Select research sources and make links 
between the design needs and the research 
undertaken – conduct research into sources that 
have been considered and chosen for their 
relevance to the design possibility and the factors 
that have been investigated. Demonstrate the 
ways that the research undertaken is relevant to 
and informs the needs of the design (including 
client/end user needs, wants and values and 
prototype needs). 
 
Research can be presented graphically, written or 
digitally and may be seen throughout the 
portfolio. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design)  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
24 
3. Specification 
Content Skills and Evidence 
a) Production of a refined design brief 
based on outcomes of research and 
investigations. 
b) Production of a technical design 
specification considering form, 
function, sustainability and standards 
relevant to the needs, wants and 
values of the intended client/end user. 
c) Evidence of client/end user influence in 
the specification. 
d) Identification and justification of 
performance requirements for the 
prototype. 
e) Consideration of scale of manufacture 
and how this reflects on relevant cost. 
 
 
Identify and Justify performance requirements 
– outline performance requirements providing a 
rationale as to how they have been determined to 
ensure a working solution to the design 
possibility, supported by evidence from research 
and investigations. 
 
 
A refined design brief and specification must be 
produced. 
The design brief should reflect the needs, wants 
and values of the client/end user. 
The specification should be informed by the 
questions raised by research and investigation 
findings. Specification points should be technical 
and measurable to allow for realistic testing and 
evaluation. An effective specification is organised 
logically and could be achieved by using sub-
headings such as: 
● Purpose/function 
● Form 
● User requirements 
● Performance requirements (considering 
relevant standards) 
● Material and component requirements 
● Scale of manufacture and cost 
Each specification point should contain more than 
a single piece of information, so that each 
statement is fully justified by giving a reason for 
the initial point. 
This section will be evidenced through any form 
of appropriate effective communication. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design) –  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
25 
Part 2: Designing a prototype 
4. Design ideas 
Content Skills and Evidence 
a) Production of a range of design 
Proposals that are realistic, workable, 
and which address the criteria in the 
specification. 
b) Exploration of different design 
approaches, processes and techniques 
to produce realistic design ideas. 
c) Selection and application of design 
strategies and knowledge of materials 
and/or components, processes and 
techniques to produce design ideas 
that address client/end user needs, 
wants and values. 
d) Design ideas show consideration and 
use of aesthetics, including cultural 
and historical influences. 
e) Decisions made in consultation with 
the client/end user. 
Select and apply design strategies - Consider 
different strategies and select them through their 
relevance to the design possibility and related 
factors and their ability to work effectively with 
design ideas presented. Demonstrate an ability to 
use the selected strategies to generate and 
produce design ideas. 
Present design ideas– demonstrate an ability to 
solve a design problem. 
Use aesthetic features – Incorporate aesthetic 
understanding into features of designs 
Demonstrate understanding of materials, 
processes, techniques and the intended use of 
the prototype – show an ability to select and 
apply relevant knowledge in the context of 
designing new prototypes to demonstrate 
understanding of its appropriate use in practice 
 
The initial design ideas will contain a ideas that 
show different approaches to the design 
possibility and solving the design problems it 
presents. 
Designs should be annotated with design 
decisions justified. They should also explain 
details of design thinking and offer thoughts on 
design proposals. 
Ideas should demonstrate interaction with 
client/end user and designer, possibly through 
the use of photographs, email, transcript or 
market research. 
This section will be evidenced through any form 
of appropriate effective communication. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design)  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
26 
5. Development of design ideas 
Content Skills and Evidence 
a) Demonstration of the application of an 
iterative approach to design 
development. This is informed by the 
application of knowledge of materials 
and the needs, wants and values of 
the client/end user. 
b) Modelling/simulation used to test 
appropriate features including 
proportions, scale, function, sub-
systems. Modelling/simulation can be 
achieved through the use of traditional 
materials, or 2D and/or 3D computer 
simulations. 
c) Ongoing developmental changes are 
informed by technical application of 
research, experimenting, and 
client/end user feedback in order to 
improve, refine and realise a design. 
Use research – draw from information and 
understanding gained from research to inform 
ongoing developmental changes.   
Use an iterative approach – employ a process of 
planning, experimenting, designing, modelling, 
testing and reviewing, including use of input from 
client/end user to inform decision making, make 
improvements and refine designs at each stage of 
development. 
Apply knowledge of materials and processes - 
show an ability to use relevant technical 
knowledge to inform the development of designs 
Apply modelling/simulation techniques – use of 
modelling/simulation as part of an iterative 
design approach to visualise developing designs 
and inform decisions 
Demonstrate understanding of the need for 
testing - show an ability to select and apply 
knowledge of relevant testing methods in the 
context of designing new prototypes in order to 
demonstrate understanding of its importance in 
the development of a final prototype 
 
This section of the portfolio is likely to consist of 
design developments, including drawings and 
details of the final design idea. 
There will be evidence in this section of students 
developing a final design idea with reference to 
the specification and improvements being 
supported by appropriate annotation. 
The evidence of modelling should be presented 
through clear, well-annotated photographs or 
screenshots. 
Client/end user interaction could include the use 
of photographs, email transcripts, market 
research or client/end user annotation of designs. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design) –  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
27 
6. Final design solution 
Content Skills and Evidence 
a) Design proposals are refined down to a 
final design solution which includes all 
requirements for fitness for purpose, 
including technical details of all 
materials and/or component parts, 
processes and techniques. 
b) Specification of materials and/or 
components and processes shows 
consideration of sustainability. 
Decisions are made based on research 
information on the environmental costs 
of extracting and processing the 
selected materials, the prototype 
manufacture, lifespan and disposal. 
c) Application of the calculation and cost 
of materials based on quantities to 
reduce wastage. 
Refine design proposals – Make final decisions 
about proposed designs and present a single 
design solution that meets the requirements of 
the design specification.  
Produce a manufacturing specification – fully 
document all details of the final design solution, 
including sufficient technical information to allow 
accurate interpretation by a third party. 
Apply calculations – use appropriate 
mathematical knowledge to determine material 
quantities and costs related to the production of 
the prototype 
Demonstrate understanding of methods of 
reducing wastage – use outcomes of calculations 
to plan the most efficient use of materials and 
resources in the manufacture of the prototype 
 
Evidence is likely to include a graphical 
representation of a final design with 
working/component drawings. 
7. Review of development and final idea 
Content Skills and Evidence 
a) Critical analysis and evaluation of their 
own ideas and decisions while using an 
iterative design process leading to 
refinements of designs. 
b) Analysis and evaluation of designs and 
prototypes/products produced by 
others, including client/end user to 
inform design decisions. 
c) Analysis and evaluation of refinements 
to designs based on the design 
decisions made by others, including 
the client/end user, along with a 
consideration of the materials, 
components and manufacturing 
techniques that will be used for making 
the final prototype. 
d) Draw conclusions based on the 
analysis and evaluation, drawing 
together considerations about the 
appropriateness of the final prototype 
in meeting the needs of the 
specification. 
Analyse refinements made to designs through 
the development process – break down or 
deconstruct the refinements made to prototype 
designs with reasoned consideration and 
investigation of a range of factors including 
materials and/or components, processes, 
techniques, aesthetics and contextual/historical 
influences supported by reference to feedback. 
Evaluate refinements made to designs through 
the development process - critically review 
information gained from analysis of prototype 
designs including strengths, weaknesses and all 
relevant information, to form independent 
judgments and come to balanced and supported 
conclusions about the appropriateness of the final 
prototype design in meeting the needs of the 
specification, taking into account the 
effectiveness of the iterative design process. 
Analyse designs and prototypes made by others 
and make connections between elements of the 
design - break down or deconstruct prototype 
designs of others with reasoned consideration 
and investigation of a range of factors including 
materials and/or components, processes, 
techniques, aesthetics and contextual/historical 
influences. Showing the ways in which elements 
and aspects of designs are related and work 
together as part of the overall design. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design)  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
28 
7. Review of development and final idea (continued) 
Content Skills and Evidence 
 Evaluate designs and prototypes made by others 
– critically review information gained from 
analysis of prototype designs of others, including 
strengths, weaknesses and all relevant 
information, to form independent judgments and 
come to balanced and supported conclusions 
which inform own design decisions. 
 
The review of development and final idea section 
is likely to accompany research, development of 
design ideas and the final design solution and 
may consist of a summative submission which 
would include a conclusion that incorporates the 
opinions of the client/end user evidenced through 
photographs, email transcripts and market 
research. 
Information should be communicated through 
logical and well-organised statements. 
There should be evidence of an objective 
evaluation of ideas set against the needs in the 
design brief and specification to ensure that 
designs are realistic, viable and fulfil the 
client/end user’s needs, wants and values. 
Client/end user interaction could include the use 
of photographs, email, transcripts or market 
research. 
This section will be evidenced through any form 
of appropriate effective communication. 
 
8. Communication of design ideas 
Content Skills and Evidence 
a) Selection and skill in the use of 
traditional/manual graphical, digital 
techniques (CAD), written techniques 
to communicate designs. 
Select and use communication techniques - 
Consider different communication techniques and 
make considered choices about which are most fit 
for purpose based on their ability to clearly and 
accurately convey design information and related 
factors. Demonstrate an ability to use the 
selected communication techniques accurately in 
order to effectively communicate all aspects of 
design proposals. 
 
Evidence to support the marks awarded in this 
section will be found in both the development of 
design ideas and the final design solution sections 
of the portfolio. Notes and annotations should 
provide sufficient information to enable others to 
interpret their design intentions. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design) –  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
29 
Part 3: Making a final prototype 
9. Tools and equipment, and 10. Quality and accuracy 
Content Skills and Evidence 
a) Production of a high-quality prototype 
that is appropriate to an advanced 
level of demand, meeting the 
requirements of the design 
specification. 
b) Selection and technical skill in 
application of material, range of tools, 
techniques, fixtures, components and 
finishes used in the manufacture of the 
final prototype. 
c) Demonstration of safe working 
practice, including for self and others 
with whom they may be working. 
d) Demonstration of an iterative approach 
to the manufacture of the final 
prototype. 
e) Measuring, determining, and applying 
of the degree of accuracy and precision 
required for prototypes to perform as 
intended. 
Select materials, fixtures, components and 
fittings – Consider different options for materials, 
fixtures, components and fittings that can be 
used and make considered choices about which 
are most fit for purpose based on their ability to 
produce a prototype that is functional and meets 
the requirements of the client/end user and 
specification. 
Demonstrate understanding of material 
properties, the requirements of the client/end 
user, and the intended purpose of the prototype - 
show an ability to select and apply knowledge of 
relevant material properties, client/end user 
requirements and the intended purpose of the 
prototype through the making of a functional 
prototype which meets all requirements set out. 
Use tools, equipment and techniques – Carry 
out required operations using selected tools and 
equipment and techniques for the manufacture of 
the final prototype, applying the required 
accuracy to ensure it performs as intended. 
Demonstrate understanding of the need for 
dimensional and geometric accuracy - show an 
ability to select and apply accurate making 
techniques in order to demonstrate an 
understanding of the importance of accuracy in 
the production of a final prototype  
Demonstrate safe working practices – document 
the ways in which the tools, equipment, 
processes and techniques used during the making 
of prototypes were used with regard for the 
safety of self and others, showing control 
measures used to reduce hazards and risk. 
Demonstrate making skills in the production of 
a functional prototype – show an ability to 
accurately apply appropriate making processes 
and techniques in relation to the complexity of 
design problem 
Produce a functional prototype – present and 
fully document the physicality and functionality of 
a completed prototype showing how it addresses 
the client/end user needs and requirements of 
the design specification  
Apply an iterative approach to manufacture - 
employ a process of planning, experimenting, 
making, testing and reviewing, including use of 
input from client/end, to inform decision making, 
make improvements and refine prototypes at 
each stage of manufacture. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design)  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
30 
9. Tools and equipment, and 10. Quality and accuracy (continued) 
Content Skills and Evidence 
 As evidence of the quality of students’ making 
skills (and the level of demand of their work), it 
is important that key stages of the manufacturing 
process are photographed in order to 
demonstrate that the prototype is an appropriate 
working solution to the identified client/end user 
needs, wants and values and is sufficiently 
developed to be tested and evaluated (for 
example, full sized products, scaled working 
models or functioning systems). Photographic 
evidence should also demonstrate that the final 
prototype is fit for purpose and in addition to 
being a working solution; addresses the needs, 
wants and values of the client/end user and is 
successful in meeting the criteria of the 
specification. 
Amendments to the final outcome are 
documented appropriately and are likely to be 
found in the evaluation section, they should 
include those made in consultation with the 
client/end user. 
Risk assessments should be appropriately 
evidenced in the portfolio of work. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design) –  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
31 
Part 4: Evaluating own design and prototype 
11. Testing and evaluating 
Content Skills and Evidence 
a) An analysis of the prototype is 
performed that includes testing against 
the specification. 
b) Evaluation of the prototype in meeting 
the needs, wants and values of the 
client/end user and specification. 
c) An analysis and evaluation of the 
impact on the environment, including 
life-cycle analysis of the final 
prototype. 
Analyse the final prototype - break down or 
deconstruct the refinements made to the final 
prototype during the design and manufacturing 
process, with reasoned consideration and 
investigation of a range of factors including 
materials and/or components, processes, 
techniques, aesthetics and contextual/historical 
influences supported by reference to feedback, 
the design specification, and testing against 
measurable criteria. 
Evaluate the final prototype - critically review 
information gained from analysis of the final 
manufactured prototype, including strengths, 
weaknesses and all relevant information, taking 
into account the effectiveness of the iterative 
process during manufacture and the intended 
purpose of the prototype, drawing balanced and 
supported conclusions. 
Analyse the potential impacts of the prototype -  
break down or deconstruct the potential social, 
moral, ethical and environmental impacts of the 
prototype with reasoned consideration and 
investigation of a range of factors including 
impact of materials and manufacturing processes, 
supported by reference to feedback, the design 
specification, and testing against measurable 
criteria 
Evaluate the potential impacts of the prototype - 
critically review information gained from analysis 
of the potential social, moral, ethical and 
environmental impacts of the prototype, including 
strengths, weaknesses and all relevant 
information, drawing balanced and supported 
conclusions. 
Annotated photographs, written responses or 
represented data related to market research/field 
trials as evidence of testing undertaken. 
There should be evidence of analysis and 
evaluation of wider issues in design and 
technology including social, moral, ethical and 
environmental impacts. 
Tests should be objective and carried out by the 
client/end user to gather third-party feedback. 
There should be evidence of client/end user 
interaction with the final prototype. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design)  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
32 
Assessment information 
● Internally assessed, externally moderated 
● The assessment will be carried out under controlled conditions, as specified on pages 33 to 
36 of the specification. 
● First assessment: June 2019. 
● Students will produce a substantial design, make and evaluate project which consists of 
120 marks 
● The project will consist of a portfolio and a prototype 
● The final prototype must be produced under immediate guidance or supervision. 
● The teacher responsible for overseeing the student’s work must ensure that a Candidate 
Assessment Booklet* (CAB) is completed for each student. 
● The portfolio and CAB for each student in the sample must be sent to Pearson, in May in 
the year of assessment. Please see our UK Information Manual for the submission deadline 
date. 
* Further information about how to complete the CAB is provided in the Task taking and 
marking section. 
Synoptic assessment 
Synoptic assessment requires students to work across different parts of a qualification and to 
show their accumulated knowledge and understanding of a topic or subject area. 
Synoptic assessment enables students to show their ability to combine their skills, knowledge 
and understanding with breadth and depth of the subject. 
This component assesses synopticity. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design) –  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
33 
Task setting, taking and marking 
Task setting 
Students should identify a design context and brief with the support of their teacher. 
Setting the task 
The context of the design possibility should be suitably challenging as to allow a range of 
alternative approaches to be taken, and allow students to investigate the wider implications 
of their design decisions. Students must individually identify a design need in negotiation 
with their teachers. 
Task taking 
Project controls relating to student independence and teacher guidance to 
students  
Teachers: 
Can:  
● provide broad parameters for student’s design contexts (including areas for investigation, 
availability of equipment, time constraints) 
● explain what a commercial design methodology is 
● advise on health and safety considerations, the use of equipment and potential ethical 
concerns of certain types of materials 
● discuss with students their initial design possibilities and their approaches to solving 
design problems 
● provide general levels of feedback to individuals or groups and allow students to revise 
and re-draft work 
Must: 
● confirm that the design and make project has the potential to meet the assessment 
criteria and offer general guidance on any necessary amendments 
● review each student’s design brief. In this review teachers should ensure that the 
proposed design brief can access the specification requirements suitably, teachers should 
give general guidance on the methodology and design tools that the student plans to use 
● promote good practice such as referencing and using a bibliography system 
● store work securely once it is handed in for formal assessment 
● ensure that students keep photographic records of the manufacturing process to evidence 
the quality of manufacturing 
● give students guidance on the safe use of unfamiliar tools and equipment 
● ensure that good-quality photographs are used to evidence the marks being allocated by 
the centre 
Must not: 
● give students a choice of titles or tasks from which they then choose 
● give detailed feedback to individual students about how to improve work to meet the 
assessment criteria. The guidance provided before final submission should enable students 
to take the initiative in making amendments only, rather than detailing what amendments 
should be made. This means that teachers must not provide templates and model answers 
for the work of specific students 
● mark work provisionally and share that mark so that the student may then improve it 
● return work to students after it has been submitted and marked 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design)  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
34 
● give guidance on how to make improvements to the design portfolio in order to meet the 
assessment criteria so that students are no longer engaged in independent learning. 
If teachers give any assistance which goes beyond general advice, they must 
then record this assistance in the CAB and take it into account when marking 
the work, for example1: 
● providing detailed specific guidance on how to improve design ideas to meet the 
assessment criteria 
● giving detailed specific guidance on errors and omissions that limits student’s 
opportunities to show initiative themselves 
● intervening personally to improve the presentation, manufacture or content of work. 
Learning hours are not specified because the process of producing the design portfolio is 
iterative and undertaken by the student, on their own, at the school/college. The prototype is 
manufactured under immediate guidance (under direct supervision of a teacher) in 
school/college. Where specialist processes or equipment are required beyond the 
school/college capabilities they may be utilised but this must be documented and 
authenticated in the appropriate section of the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in 
Design and Technology (Product Design) Candidate Assessment Booklet (CAB). 
Annotation should be used to explain how marks were applied in the context of the additional 
assistance given. 
If teachers give specific guidance which goes beyond general guidance and is not taken into 
account when marking the work, this will be considered as malpractice. If malpractice is 
suspected, we will investigate. If malpractice is found to have taken place a penalty will be 
applied dependent on the circumstances and severity of the malpractice. 
For full information regarding malpractice please see the JCQ document ‘Suspected 
Malpractice in Examinations and Assessments’. 
Task writing 
Authenticity 
Teachers and centres must be satisfied that the work is the student’s own and should sign 
the Candidate Assessment Booklet. 
Health and safety 
Centres should develop their own mechanisms so that students know the importance of 
ensuring their own safety and that of others. This should include developing risk 
assessments as part of the manufacturing process, for example by using model risk 
assessments or Health and Safety Executive pro forma to assess likely hazards and risk. 
Students who might be lone working should be provided with additional information and 
guidance and the centre must have suitable policies and procedures for lone working. 
Practical making activities must be supervised at all times at school/college. 
Resources 
Students should have equal access to resources. They should have access to a range of 
resources, literature and sources of information to enable them to make choices as required 
for their design and make task. Students should have access to the tools and equipment 
they will require in order to manufacture their final prototype with a high degree of accuracy 
and skill. 
 
1 First three bullet points as per the JCQ Instructions for conducting non-examination assessment, 
section 4.2. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design) –  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
35 
Portfolio guidance 
It is recommended that students produce an electronic portfolio equivalent of approximately 
40 sides of A3 paper, for their design, make and evaluate project along with any models and 
their prototype. Electronic portfolios must use either Adobe or Power Point and be submitted 
electronically. Students will not be penalised specifically on the basis of the amount of work 
that they produce. However, excessively high or low amounts of work may restrict student’s 
ability to evidence the skills outlined in the marking criteria.  
Photographic evidence 
As proof of the quality of students’ making skills it is important that all stages of the 
manufacturing process are photographed in order to evidence that the prototype is an 
appropriate working solution to a need or want that is sufficiently developed to be tested and 
evaluated (for example, full sized products, scaled working models or functioning systems). 
Photographic evidence should also demonstrate that the final prototype is fit for purpose and 
in addition to being a working solution; addresses the needs, wants and values of the 
intended client/end user and is successful in meeting the criteria of the specification. Images 
should show fully the details of the prototype, which will require photographs being taken 
from a range of angles to show details of all sides and features of a 3D outcome. 
Photographs should be coloured, well lit, and of a high resolution in order to clearly show 
details of the final outcome. Photographs should be submitted as jpegs, with a maximum 
individual file size of 3 MBs. There should be sufficient photographic evidence to support the 
award of marks, however a maximum quantity of 20 photographs per project is suggested. 
Marking, standardisation and moderation 
Once work has been submitted for marking it may not be given back to students. 
Teachers should mark the project using the assessment criteria on the following pages. 
Teachers may annotate students’ work but should also include any comments on the CAB to 
justify the marks awarded. Please refer to the ‘General Marking Guidance’ provided in the 
CAB for further information on how to apply these assessment criteria grids accurately. 
Where marking has been carried out by more than one teacher in a centre, there must be a 
process of internal standardisation carried out to ensure that there is a consistent application 
of the assessment criteria. 
Marks awarded by the centre will be subject to external moderation by Pearson. Moderation 
will ensure consistency with national standards. Pearson will notify centres of the students 
whose work has been selected for moderation. This sample will take cohort size into account. 
The portfolio and CAB for each student in the sample must be sent to Pearson, in May in the 
year of assessment. Please see our UK Information Manual for the submission deadline date. 
A copy is made available to all examinations officers and is available on our website: 
qualifications.pearson.com 
If the moderation indicates that centre assessment does not reflect national standards, an 
adjustment will be made to students’ final marks to compensate. 
For further information please refer to the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ) document 
Instructions for conducting non-examination assessments (new GCE and GCSE 
specifications) on the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk. The assessment of this qualification 
must comply with these instructions. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design)  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
36 
Component 2: Assessment Criteria 
Teachers must mark students’ work using the following assessment criteria. Please refer to 
the ‘General Marking Guidance’ provided in the CAB for further information on how to apply 
these grids accurately. 
Part 1: Identifying and outlining possibilities for design 
Please refer to the information provided on page 22 of the specification relating to the skills 
and evidence outlined for this grid.   
Grid 1 
Level Mark Identification and investigation of a design possibility 
(AO1 1a 9 marks) 
 0 No rewardable material. 
Level 1 1–3 ● Evidence of basic investigation of superficially relevant design 
possibilities. 
● Basic identification and justification of a design possibility. 
● Basic investigation of the needs, wants and values of the 
client/end user to inform design requirements. 
Level 2 4–6 ● Evidence of sound investigation of relevant design possibilities. 
● Competent identification and justification of a design possibility. 
● Sound investigation of the needs, wants and values of the 
client/end user to inform design requirements. 
Level 3 7–9 ● Evidence of in-depth investigation of pertinent design possibilities. 
● Effective identification and justification of a design possibility. 
● Comprehensive investigation of the needs, wants and values of 
the client/end user to inform design requirements. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design) –  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
37 
Please refer to the information provided on page 23 of the specification relating to the skills 
and evidence outlined for this grid.   
Grid 2 
Level Mark Investigation of needs and research  
(AO1 1a 15 marks) 
 0 No rewardable material. 
Level 1 1–3 ● Superficial assessment of the needs, wants and values of the end user. 
● Superficial assessment of the needs of the prototype with 
limited consideration of form, and function. 
● Limited links between the design needs and the research undertaken. 
● Basic selection of research sources, including existing products, 
ergonomic information and standards, which provide limited insight to 
the design context, showing a partial understanding of the design 
possibility and related design problems. 
Level 2 4–7 ● Partially developed assessment of the needs, wants and values of the 
end user. 
● Partially developed assessment of the needs of the prototype 
with generally relevant consideration of form, function and 
sustainability. 
● Partially sound links between the design needs and the research 
undertaken. 
● Partially sound selection of research sources, including existing 
products, ergonomic information and standards, which provide 
a partially sound insight to the design context, showing a consistent 
understanding of the design possibility and related design problems. 
Level 3 8–11 ● Mostly developed assessment of the needs, wants and values of the 
user. 
● Mostly developed assessment of the needs of the prototype 
with relevant consideration of form, function, sustainability and level of 
production. 
● Sound links between the design needs and the research undertaken. 
● Sound selection of research sources, including existing products, 
ergonomic information and standards, which provide a sound insight to 
the design context, showing a considered understanding of the design 
possibility and related design problems. 
Level 4 12–15 ● Comprehensively developed assessment of the needs, wants and 
values of the user. 
● Comprehensively developed assessment of the needs of the prototype 
with pertinent consideration of form, function, sustainability and level 
of production. 
● Perceptive links between the design needs and the research 
undertaken. 
● Perceptive selection of research sources, including existing products, 
ergonomic information and standards, which provide perceptive insight 
to the design context, showing a comprehensive understanding of the 
design possibility and related design problems. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design)  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
38 
Please refer to the information provided on page 24 of the specification relating to the skills 
and evidence outlined for this grid.   
Grid 3 
Level Mark Specification  
(AO1 1b 9 marks) 
 0 No rewardable material. 
Level 1 1–3 ● Basic design brief that reflects some of the investigated needs, 
wants and values of the client/end user. 
● Superficial range of specification points which are realistic, technical 
and measurable in relation to a basic design problem. 
● Limited justification of the performance requirements for the 
prototype. 
Level 2 4–6 ● Considered design brief that reflects most of the investigated needs, 
wants and values of the client/end user. 
● Developed range of specification points which are realistic, technical 
and measurable in relation to an effective design problem. 
● Sound justification of the performance requirements for the 
prototype. 
Level 3 7–9 ● Comprehensive design brief that fully reflects the investigated 
needs, wants and values of the client/end user. 
● Comprehensive range of specification points which are realistic, 
technical and measurable in relation to a sophisticated design 
problem 
● Perceptive justification of the performance requirements for the 
prototype. 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design) –  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
39 
Part 2: Designing a prototype 
Please refer to the information provided on page 25 of the specification relating to the skills 
and evidence outlined for this grid. 
Grid 4 
Level Mark Design ideas  
(AO2 9 marks) 
 0 No rewardable material 
Level 1 1–3 ● Basic selection and use of design strategies to inform decisions.  
● Present ideas that show a limited consideration for the user needs 
and specification parameters. 
● Basic use of aesthetic features with basic consideration of historical 
and cultural influences showing a limited understanding of the 
intended use of the prototype. 
● Ideas demonstrate a basic understanding of relevant materials and 
processes. 
Level 2 4–6 ● Considered selection and use of design strategies to inform 
decisions.  
● Present ideas that show sound consideration for the user needs and 
specification parameters. 
● Effective use of aesthetic features with sound consideration of 
historical and cultural influences showing a sound understanding of 
the intended use of the prototype. 
● Ideas demonstrate a sound understanding of relevant materials, 
processes and techniques. 
Level 3 7–9 ● Sophisticated selection and use of design strategies to inform 
decisions.  
● Present ideas that show an in-depth consideration for the user 
needs and specification parameters. 
● Accomplished use of aesthetic features with perceptive 
consideration of historical and cultural influences showing an in-
depth understanding of the intended use of the prototype. 
● Ideas demonstrate an in-depth understanding of relevant materials, 
processes and techniques. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design)  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
40 
Please refer to the information provided on page 26 of the specification relating to the skills 
and evidence outlined for this grid. 
Grid 5 
Level Mark Development of design ideas 
(AO2 9 marks) 
 0 No rewardable material 
Level 1 1–3 ● Superficial use of research to inform ongoing developmental 
changes. 
● Basic use of an iterative approach to the development of a design 
solution, including superficial input of client/end user feedback to 
inform decisions throughout the process. 
● Changes and alternatives to designs are informed by the basic 
application of technical knowledge of materials and processes. 
● Limited application of modelling/simulation techniques to inform 
decisions showing a basic understanding of the need for testing in 
the development of a final prototype. 
Level 2 4–6 ● Considered use of research to inform ongoing developmental 
changes. 
● Sound use of an iterative approach to the development of a design 
solution, including considered input of client/end user feedback to 
inform decisions throughout the process. 
● Changes and alternatives to designs are informed by the sound 
application of technical knowledge of materials and processes. 
● Effective application of modelling/simulation techniques to inform 
decisions showing a sound understanding of the need for testing in 
the development of a final prototype. 
Level 4 7–9 ● Perceptive use of research to inform ongoing developmental changes. 
● Accomplished use of an iterative approach to the development of a 
design solution, including perceptive input of client/end user 
feedback to inform decisions throughout the process. 
● Changes and alternatives to designs are informed by the in-depth 
application of technical knowledge of materials and processes. 
● Sophisticated application of modelling/simulation techniques to 
inform decisions showing an in-depth understanding of the need for 
testing in the development of a final prototype. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design) –  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
41 
Please refer to the information provided on page 27 of the specification relating to the skills 
and evidence outlined for this grid. 
Grid 6 
Level Mark Final design solution 
(AO1 3 marks, AO2 6 marks) 
 0 No rewardable material 
Level 1 1–3 ● The manufacturing specification generally addresses the needs and 
wants of the client/end user and includes basic technical details to 
allow partially accurate interpretation by a third party. 
● Basic refinement of design proposals to generate a design solution 
that generally meets the requirements of the design specification. 
● Basic project management including application of calculations to 
determine material quantities and costs related to the production of 
the prototype, showing a basic understanding of methods which can 
be applied to reduce wastage. 
Level 2 4–6 ● A manufacturing specification that effectively addresses the needs 
and wants of the client/end user is presented that includes effective 
technical details to allow mostly accurate interpretations by a third 
party. 
● Effective refinement of design proposals to generate a design solution 
that effectively meets the requirements of the design specification. 
● Effective project management including application of calculations to 
determine material quantities and costs related to the production of 
the prototype, showing an effective understanding of methods which 
can be applied to reduce wastage. 
Level 3 7–9 ● A manufacturing specification that comprehensively addresses the 
needs and wants of the client/end user is presented that includes 
comprehensive technical details to allow fully accurate interpretation 
by a third party. 
● Sophisticated refinement of design proposals to generate a design 
solution that comprehensively meets the requirements of the design 
specification.  
● Accomplished project management including application of 
calculations to determine material quantities and costs related to the 
production of the prototype, showing a thorough understanding of 
methods which can be applied to reduce wastage. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design)  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
42 
Please refer to the information provided on page 27 of the specification relating to the skills 
and evidence outlined for this grid. 
Grid 7 
Level Mark Review of development and final idea  
(AO3 1a 6 marks, AO3 1b 6 marks) 
 0 No rewardable material 
Level 1 1–3 ● Superficial analysis of the refinements made to designs through the 
development process with limited references to feedback made by 
others and consideration of materials, components and manufacturing 
techniques. 
● Limited and imbalanced evaluation of the refinements made to 
designs through the development process, which draw limited 
conclusions about the appropriateness of the final prototype in 
meeting the needs of the specification. 
● Superficial analysis of the designs and prototypes made by others, 
which considers a limited range of factors and makes superficial 
connections between elements of the design. 
● Limited and imbalanced evaluation of the design and prototypes 
made by others, which begins to inform their own design decisions. 
Level 2 4-6 ● Partially developed analysis of the refinements made to designs 
through the development process, supported by generally relevant 
references to feedback made by others and consideration of 
materials, components and manufacturing techniques. 
● Partially sound and partially balanced evaluation of the refinements 
made to designs through the development process, which is used to 
draw partially sound conclusions about the appropriateness of the 
final prototype in meeting the needs of the specification. 
● Partially developed analysis of the designs and prototypes made by 
others, which considers a generally relevant range of factors and 
makes partially developed connections between elements of the 
design. 
● Partially sound and partially balanced evaluation of the designs and 
prototypes made by others, which coherently informs their own 
design decisions. 
Level 3 7-9 ● Mostly developed analysis of the refinements made to designs 
throughout the development process, mostly relevant references to 
feedback made by others and consideration of materials, components 
and manufacturing techniques. 
● Sound and mostly balanced evaluation of the refinements made to 
designs through the development process, which is used to draw 
sound conclusions about the appropriateness of the final prototype in 
meeting the needs of the specification. 
● Mostly developed analysis of the designs and prototypes made by 
others, which considers a mostly relevant range of factors and makes 
mostly relevant connections between elements of the design. 
● Sound and mostly balanced evaluation of the designs and prototypes 
made by others, which effectively informs their own design decisions. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design) –  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
43 
 
Level Mark Review of development and final idea (continued) 
(AO3 1a 6 marks, AO3 1b 6 marks) 
Level 4 10-12 ● Comprehensively developed analysis of the refinements made to 
designs through the development process, pertinently supported by 
references to feedback made by others and consideration of 
materials, components and manufacturing techniques. 
● Perceptive and balanced evaluation of the refinements made to 
designs through the development process, which is used to draw 
perceptive conclusions about the appropriateness of the final 
prototype in meeting the needs of the specification. 
● Comprehensively developed analysis of the designs and prototypes 
made by others, which considers a comprehensive range of factors 
and makes comprehensive connections between elements of the 
design. 
● Perceptive and balanced evaluation of the designs and prototypes 
made by others, which is used perceptively to inform their own 
design decisions. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design)  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
44 
Please refer to the information provided on page 28 of the specification relating to the skills 
and evidence outlined for this grid. 
Grid 8 
Level Mark Communication of design ideas 
(AO2 6 marks) 
 0 No rewardable material 
Level 1 1–2 ● Basic selection and appropriate use of traditional/manual graphical 
techniques to communicate design proposals. 
● Basic selection and appropriate use of computer-aided design (CAD) 
techniques to communicate design proposals. 
● Basic selection and appropriate use of written techniques to 
communicate design proposals. 
Level 2 3–4 ● Considered selection and effective use of traditional/manual graphical 
techniques to communicate design proposals. 
● Considered selection and effective use of computer-aided design 
(CAD) techniques to communicate design proposals. 
● Considered selection and effective use of written techniques to 
communicate design proposals. 
Level 3 5–6 ● Perceptive selection and accomplished use of traditional/manual 
graphical techniques to communicate design proposals. 
● Perceptive selection and accomplished use of computer-aided design 
(CAD) techniques to communicate design proposals. 
● Perceptive selection and accomplished use of written techniques to 
communicate design proposals. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design) –  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
45 
Part 3: Making a final prototype 
Please refer to the information provided on pages 29-30 of the specification relating to the 
skills and evidence outlined for this grid. 
Grid 9 
Level Mark Tools and equipment 
(AO2 12 marks) 
 0 No rewardable material 
Level 1 1–3 ● Basic selection of materials, fixtures, components and fittings some 
of which are appropriate for the final prototype, showing a limited 
understanding of the intended purpose of the prototype. 
● Limited use of tools and equipment to prepare materials for the 
manufacture of the prototype, showing a limited understanding of the 
need for dimensional accuracy.  
● Demonstrate a generally adequate degree of safe working practice 
for self and others. 
Level 2 4–6 ● Adequate selection of materials, fixtures, components and fittings 
which are generally appropriate for the final prototype, showing a 
partially sound understanding of the requirements of the end user 
and the intended purpose of the prototype. 
● Some skilful use of tools, equipment and techniques to prepare 
materials for the manufacture of the prototype, showing a generally 
sound understanding of the need for dimensional or geometric 
accuracy.  
● Demonstrate a fully adequate degree of safe working practice for self 
and others.  
Level 3 7-9 ● Mostly sophisticated selection of materials, fixtures, components and 
fittings which are mostly appropriate for the final prototype, showing 
a sound understanding of the requirements of the end user and the 
intended purpose of the prototype. 
● Mostly Skilful use of tools, equipment and techniques to prepare 
materials for the manufacture of the prototype, showing a sound 
understanding of the need for dimensional or geometric accuracy.  
● Demonstrate a generally high degree of safe working practice for self 
and others. 
Level 4 10–12 ● Sophisticated selection of materials, fixtures, components and fittings 
which are fully appropriate for the final prototype, showing an in-
depth understanding of material properties, the requirements of the 
end user, and the intended purpose of the prototype. 
● Accomplished use of tools, equipment and techniques to prepare 
materials for the manufacture of the prototype, showing an in-depth 
understanding of the need for dimensional and geometric accuracy.  
● Demonstrate a consistently high degree of safe working practice for 
self and others. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design)  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
46 
Please refer to the information provided on pages 29-30 of the specification relating to the 
skills and evidence outlined for this grid. 
Grid 10 
Level Mark Quality and accuracy 
(AO2 18 marks) 
 0 No rewardable material 
Level 1 1–4 ● Produce a prototype that demonstrates mostly adequate making 
skills in relation to a basic design problem. 
● Produce a partly functioning prototype which matches the end user 
needs. 
● Produce a prototype that superficially meets the design specification. 
● Basic application of an iterative approach to manufacture and to 
produce a prototype. 
Level 2 5–9 ● Produce a prototype that demonstrates some skilful making skills at 
an advanced level in relation to a partially effective design problem 
● Produce a generally functioning prototype which matches the end 
user needs. 
● Produce a prototype that partially meets the design specification. 
● Considered application of an iterative approach to manufacture to 
produce a prototype. 
Level 3 10–14 ● Produce a prototype that demonstrates skilful making skills at an 
advanced level in relation to an effective design problem. 
● Produce a mostly functional prototype which matches the end user 
needs. 
● Produce a prototype that mostly meets the design specification. 
● Accomplished application of an iterative approach to manufacture to 
produce a prototype. 
Level 4 15–18 ● Produce a prototype that demonstrates accomplished making skills at 
an advanced level in relation to a sophisticated design problem 
● Produce a fully functional prototype which matches the end user 
needs. 
● Produce a prototype that fully meets the design specification. 
● Sophisticated application of an iterative approach to manufacture to 
produce a prototype. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design) –  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
47 
Part 4: Evaluating own design and prototype 
Please refer to the information provided on page 31 of the specification relating to the skills 
and evidence outlined for this grid. 
Grid 11 
Level Mark Testing and evaluation 
(AO3 1a 3 marks, AO3 1b 3 marks, AO3 2a 3 marks,  
AO3 2b 3 marks) 
 0 No rewardable material 
Level 1 1–4 ● Superficial analysis of the final prototype, taking into account 
refinements implemented during the development and manufacturing 
process and the client/end user specification, showing a limited 
approach to testing against measurable criteria. 
● Limited evaluation of the prototype, taking into account the iterative 
design process and the intended purpose of the prototype, drawing 
imbalanced conclusions from testing. 
● Superficial analysis of the social, moral, ethical and environmental 
impact of materials and manufacturing processes of the prototype 
● Limited evaluation o of the social, moral, ethical and environmental 
impact of the prototype. 
Level 2 5–8 ● Developed analysis of the prototype, taking into account refinements 
implemented during the development and the client/end user 
specification, showing a sound approach to testing against 
measurable criteria. 
● Sound evaluation of the prototype, taking into account the iterative 
design process and the intended purpose of the prototype, drawing 
mostly balanced conclusions from testing against measurable criteria. 
● Developed analysis of the social, moral, ethical and environmental 
impact of materials and manufacturing processes of the prototype 
● Sound evaluation of the social, moral, ethical and environmental 
impact of the prototype. 
Level 3 9–12 ● Comprehensively developed analysis of the prototype, taking into 
account refinements implemented during the development and the 
client/end user specification, showing a perceptive approach to 
testing against most measurable criteria. 
● Perceptive evaluation of the prototype, taking into account the 
iterative design process and the intended purpose of the prototype, 
drawing balanced conclusions from testing against measureable 
criteria. 
● Comprehensively developed analysis of the social, moral, ethical and 
environmental impact of materials and manufacturing processes of 
the prototype 
● Perceptive evaluation of the social, moral, ethical and environmental 
impact of the prototype. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design)  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
48 
Security and backups 
It is the centre’s responsibility to keep the work that students have submitted for 
assessment secure. 
Secure storage is defined as a securely-locked cabinet or cupboard. Where students are 
producing artefacts, secure storage is defined as a classroom studio or workshop that is 
locked or supervised from the end of one session to the start of the next. 
The rules on storage also apply to electronic data. For example, centres should collect 
memory sticks for secure storage between sessions or restrict student access to specific 
areas of the centre’s IT network. 
For materials stored electronically, centres are strongly advised to use firewall protection and 
virus-checking software, and to employ an effective backup strategy, so that an up-to-date 
archive of students’ evidence is maintained. 
Further information 
For up-to-date advice on teacher involvement and administration of non-examination 
assessments, please refer to the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ) document Instructions 
for conducting non-examination assessments (new GCE and GCSE specifications) available 
on the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design) –  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
49 
Assessment Objectives 
 
Students must: 
% in GCE 
A Level 
AO1 Identify, investigate and outline design possibilities to address 
needs and wants 
15 
AO2 Design and make prototypes that are fit for purpose 25 
AO3 Analyse and evaluate 
● design decisions and outcomes, including for prototypes made 
by themselves and others 
● wider issues in design and technology 
25 
AO4 Demonstrate and apply knowledge and understanding of 
● technical principles 
● design and making principles 
35 
Total 100% 
 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
Component 
Assessment Objectives Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives AO1 % AO2 % AO3 % AO4 % 
Component 1: Principles of 
Design and Technology 
– – 15 35 50% 
Component 2: Independent 
Design and Make Project 
15 25 10 – 50% 
Total for GCE A Level 15% 25% 25% 35% 100% 
 
NB Totals have been rounded either up or down. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design)  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
50 
3 Administration and general information 
Entries 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for this qualification can be found in 
our UK Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations officers and is 
available on our website: qualifications.pearson.com 
Discount codes and performance tables 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more than one GCE qualification with 
the same discount code will have only one of the grades they achieve counted for the 
purpose of the school and college performance tables. This will be the grade for the larger 
qualification (i.e. the A Level grade rather than the AS grade). If the qualifications are the 
same size, then the better grade will be counted (please see Appendix 9: Codes). 
Students should be advised that if they take two GCE qualifications with the same discount 
code, colleges, universities and employers they wish to progress to are likely to take the 
view that this achievement is equivalent to only one GCE. The same view may be taken if 
students take two GCE qualifications that have different discount codes but have significant 
overlap of content. Students or their advisers who have any doubts about their subject 
combinations should check with the institution they wish to progress to before embarking on 
their programmes. 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, 
special consideration and malpractice 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality policy requires all students to 
have equal opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our qualifications 
to be awarded in a way that is fair to every student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the Equality Act 2010) are not, 
when they are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in comparison to 
students who do not share that characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification and that 
this achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their peers. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be available in English. All student work must be in 
English. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design) –  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
51 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with special 
educational needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to: 
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the assessment. 
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an individual 
student with a disability, without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding bodies comply with the duty under the 
Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students will 
then know what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for assessment. 
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable adjustments 
where a person with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in undertaking an 
assessment. The awarding organisation is required to take reasonable steps to overcome 
that disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be unique to that individual and 
therefore might not be in the list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of factors, 
which will include: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment, and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding 
organisation, timeframes or affects the security or integrity of the assessment. This is 
because the adjustment is not ‘reasonable’. 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student's mark or grade to 
reflect temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the examination/ 
assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a material effect on a 
student’s ability to take an assessment or demonstrate their level of attainment in  
an assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to apply for access arrangements 
and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special 
consideration, please refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design)  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
52 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that compromises or seeks to 
compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in controlled assessments discovered before the candidate has signed 
the declaration of authentication form does not need to be reported to Pearson. 
Candidate malpractice found in controlled assessments after the declaration of authenticity 
has been signed, and in examinations must be reported to Pearson on a JCQ Form M1 
(available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form should be emailed to 
candidatemalpractice@pearson.com. Please provide as much information and supporting 
documentation as possible. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies 
with Pearson. 
Failure to report candidate malpractice constitutes staff or centre malpractice.  
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and maladministration of 
our qualifications. As with candidate malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is any act that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of assessment or undermines the integrity 
of the qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported 
immediately, before any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson on a  
JCQ Form M2(a) (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form, 
supporting documentation and as much information as possible should be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions 
lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the document 
General and Vocational Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments Policies and Procedures, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice. 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to comply with the requirements of 
Ofqual's General Conditions of Recognition. 
This A Level qualification will be graded and certificated on a six-grade scale from A* to E 
using the total subject mark. Individual components are not graded. 
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum judged by Pearson to be of 
sufficient standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U result. 
The first certification opportunity for this qualification will be 2019. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design) –  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
53 
Student recruitment and progression 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this qualification. 
Students who would benefit most from studying this qualification are likely to have a Level 2 
qualification such as a GCSE in Design and Technology. 
Progression 
Students can progress from this qualification to: 
● tertiary education and/or work-based study including product design, engineering and 
architecture 
● further training in the design, creative, engineering and/or manufacturing industries 
● employment in a relevant sector. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design)  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
54 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design) –  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
55 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Mathematical skills requirement 57 
Appendix 2: Calculators 58 
Appendix 3: Science knowledge and skills requirement 59 
Appendix 4: Links to other relevant subjects 60 
Appendix 5: Command word definitions 62 
Appendix 6: The context for the development of this qualification 64 
Appendix 7: Transferable skills 66 
Appendix 8: Level 3 Extended Project qualification 67 
Appendix 9: Codes 69 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design)  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
56 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design) –  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
57 
Appendix 1: Mathematical skills 
requirement 
This appendix is taken from the document Design and Technology GCE subject content 
published by the Department for Education (DfE) in December 2015. 
The mathematical skills listed will be assessed in the examination only. The minimum level of 
mathematics in the examinations will be equivalent to higher tier in a GCSE Qualification in 
Mathematics. 
These skills will be sampled in each examination and covered over the lifetime of the 
specification. Examples of mathematical questions are Q1(d), 4(c) and 4(d) in the Sample 
Assessment Materials. 
 
Reference Mathematical skills 
requirement 
Potential applications 
a Confident use of number, 
percentages and 
percentiles 
Calculation of quantities of materials, costs and 
sizes. 
b Use of ratios Scaling drawings. 
c Calculation of surface 
areas and/or volumes 
Determining quantities of materials. 
d Use of trigonometry Calculation of sides and angles as part of 
product design. 
e Construction, use and/or 
analysis of graphs and 
charts 
Representation of data used to inform 
decisions and evaluation of outcomes. 
Presentation of market data, user preferences, 
outcomes of market research. 
f Use of coordinates and 
geometry 
Use of datum points and geometry when 
setting out design drawings. 
g Use of statistics and 
probability as a measure of 
likelihood 
Interpret statistical analyses to determine user 
needs and preferences. 
Use data related to human scale and 
proportion to determine product scale and 
dimensions. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design)  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
58 
Appendix 2: Calculators 
Students may use a calculator in assessments for this qualification, and centres are 
responsible for making sure that calculators used by their students meet the requirements 
highlighted in the table below.  
Students must be told these regulations beforehand and they must be familiar with them 
before their assessments for this qualification. 
Students must have a calculator with them for their examinations which they may use. 
 
Calculators must be: 
● of a size suitable for use on a desk 
● either battery or solar powered 
● free of lids, cases and covers that 
have printed instructions or 
formulae. 
 
Calculators must not: 
● be designed or adapted to offer any of these 
facilities: 
o language translators 
o symbolic algebraic manipulation 
o symbolic differentiation or integration 
o communication with other machines or 
the internet 
● be borrowed from another candidate during 
an examination for any reason* 
● have retrievable information stored in them, 
and this includes: 
o databanks 
o dictionaries 
o mathematical formulae 
o text. 
The candidate is responsible for 
the following: 
● the calculator’s power supply 
● the calculator’s working condition 
● clearing anything stored in the 
calculator. 
 
*An invigilator may give a student a replacement calculator 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design) –  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
59 
Appendix 3: Science knowledge and skills 
requirement 
This appendix is taken from the document Design and Technology GCSE subject content 
published by the Department for Education (DfE) in December 2015. 
These skills will be sampled in each examination and covered over the lifetime of the 
specification. Example of science knowledge and skills questions are Q2(a), 3(c) and 4(b) in 
the Sample Assessment Materials. 
Students must know and apply the following scientific skills, knowledge and understanding: 
 
Reference Science knowledge and 
skills requirement 
Example of applications 
b Describe the conditions 
that cause degradation 
Ensure products are designed to take account 
of potential corrosion caused by environmental 
factors. 
c Know the physical 
properties of materials and 
explain how they are 
related to their uses 
Understand the appropriate use of materials, 
including glass and ceramics, polymers, 
composites, woods, and metals, based on their 
physical properties. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design)  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
60 
Appendix 4: Links to other relevant subjects 
The following table show how this qualification links to other relevant subjects As part of the 
delivery of this qualification, teachers should use this appendix to ensure students gain an 
awareness and appreciation for the ways in which other subjects inform decisions in design 
and the application or development of technology. 
These links will be sampled over the lifetime of the qualification through the assessment of 
the related Design & Technology content. For example, in the Sample Assessment Materials, 
Q4(e) is linked to Business A Level subject criteria (operations management: quality and 
productivity), while Q8 is linked to Art and Design A Level subject criteria (explore relevant 
resources; analyse, discuss and evaluate images, objects and artefacts; make and record 
independent judgements). 
 
Links to 
other 
subjects 
Examples of links to other 
A Level subject criteria 
Examples of Design and Technology 
Content 
Business Operations management:  
● Quality  
● Productivity 
Component 1 
5.1 – The importance and influence of 
ensuring products are fit-for-purpose and 
meet the criteria of specifications when 
designing, making and evaluating 
11.2 – Modelling the costing of projects 
to achieve an optimum outcomes 
Business analysis:  
● Decision making 
Component 1 
12.2 – Project management strategies 
Business analysis:  
● Forecasting 
● Data analysis 
Component 1 
11.1a– Marketing research 
Marketing:  
● Identifying and anticipating 
customer needs 
● Product life cycle 
 
Component 1 
5 – Factors influencing the development 
of products 
11.1a– Marketing research 
12.3 - The cost, sales, profit and market 
implications to the designer and 
manufacturer of the stages of a product’s 
life cycle 
Art and 
Design 
 
Explore relevant resources; 
analyse, discuss and evaluate 
images, objects and artefacts; 
and make and record 
independent judgements. 
Component 2 
Part 1: Identifying and Outlining 
Possibilities for Design 
● Identification and investigation of a 
design possibility 
● Investigation of needs and research 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design) –  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
61 
 
Links to 
other 
subjects 
Examples of links to other 
A Level subject criteria 
Examples of Design and Technology 
Content 
Art and 
Design 
(continued) 
Record experiences and 
observations, in a variety of 
ways using drawing or other 
appropriate visual forms; 
undertake research; and gather, 
select and organise visual and 
other appropriate information. 
Component 1 
3.3 – Use of media to record to 
recognised standards, explain and 
communicate information and ideas to 
recognised standards 
Component 2 
Part 1: Identifying and Outlining 
Possibilities for Design 
• Identification and investigation of a 
design possibility 
• Investigation of needs and research  
Explore relevant resources: 
analyse, discuss and evaluate 
images, objects and artefacts: 
and make and record 
independent judgements 
Component 1 
5.3 – Aesthetics 
5.4 – Design theory 
Component 2 
Part 1: Identifying and Outlining 
Possibilities for Design 
Part 2: Investigation of needs and 
research 
Geography Global systems Component 1 
6.1c – the global marketplace 
Computer 
Science 
The individual (moral), social 
(ethical), legal and cultural 
opportunities and risks of digital 
technology. 
Component 1 
6.1 – Current and historical technological 
developments that have had an effect on 
the work of designers and technologists 
and their social, moral and ethical 
impacts 
9.1 – Characteristics, application, 
advantages and disadvantages of 
‘cleaner’ design and technology – a 
product’s life cycle in relation to 
sustainable development issues 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design)  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
62 
Appendix 5: Command word definitions 
This table lists the command words that will be used in the examination for this qualification 
and their definitions. 
 
Command word Definition 
Give/State/Name All of these command words are really synonyms. They 
generally all require recall of one or more pieces of 
information. 
Describe Give an account of a ‘process’ listing the steps or stages of 
the process in the correct order/sequence, or give an 
account of ‘something’ listing a series of 
features/points/trends. The number of points/depth of 
answer required will be indicated by the mark allocation. 
Describe using sketch 
and notes/annotation 
Using graphical depiction with annotation, give an account of 
a ‘process’ showing the steps or stages of the process in the 
correct sequence/order, or give an account of ‘something’ 
showing a series of features/points/trends. The number of 
points/stages required will be indicated by the mark 
allocation. 
Calculate Work out a numerical problem using mathematical processes 
or formulae using the appropriate processes in their 
response. Requires showing how they have worked out the 
answer. 
Points-based mark scheme may credit use of correct 
formulae, use of correct steps/stages of calculation 
(evidenced by showing workings), correct outcome. 
Explain Providing an answer and a reason or set of reasons 
qualifying the answer, such as reasons why something can 
be considered to fulfil a need, provide a purpose, 
communicate an intention. The answer must contain some 
element of reasoning/justification; may be used to support a 
given statement. 
Outline This is a broad command that is looking for a clear and 
coherent approach that communicates the essential 
features of a process, system, technique, philosophy or 
concept. Does not require a conclusion. 
Construct/Produce/Draw 
(a 2-point perspective 
drawing/working drawing) 
Use graphical means to communicate/demonstrate 
understanding and application of drawing conventions. 
Requires use of maths skills/coordinates/measuring for 
accuracy. 
Consider/Discuss Identify the issue/situation/problem/concept/argument in the 
question. Explore aspects of the 
issue/element/situation/problem/concept/argument. 
Investigate the issue/situation etc by reasoning or argument. 
Uses subject-specific language and demonstrates use of 
evidence (scientific, mathematical, data) to support points of 
discussion. Does not require a conclusion. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design) –  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
63 
 
Command word Definition 
Justify Used where a developed argument or discussion that reaches 
a conclusion requires legitimising or requires backing up. 
To provide the rationale as to why a conclusion has been 
reached. Where opinions are expressed, the factors that 
have been considered and how their importance and effect 
been gauged. Clear trajectory/path is central to the 
response, response has a clear route and a coherent flow 
throughout. Uses subject-specific language and provides the 
evidence or structure to a conclusion. 
Analyse To break down or deconstruct a process, system, 
technique, philosophy, concept, design movement or 
product, together with reasoned consideration, scrutiny and 
investigation of a range of factors – contextual influences, 
researched and recalled information or data (scientific, 
mathematical), subject-specific language and formal 
discussion. Consideration of the components and factors in 
relation to one another. 
Evaluate Critically review information gained from analysis, 
investigations – bring it together to form a conclusion, 
drawing on evidence, data (scientific, mathematical), 
including strengths, weaknesses, and relevant information. 
Come to a supported conclusion in relation to a given 
context. Will be part of the process making independent 
judgements, communicating own views as an informed 
student. 
 
Please refer to the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology 
(Product Design) Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) and any associated Levels 
Descriptors for further guidance relating to each command word.  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design)  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
64 
Appendix 6: The context for the 
development of this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] and our 
ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
● reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with those 
taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
● consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including learned bodies, 
subject associations, higher-education academics, teachers and employers to ensure this 
qualification is suitable for a UK context 
● reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in their 
documents GCE Qualification Level Conditions and Requirements and GCE Subject Level 
Conditions and Requirements for Design and Technology, published in February 2016. 
 
[1]Pearson’s World Class Qualification Principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
● demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning 
and measuring higher-order skills 
● rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and 
valid assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in end users of the 
knowledge, skills and competencies of certified students 
● inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students 
develop at different rates and have different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
● empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills, see Appendix 7. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design) –  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
65 
 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
 
“ The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important change to the 
education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications will assist them in 
helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an ‘Expert 
Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or because of 
our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the world as diverse as 
Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification development 
process that has included: 
● extensive international comparability against the highest-performing jurisdictions in the 
world 
● benchmarking assessments against UK and overseas providers to ensure that they are at 
the right level of demand 
● establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-specific 
expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
● subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future oriented. The 
design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, meaning learner outcomes 
have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a learner’s 
success in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident that we have 
supported the development of qualifications that are outstanding for their coherence, 
thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as representing world-class best 
practice. 
”    
  
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Lee Sing Kong 
Director, National Institute of Education, 
Singapore 
  
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
  
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design)  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
66 
 
Appendix 7: Transferable skills 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently flagged the 
need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable them to respond with 
confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines skills, or 
competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that can be learned and 
that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform an activity or task and can be 
built upon and extended through learning.’ [1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected and 
evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this process, we 
identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the most evidence-based and 
robust skills framework. We adapted the framework slightly to include the Program for 
International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT Literacy and Collaborative Problem Solving 
(CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves: [2]  
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve general 
cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and communicate. [3]  
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, oral communication, written communication, assertive 
communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, service 
orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared understanding, 
taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team organisation. 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work stress, 
adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, and physical 
adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual teams, 
work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and able to acquire 
new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher education, 
as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the teaching and learning of 
this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning materials, developed with 
stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
 
[1]  OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012) 
[2]  Koenig J A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop (National 
Academies Press, 2011) 
[3]  PISA – The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy (2011) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design) –  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
67 
Appendix 8: Level 3 Extended Project 
qualification 
What is the Extended Project?  
The Extended Project is a standalone qualification that can be taken alongside GCEs. It 
supports the development of independent learning skills and helps to prepare students for 
their next step – whether that be higher education or employment. The qualification:  
● is recognised by higher education for the skills it develops  
● is worth half of an Advanced GCE qualification at grades A*–E  
● carries UCAS points for university entry.  
The Extended Project encourages students to develop skills in the following areas: research, 
critical thinking, extended writing and project management. Students identify and agree a 
topic area of their choice for in-depth study (which may or may not be related to a GCE 
subject they are already studying), guided by their teacher.  
Students can choose from one of four approaches to produce:  
● a dissertation (for example an investigation based on predominately secondary research)  
● an investigation/field study (for example a practical experiment)  
● a performance (for example in music, drama or sport)  
● an artefact (for example creating a sculpture in response to a client brief or solving an 
engineering problem). 
The qualification is coursework based and students are assessed on the skills of managing, 
planning and evaluating their project. Students will research their topic, develop skills to 
review and evaluate the information, and then present the final outcome of their project. 
The Extended Project has 120 guided learning hours (GLH) consisting of a 40-GLH taught 
element that includes teaching the technical skills (for example research skills) and an  
80-GLH guided element that includes mentoring students through the project work. The 
qualification is 100% internally assessed and externally moderated. 
How to link the Extended Project with design and technology 
The Extended Project creates the opportunity to develop transferable skills for progression to 
higher education and to the workplace, through the exploration of either an area of personal 
interest or a topic of interest from within the design and technology qualification content. 
Through the Extended Project students will develop skills that support their study of design 
and technology, including:  
● investigation and analysis of a problem within a context 
● conducting, organising and using research 
● independent reading in the subject area  
● planning, project management and time management 
● production of a design brief and specification to direct, inform and evaluate their 
design practice 
● collecting, handling and interpreting data and evidence 
● critically analyse and evaluate their own ideas and decisions while using an iterative 
design and make process 
● consideration of social, moral and ethical factors 
● critical thinking. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design)  
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
68 
 
In the context of the Extended Project, critical thinking refers to the objective analysis and 
evaluation of prototypes/products made by others and the students themselves. This 
supports the development of evaluative skills, through evaluating design decisions, and using 
qualitative and quantitative evidence to support informed judgements and propose evidence-
based solutions to real-world problems. 
Types of Extended Project related to design and technology 
Students may produce a dissertation on any topic that can be researched and argued, for 
example a controversial business issue such as child labour, executive pay or advertising to 
children. 
A dissertation might involve an investigation such as: 
● the impact of digital downloads on the music industry 
● an investigation into the ease of doing business in a chosen country. 
The dissertation uses secondary research sources to provide a reasoned defence or a point of 
view, with consideration of counter-arguments. 
An alternative might be an investigative project or field study involving the collection of data 
from primary research, for example: 
● a study of the impact of unemployment on the local community 
● a statistical survey of changing social attitudes towards online purchasing. 
A field study might consider an issue that lends itself to primary research, for example an 
investigation into the motivation techniques used in a chosen business. 
Using the Extended Project to support breadth and depth  
In the Extended Project, students are assessed on the quality of the work they produce and 
the skills they develop and demonstrate through completing this work. Students should 
demonstrate that they have extended themselves in some significant way beyond what they 
have been studying in design and technology. Students can demonstrate extension in one or 
more dimensions: 
● deepening understanding – where a student explores a topic in greater depth than in 
the specification content. This could be an in-depth exploration of one aspect of design 
and make principles leading to the production of their prototype 
● broadening skills – where a student learns a new skill. This might be learning new 
processes or techniques that can be applied in their independent design and make project 
● widening perspectives – where the student’s project spans different subjects. A student 
studying design and technology with geography may wish to research the impact of 
technology on a particular region or locality. A student studying design and technology 
with mathematics may wish to use statistical techniques to analyse market data and 
research one aspect of a market in more detail. 
A wide range of information to support the delivery and assessment of the Extended Project, 
including the specification, teacher guidance for all aspects, an editable scheme of work and 
exemplars for all four approaches, can be found on our website. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Design and Technology (Product Design) – 
Specification – Issue 2 – February 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
69 
Appendix 9: Codes 
Type of code Use of code Code 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for performance 
tables is assigned a discount code 
indicating the subject area to which it 
belongs. 
Discount codes are published by DfE in the 
RAISEonline library (www.raiseonline.org) 
VF2 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an 
Ofqual Regulated Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) code. 
The RQF code is known as a Qualification 
Number (QN). This is the code that 
features in the DfE Section 96 and on the 
LARA as being eligible for 16–18 and 19+ 
funding, and is to be used for all 
qualification funding purposes. The QN will 
appear on students’ final certification 
documentation. 
The QN for this 
qualification is: 
603/0697/X 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to 
enter students for a qualification. Centres 
will need to use the entry codes only when 
claiming students’ qualifications. 
A Level – 9DT0 
Component codes These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be 
entered for individual components. 
Component 1: 9DT0/01 
Component 2: 9DT0/02 
DB250221 9781446933015_GCE2017_AL_DTECH_ISS2.DOC.1–76/0 

 
 
Edexcel, BTEC and LCCI qualifications 
Edexcel, BTEC and LCCI qualifications are awarded by Pearson, the UK’s largest awarding 
body offering academic and vocational qualifications that are globally recognised and 
benchmarked. For further information, please visit our qualifications website at 
qualifications.pearson.com. Alternatively, you can get in touch with us using the details on 
our contact us page at qualifications.pearson.com/contactus 
About Pearson 
Pearson is the world's leading learning company, with 22,500 employees in more than 
70 countries working to help people of all ages to make measurable progress in their lives 
through learning. We put the learner at the centre of everything we do, because wherever 
learning flourishes, so do people. Find out more about how we can help you and your 
learners at qualifications.pearson.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References to third party material made in this specification are made in good faith. Pearson 
does not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may 
be subject to change, or any opinions expressed therein. (Material may include textbooks, 
journals, magazines and other publications and websites.) 
 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
 
ISBN 978 1 446 9 3301 5 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2022 
 
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office:  80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL
V AT Reg No GB 278 537121
Getty Images: Alex Belmonlinsky
