Specification
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics (9PL0)
First teaching from September 2017
First certification from 2019 Issue 3
A Level 
Politics

 
 
 
Summary of Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE 
in Politics specification Issue 3 
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this issue Page 
number  
UK Government content, topic 1 (The Constitution), 1.1: removal of reference to 
European Communities Act from first bullet point; removal of reference to 
European Union Law from third bullet point 
24 
UK Government content, topic 4 (Relations between the branches), 4.3: removal 
of reference to social policy from the first bullet point; the second and third bullet 
points have been replaced by bullet point about the impact of leaving the EU 
27 
Appendix 2: the definition of Supplementary Vote updated in UK Politics section 
3 on Electoral systems 
66 
Appendix 2: the definition of executive orders updated in USA section 3 on the 
US Presidency 
84 
 
Previous issues show earlier changes. 
If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, please contact us via 
our website at: qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/contact-us.html. 
 
 
 
Contents 
1 Introduction 2 
Why choose Edexcel A Level Politics? 2 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this qualification 3 
Qualification at a glance 4 
2 Subject content and assessment information 6 
Component 1: UK Politics and Core Political Ideas 7 
Component 2: UK Government and Non-core Political Ideas 22 
Component 3: Comparative Politics 39 
Assessment Objectives 55 
3 Administration and general information 56 
Entries 56 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special consideration and 
malpractice 56 
Student recruitment and progression 59 
Appendix 1: Question paper command words 63 
Appendix 2: Key terminology glossary 64 
Appendix 3: The context for the development of this 
qualification 93 
Appendix 4: Transferable skills 95 
Appendix 5: Level 3 Extended Project qualification 96 
Appendix 6: Codes 98 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
2 
 
1 Introduction 
Why choose Edexcel A Level Politics? 
We’ve listened to feedback from all parts of the politics subject community, including higher 
education. We’ve used this opportunity of curriculum change to redesign qualifications so 
that they reflect the demands of a truly modern and evolving political environment in the UK 
and around the world – qualifications that enable your students to apply themselves and 
which give them the skills to succeed. At AS Level, students will study UK politics and 
UK government, which will give them a set of core knowledge and understanding of politics. 
Students will then develop this knowledge and understanding at A Level, and study three 
core political ideas and another from a choice of five. They then have the choice to study 
either the government and politics of the USA or global politics. 
Familiar specification within a clear and coherent structure 
Our new specification is familiar and manageable, but with new components introduced in a 
straightforward structure. Each topic in our qualification is fully detailed, providing you with 
the full range of breadth and depth to teach. 
A wide range of engaging and contemporary issues 
Our qualification includes a broad range of relevant and contemporary ideas, institutions, 
processes and issues to support learning about politics. 
Clear assessments for students of all abilities 
Assessments will develop students’ skills in critical thinking and analysis, using a variety of 
question types, sources and materials. 
Free topic-specific resources 
We will provide teacher and student guides for all the content, including the new content on 
political thinkers and their ideas, and approaches to comparative politics. 
AS and A Level qualifications that are co-teachable 
Co-teaching AS and A Level provides flexibility for you and your students. Centres  
co-teaching AS and A Level can deliver the UK politics and UK government content in the 
first year, allowing students to be entered for the AS at the end of year. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
3 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this 
qualification 
Planning 
• Our Getting Started Guide gives you an overview of the new AS and A Level 
qualifications to help you to get to grips with the changes to content and assessment, 
and to help you understand what these changes mean for you and your students. 
• We will give you editable course planners and schemes of work, which you can adapt 
to suit your department. 
• Our mapping documents highlight key differences between the new and the 2008 
qualifications. 
Teaching and learning 
There will be lots of free teaching and learning materials and support to help you deliver the 
new qualifications, including: 
• suggested resource lists for each component 
• a student learning and revision guide 
• materials for your options evenings 
• a new, more detailed Getting Started guide, including topic-specific guides with 
information on each of the political ideas and their thinkers, and support and literature to 
help teaching and learning on the comparative theories for the A Level options 
• a free bridging unit to give students ‘An Introduction to Politics’ on their move from GCSE 
to AS/A Level. 
Preparing for exams 
We will also provide a range of resources to help you prepare your students for the 
assessments, including: 
• additional assessment materials to support formative assessments and mock exams 
• marked exemplars of student work with examiner commentaries. 
ResultsPlus 
ResultsPlus provides the most detailed analysis available of your students’ exam 
performance. It can help you identify the topics and skills where further learning would 
benefit your students. 
Get help and support 
Our subject advisor service and online community will ensure you receive help and guidance 
from us and that you can share ideas and information with other teachers. You can sign up 
to receive e-newsletters to keep up to date with qualification updates and product and 
service news. 
Learn more at qualifications.pearson.com 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
4 
Qualification at a glance 
Content and assessment overview 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics consists of three externally-examined 
papers. 
Students must complete all assessment in May/June in any single year. 
Component 1: UK Politics (*Component code: 9PL0/01) 
Written examination: 2 hours 
33⅓% of the qualification 
84 marks 
Content overview 
1. Political Participation, students will study: 
• democracy and participation, political parties, electoral systems, voting behaviour and the 
media. 
2. Core Political Ideas, students will study: 
• conservatism, liberalism, socialism. 
Assessment overview 
Section A: Political Participation 
One 30-mark question from a choice of two (each question uses a source) – students must 
complete one of these. Plus one 30-mark question from a choice of two – students must 
complete one of these. 
All questions assess AO1, AO2 and AO3. 
Section B: Core Political Ideas 
One 24-mark question from a choice of two, which assesses AO1, AO2 and AO3. 
 
Component 2: UK Government (*Component code: 9PL0/02)  
Written examination: 2 hours 
33⅓% of the qualification 
84 marks 
Content overview 
1. UK Government, students will study: 
• the constitution, parliament, Prime Minister and executive, relationships between the 
branches. 
2. Non-core political ideas, students will study: 
• one idea from the following: anarchism, ecologism, feminism, multiculturalism, 
nationalism. 
Assessment overview 
Section A: UK Government 
• One 30-mark question from a choice of two (each question uses a source) – students must 
complete one of these. Plus one 30-mark question from a choice of two – students must 
complete one of these. 
• All questions assess AO1, AO2 and AO3. 
Section B: Non-core Political Ideas 
• One 24-mark question from a choice of two, which assesses AO1, AO2 and AO3. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
5 
 
Component 3: Comparative Politics (*Component code: 9PL0/3A or 3B)  
Written examination: 2 hours 
33⅓% of the qualification 
84 marks 
Students study either USA (9PL0/3A) or Global (9PL0/3B) 
Content overview 
For USA (3A), students will study: 
• the US Constitution and federalism, US Congress, US presidency, US Supreme Court and 
civil rights, democracy and participation, comparative theories. 
OR 
For Global (3B) students will study: 
• sovereignty and globalisation, global governance: political and economic, global governance: 
human rights and environmental, power and developments, regionalism and the European 
Union, comparative theories. 
Assessment overview for 3A and 3B 
Section A 
• One 12-mark question from a choice of two, which assesses AO1 and AO2. 
Section B 
• One compulsory 12-mark question focused on comparative theories, which assesses 
AO1 and AO2. 
Section C 
• Two 30-mark questions from a choice of three, which assess AO1, AO2 and AO3. 
 
*See Appendix 6: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to this 
qualification. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
6 
2 Subject content and assessment 
information 
Qualification aims and objectives 
The aims and objectives of this qualification are to enable students to: 
• develop knowledge and an informed understanding of contemporary political structures 
and issues in their historical context, both within the United Kingdom (UK) and globally 
• develop a critical awareness of the changing nature of politics and the relationships 
between political ideas, institutions and processes 
• develop knowledge and an informed understanding of the influences and interests which 
have an impact on decisions in government and politics 
• develop knowledge and an informed understanding of the rights and responsibilities of 
individuals and groups 
• develop the ability to critically analyse, interpret and evaluate political information to 
form arguments and make judgements 
• develop an interest in, and engagement with, contemporary politics. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
7 
Component 1: UK Politics and Core Political Ideas 
There are two compulsory sections to this component: UK Politics and Core Political Ideas. 
UK Politics 
This section explores the nature of politics and how people engage in the political process in 
the UK. 
Students will investigate in detail how people and politics interact. They will explore the 
emergence and development of the UK’s democratic system and the similarities, differences, 
connections and parallels between direct and indirect democracy. They will focus on the role 
and scope of political parties that are so central to contemporary politics, including the 
significance of the manifestos they publish at election time and their relevance to the 
mandate of the resulting government. 
This section allows students to understand the individual in the political process and their 
relationship with the state and their fellow citizens. Students will examine how electoral 
systems in the UK operate and how individuals and groups are influenced in their voting 
behaviour and political actions. This component will further examine the role of the media in 
contemporary politics. It will also give students an understanding of voting patterns and 
voting behaviour. 
There are four content areas in UK Politics: 
1. Democracy and participation 
2. Political parties 
3. Electoral systems 
4. Voting behaviour and the media. 
Core Political Ideas 
This section allows students to explore the three traditional political ideas of conservatism, 
liberalism and socialism. Students will learn about the core ideas and principles and how they 
apply in practice to human nature, the state, society and the economy, the divisions within 
each idea and their key thinkers.  
There are three content areas in Core Political Ideas: 
1. Liberalism 
2. Conservatism 
3. Socialism. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
8 
Skills 
• Students must comprehend and interpret political information in relation to areas of 
UK politics and core political ideas. 
• Students must fully understand, and critically analyse and evaluate areas of UK politics 
and core political ideas. 
• Students must identify parallels, connections, similarities and differences between 
content studied, providing a basis for comparing the UK with the USA and appreciating 
the UK’s position in global politics. 
• Students must construct and communicate arguments and explanations with relevance, 
clarity and coherence, and draw reasoned conclusions about UK politics and core political 
ideas. 
• Students must develop knowledge and understanding of key political concepts. The 
content supports these skills by presenting the main content for learning in the right-
hand side of the content tables. 
• Students must use appropriate vocabulary. The content supports this skill by listing key 
terminology in each content area in the left-hand side of the content table. The lists are 
to support teaching of the main content and help students to use appropriate vocabulary 
in assessment. Students should, therefore, familiarise themselves with the definitions of 
key terminology for each section, please also see Appendix 2: Key terminology glossary. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
9 
UK Politics content 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
1 Democracy and 
participation 
Key terminology 
Legitimacy 
Direct democracy 
Representative  
democracy 
Pluralist democracy 
Democratic deficit 
Participation crisis 
Franchise/suffrage 
Think tanks 
Lobbyists 
1.1  Current systems of representative democracy and direct 
democracy. 
• The features of direct democracy and representative 
democracy.  
• The similarities and differences between direct democracy 
and representative democracy.  
 Advantages and disadvantages of direct democracy and 
representative democracy and consideration of the case for 
reform. 
1.2  A wider franchise and debates over suffrage. 
• Key milestones in the widening of the franchise in relation 
to class, gender, ethnicity and age, including the 1832 
Great Reform Act and the 1918, 1928 and 1969 
Representation of the People Acts. 
• The work of the suffragists/suffragettes to extend the 
franchise. 
 The work of a current movement to extend the franchise. 
1.3  Pressure groups and other influences. 
• How different pressure groups exert influence and how 
their methods and influence vary in contemporary 
politics. 
• Case studies of two different pressure groups, 
highlighting examples of how their methods and influence 
vary. 
• Other collective organisations and groups including think 
tanks, lobbyists and corporations, and their influence on 
government and Parliament. 
1.4  Rights in context. 
• Major milestones in their development, including the 
significance of Magna Carta and more recent 
developments, including the Human Rights Act 1998 and 
Equality Act 2010. 
• Debates on the extent, limits and tensions within the UK’s 
rights-based culture, including consideration of how 
individual and collective right may conflict, the 
contributions from civil liberties pressure groups – 
including the work of two contemporary civil liberties 
pressure groups. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
10 
 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
2 Political parties 
Key terminology 
Old Labour (social 
democracy) 
New Labour 
(Third Way) 
One Nation 
New Right 
Classical liberals 
Modern liberals 
Party systems 
Left-wing 
Right-wing 
2.1  Political parties. 
• The functions and features of political parties in the UK’s 
representative democracy. 
• How parties are currently funded and debates on the 
consequences of the current funding system. 
2.2  Established political parties. 
• The origins and historical development of the Conservative 
Party, the Labour Party and Liberal Democrat Party, and 
how this has shaped their ideas and current policies on the 
economy, law and order, welfare and foreign affairs. 
2.3  Emerging and minor UK political parties. 
• The importance of other parties in the UK. 
• The ideas and policies of two other minor parties. 
2.4  UK political parties in context. 
• The development of a multi-party system and its 
implications for government. 
• Various factors that affect party success – explanations of 
why political parties have succeeded or failed, including 
debates on the influence of the media. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
11 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
3 Electoral systems 
Key terminology 
First-past-the-post 
(FPTP) 
Additional Member 
System (AMS) 
Single Transferable 
Vote (STV) 
Supplementary  
Vote (SV) 
Safe seat 
Marginal seat 
Minority government 
Coalition government 
3.1  Different electoral systems. 
• First-past-the-post (FPTP), Additional Member System 
(AMS), Single Transferable Vote (STV), and 
Supplementary Vote (SV). 
• The advantages and disadvantages of these different 
systems. 
• Comparison of first-past-the-post (FPTP) to a different 
electoral system in a devolved parliament/assembly. 
3.2 Referendums and how they are used. 
• How referendums have been used in the UK and their 
impact on UK political life since 1997. 
• The case for and against referendums in a representative 
democracy. 
3.3 Electoral system analysis. 
• Debates on why different electoral systems are used in the 
UK. 
• The impact of the electoral system on the government or 
type of government appointed.  
• The impact of different systems on party representation 
and of electoral systems on voter choice. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
12 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
4 Voting behaviour 
and the media 
Key terminology 
Class dealignment 
Partisan dealignment 
Governing 
competency 
Disillusion and 
apathy 
Manifesto 
Mandate 
4.1  Case studies of three key general elections. 
• Case studies of three elections (one from the period 1945–
92, the 1997 election, and one since 1997), the results 
and their impact on parties and government. 
• The factors that explain the outcomes of these elections, 
including: 
o the reasons for and impact of party policies and 
manifestos, techniques used in their election 
campaigns, and the wider political context of the 
elections 
o class-based voting and other factors influencing voting 
patterns, such as partisanship and voting attachment 
o gender, age, ethnicity and region as factors in 
influencing voting behaviour, turnout and trends.  
• Analysis of the national voting-behaviour patterns for 
these elections, revealed by national data sources and how 
and why they vary. 
4.2  The influence of the media. 
• The Assessment of the role and impact of the media on 
politics – both during and between key general elections, 
including the importance and relevance of opinion polls, 
media bias and persuasion. 
 
Definitions of key terminology are given in Appendix 2: Key terminology glossary. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
13 
Core Political Ideas content 
Conservatism 
Conservatism seeks to conserve society as it is and is suspicious of change. Conservatism 
values pragmatism over ideological thinking, seeking to adapt its values over time, according 
to changes in society. However, new right thinking within conservatism in the 1970s and 
1980s challenged much of what conservatism had traditionally stood for. 
There are three content areas: 
1. Conservatism: core ideas and principles 
2. Differing views and tensions within conservatism 
3. Conservative thinkers and their ideas. 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
1 Conservatism: core 
ideas and principles 
Key terminology 
Hierarchy 
Authority 
Change to conserve 
Atomism 
Core ideas and principles of conservatism and how they relate to 
human nature, the state, society and the economy: 
• pragmatism – flexible approach to society with decisions 
made on the basis of what works – to cover links between 
pragmatism and traditional conservative and one-nation 
philosophy 
• tradition – accumulated wisdom of past societies and a 
connection between the generations – to cover how this 
creates stability, links with organic change, and enhances 
humans’ security 
• human imperfection – humans are flawed which makes them 
incapable of making good decisions for themselves – to cover 
the three aspects of psychological, moral and intellectual 
imperfection 
• organic society/state – society/state is more important than 
any individual parts – to cover how this links to the 
underpinning of the beliefs of authority and hierarchy, and a 
cohesive society 
• paternalism – benign power exerted from above by the state, 
that governs in the interests of the people – to cover the 
different interpretations by traditional (an authoritarian 
approach, the state knows what is best so the people must 
do what they are told) and one-nation conservatives (there is 
an obligation on the wealthy to look after those who are 
unable to look after themselves)and why it is rejected by 
New Right Conservatives 
• libertarianism (specifically neo-liberalism) – upholds liberty, 
seeking to maximise autonomy and free choice, mainly in the 
economy – to cover the moral and economic values 
associated with this idea. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
14 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
2 Differing views and 
tensions within 
conservatism 
Key terminology 
Noblesse oblige 
Anti-permissiveness 
Radical 
Human imperfection 
The differing views and tensions within conservatism: 
• traditional conservative − commitment to hierarchical and 
paternalistic values 
• one-nation conservative − updating of traditional 
conservatism in response to the emergence of capitalism 
• New Right − the marriage of neo-liberal and neo-
conservative ideas and include: 
o neo-liberal: principally concerned with free-market 
economics and atomistic individualism 
o neo-conservative: principally concerned with the fear of 
social fragmentation, tough on law and order and public 
morality.  
 
Please note that content area 3 should focus on the key ideas given, rather than on the 
study of biographical information on each thinker. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
15 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
3 Conservative 
thinkers and their 
ideas 
Key terminology 
Laissez-faire 
Empiricism 
The key ideas of the following thinkers to exemplify the content 
from areas 1 and 2: 
Thomas Hobbes (1588–1679) 
• Order – an ordered society should balance the human need 
to lead a free life. 
• Human nature – humans are needy, vulnerable and easily led 
astray in attempts to understand the world around them. 
Edmund Burke (1729–1797) 
• Change – political change should be undertaken with great 
caution and organically. 
• Tradition and empiricism – practices passed down for 
generations should be respected. 
Michael Oakeshott (1901–1990) 
• Human imperfection – suggestion that society is 
unpredictable and humans are imperfect. 
• Pragmatism – belief that conservatism is about being 
pragmatic. 
Ayn Rand (1905–1982) 
• Objectivism – this advocates the virtues of rational  
self-interest. 
• Freedom – this supports a pure, laissez-faire capitalist 
economy. 
Robert Nozick (1938–2002) 
• Libertarianism – based on Kant’s idea that individuals in 
society cannot be treated as a thing, or used against their will 
as a resource. 
• Self-ownership – individuals own their bodies, talents, 
abilities and labour. 
 
Please note that content area 3 should focus on the key ideas given, rather than on the 
study of detailed biographical information on each thinker. Key terminology is not exclusive 
to the given content area and they apply across all three content areas. Definitions of key 
terminology are given in Appendix 2: Key terminology glossary. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
16 
Liberalism 
Liberalism is seen essentially as a product of The Enlightenment as it recognises that humans 
are rational creatures capable of understanding the world and making decisions for 
themselves. The defining feature of liberalism is its belief in individualism and freedom. 
There are three content areas: 
1. Liberalism: core ideas and principles 
2. Differing views and tensions within liberalism 
3. Liberal thinkers and their ideas. 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding 
of:  
1 Liberalism: core ideas 
and principles 
Key terminology 
Foundational equality 
Formal equality 
Equality of opportunity 
Social contract 
Meritocracy 
Mechanistic theory 
Tolerance 
Limited government 
Core ideas and principles of liberalism and how they relate to 
human nature, the state, society and the economy: 
• individualism – the primacy of the individual in society 
over any group – to cover egoistical individualism and 
developmental individualism 
• freedom/liberty – the ability and right to make decisions 
in your own interests based on your view of human 
nature – to cover how liberals guarantee individual 
freedom, the link between freedom and individualism, 
that freedom is ‘under the law’ 
• state – it is ‘necessary’ to avoid disorder, but ‘evil’ as it 
has potential to remove individual liberty, thus should be 
limited; this is linked to the liberal view of the economy 
• rationalism – the belief that humans are rational 
creatures, capable of reason and logic – to cover how 
rationalism underpins an individual’s ability to define 
their own best interests and make their own moral 
choices, creating a progressive society 
• equality/social justice – the belief that individuals are of 
equal value and that they should be treated impartially 
and fairly by society – to cover foundational and formal 
equality, and equality of opportunity 
• liberal democracy – a democracy that balances the will 
of the people, as shown through elections, with limited 
government (state) and a respect for civil liberties in 
society – to cover why liberals support it as well as why 
they are concerned about it. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
17 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding 
of:  
2 Differing views and 
tensions within 
liberalism 
Key terminology 
Egoistical individualism 
Developmental individualism 
Negative freedom 
Positive freedom 
Laissez-faire capitalism 
Keynesianism 
The differing views and tensions within liberalism: 
• classical liberalism − early liberals who believed that 
individual freedom would best be achieved with the state 
playing a minimal role 
• modern liberalism − emerged as a reaction against  
free-market capitalism, believing this had led to many 
individuals not being free. Freedom could no longer 
simply be defined as ‘being left alone’. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
18 
 
Please note that content area 3 should focus on the key ideas given, rather than on the 
study of detailed biographical information on each thinker. 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding 
of:  
3 Liberal thinkers and 
their ideas 
Key terminology 
Harm principle 
Minimal state 
Enabling state 
The key ideas of the following thinkers to exemplify the 
content from areas 1 and 2: 
John Locke (1632-1704) 
• Social contract theory – society, state and government 
are based on a theoretical voluntary agreement. 
• Limited government – that government should be limited 
and based on consent from below. 
Mary Wollstonecraft (1759–97) 
• Reason – women are rational and independent beings 
capable of reason. 
• Formal equality – in order to be free, women should 
enjoy full civil liberties and be allowed to have a career. 
John Stuart Mill (1806-73) 
• Harm principle – that individuals should be free to do 
anything except harm other individuals. 
• Tolerance – belief that the popularity of a view does not 
necessarily make it correct. 
John Rawls (1921-2002) 
• Theory of justice – opinion that society must be just and 
guarantee each citizen a life worth living. 
• The veil of ignorance – a hypothetical scenario where 
individuals agree on the type of society they want from a 
position where they lack knowledge of their own position 
in society. 
Betty Friedan (1921-2006) 
• Legal equality – women are as capable as men and that 
oppressive laws and social views must be overturned. 
• Equal opportunity – women are being held back from 
their potential because of the limited number of jobs 
that are ‘acceptable’ for women. 
 
Please note that key terminology is not exclusive to the given content area and applies 
across all three content areas. Definitions of key terminology are given in Appendix 2: Key 
terminology glossary. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
19 
Socialism 
Socialism is defined by its opposition to capitalism. It aims to provide a clear alternative that 
is more humane and based on collectivism not individualism, co-operation not competition 
and social equality not inequality. There is a wide variety of traditions within socialism, with 
the goal of abolishing or minimising class division. 
There are three content areas: 
1. Socialism: core ideas and principles 
2. Differing views and tensions within socialism 
3. Socialist thinkers and their ideas. 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
1 Socialism: core 
ideas and principles 
Key terminology 
Fraternity 
Cooperation 
Capitalism  
Common ownership 
Communism 
 
Core ideas and principles of socialism and how they relate to 
human nature, the state, society and the economy: 
• collectivism – to cover how collective human effort is both of 
greater practical value to the economy and moral value to 
society than the effort of individuals 
• common humanity – to cover the nature of humans as social 
creatures with a tendency to co-operation, sociability and 
rationality, and how the individual cannot be understood 
without reference to society, as human behaviour is socially 
determined 
• equality – is a fundamental value of socialism – to cover the 
disagreements among socialists about the nature of equality 
and how it is critical to the state, society, the economy and 
human nature 
• social class – a group of people in society who have the same 
socioeconomic status – to cover the extent to which class 
impacts on socialists’ views of society, the state and the 
economy 
• workers’ control − to cover the importance and the extent of 
control over the economy and/or state and how it is to be 
achieved. 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
2 Differing views 
and tensions within 
socialism 
Key terminology 
Evolutionary socialism 
Marxism 
Revisionism 
Social justice 
The differing views and tensions within socialism: 
• revolutionary socialism − socialism can be brought about only 
by the overthrow of the existing political and societal 
structures 
• social democracy − an ideological view that wishes to 
humanise capitalism in the interests of social justice 
• Third Way − a middle-ground alternative route to socialism 
and free-market capitalism. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
20 
Please note that content area 3 should focus on the key ideas given, rather than on the 
study of detailed biographical information on each thinker. 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
3 Socialist thinkers 
and their ideas 
Key terminology 
Class consciousness 
Historical materialism 
Dialectic 
Keynesian economics 
The key ideas of the following thinkers to exemplify the content 
from areas 1 and 2: 
Karl Marx (1818–83) and Friedrich Engels (1820–95) 
• The centrality of social class – the ideas of historical 
materialism, dialectic change and revolutionary class 
consciousness. 
• Humans as social beings – how nature is socially determined 
and how true common humanity can be expressed only under 
communism. 
Beatrice Webb (1858–1943) 
• ‘The inevitability of gradualness’ – the gradualist 
parliamentary strategy for achieving evolutionary socialism. 
• The expansion of the state – that this, and not the overthrow 
of the state, is critical in delivering socialism. 
Rosa Luxemburg (1871–1919) 
• Evolutionary socialism and revisionism – this is not possible as 
capitalism is based on an economic relationship of exploitation. 
• Struggle by the proletariat for reform and democracy – this 
creates the class consciousness necessary for the overthrow of 
the capitalist society and state. 
Anthony Crosland (1918–77) 
• The inherent contradictions in capitalism – does not drive 
social change and managed capitalism can deliver social 
justice and equality. 
• State-managed capitalism – includes the mixed economy, full 
employment and universal social benefits. 
Anthony Giddens (1938– ) 
• The rejection of state intervention – acceptance of the free 
market in the economy, emphasis on equality of opportunity 
over equality, responsibility and community over class conflict. 
• The role of the state – is social investment in infrastructure 
and education not economic and social engineering. 
 
Please note that key terminology is not exclusive to the given content area and applies 
across all three content areas. Definitions of key terminology are given in Appendix 2: Key 
terminology glossary. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
21 
Assessment information 
• First assessment: June 2019. 
• The assessment is 2 hours. 
• The assessment is out of 84 marks. 
• The assessment consists of two sections: 
o Section A – Political Participation: this section is worth 60 marks 
 Students answer one source question requiring comparative analysis from a choice of 
two and one essay question from a choice of two. AO1, AO2 and AO3 are assessed. 
o Section B – Core Political Ideas: this section is worth 24 marks 
 Students have a choice of two questions and they answer one.  
AO1, AO2 and AO3 are assessed. 
These questions will focus on content areas 1 and 2 and require students to use the 
key ideas of thinkers (content area 3) in their answers. These questions will cover 
either one core political idea or two core political ideas (1 socialism, 1 liberalism). 
No other materials, for example a calculator, are required for this paper. 
Sources 
AO2 and AO3 require students to study and respond to ‘political information’. In this 
qualification, this is carried out through the questions in Section A that use a source. These 
sources will be a single written (text) source only or a single source that combines both text 
and data (pie chart, tables, simple graphs such as a bar chart), all related in some way to 
UK politics. 
Sources will be selected to ensure that they give students opportunities to bring in their own 
knowledge and understanding, to engage in comparative analysis and to evaluate by making 
judgements and drawing conclusions. 
For each source, information relating to the context of the source is provided.  
This information will not be discretely assessed, however it is provided to help students to 
engage with the information provided in the source. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and mark scheme for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 
Advanced GCE in Politics Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
22 
Component 2: UK Government and Non-core 
Political Ideas 
There are two sections within this component, UK Government and Political Ideas. Students 
study UK Government and one political idea from a choice of five from the Political Ideas 
section. 
Overview 
Politics is ultimately about people, but most political decisions are made by a branch of 
government whose roles and powers are determined by a set of rules: the constitution. 
This component is fundamental to understanding the nature of UK government, since it 
enables students to understand where, how and by whom political decisions are made.  
The component also gives students a base of comparison to other political systems. 
The component introduces students to the set of rules governing politics in the UK, the UK 
constitution, which is different in nature from most of the rest of the world. It further 
introduces students to the specific roles and powers of the different major branches of the 
government – legislative, executive, and judiciary – as well as the relationships and balance 
of power between them, and considers where sovereignty now lies within this system. 
Students will explore the following key themes: the relative powers of the different branches 
of UK government; the extent to which the constitution has changed in recent years; the 
desirability of further change; and the current location of sovereignty within the UK political 
system. 
UK Government 
There are four content areas: 
1. The constitution 
2. Parliament 
3. Prime Minister and executive 
4. Relations between the branches. 
Non-core Political Ideas 
This section allows students to explore one of five additional political ideas. Students will 
learn about the core ideas and principles and how they apply in practice to human nature, 
the state, society and the economy, the divisions within each idea and their key thinkers. 
The five non-core political ideas to choose from are: 
1. Anarchism 
2. Ecologism 
3. Feminism 
4. Multiculturalism 
5. Nationalism. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
23 
Skills 
• Students must comprehend and interpret political information in relation to areas of 
UK government and one non-core political idea. 
• Students must fully understand, and critically analyse and evaluate areas of 
UK government and one non-core political idea. 
• Students must identify parallels, connections, similarities and differences between 
content studied, providing a basis for comparing the UK with the USA and appreciating 
the UK’s position in global politics. 
• Students must construct and communicate arguments and explanations with relevance, 
clarity and coherence and draw reasoned conclusions about UK government and one 
non-core political idea. 
• Students must develop knowledge and understanding of key political concepts.  
The content supports these skills by presenting the main content for learning in the  
right-hand side of the content tables. 
• Students must use appropriate vocabulary. The content supports this skill by listing key 
terminology in each content area in the left-hand side of the content tables. The lists are 
to support teaching of the main content and help students to use appropriate vocabulary 
in assessment. Students should, therefore, familiarise themselves with the definitions of 
key terminology for each section, please also see Appendix 2: Key terminology glossary. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
24 
UK Government content 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
1 The constitution 
Key terminology 
Constitution 
Unentrenched 
(entrenched) 
Uncodified (codified) 
Unitary (federal) 
Parliamentary 
sovereignty 
The rule of law 
Statute law 
Common law 
Conventions 
Authoritative works 
Treaties 
Devolution 
1.1 The nature and sources of the UK Constitution, including: 
• an overview of the development of the Constitution 
through key historical documents: 
o Magna Carta (1215); Bill of Rights (1689);  
Act of Settlement (1701); Acts of Union (1707); 
Parliament Acts (1911 and 1949) 
• the nature of the UK Constitution: unentrenched, 
uncodified and unitary, and the ‘twin pillars’ of 
parliamentary sovereignty and the rule of law 
• the five main sources of the UK Constitution: statute law; 
common law; conventions; authoritative works, and 
treaties. 
1.2  How the constitution has changed since 1997. 
• Under Labour 1997–2010: House of Lords reforms, 
electoral reform; devolution; Human Rights Act 1998; 
and the Supreme Court. 
• Under the Coalition 2010–15: Fixed Term Parliaments, 
Act 2011; further devolution to Wales. 
• Any major reforms undertaken by governments since 
2015, including further devolution to Scotland (in the 
context of the Scottish Referendum). 
1.3 The role and powers of devolved bodies in the UK, and the 
impact of this devolution on the UK. 
• Devolution in England. 
• Scottish Parliament and Government. 
• Welsh Assembly and Government. 
• Northern Ireland Assembly and Executive. 
1.4  Debates on further reform. 
• An overview of the extent to which the individual reforms 
since 1997 listed in section 1.2 above should be taken 
further. 
• The extent to which devolution should be extended in 
England. 
• Whether the UK constitution should be changed to be 
entrenched and codified, including a bill of rights. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
25 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
2 Parliament 
Key terminology 
Parliament 
House of Commons 
House of Lords 
Confidence and supply 
Salisbury Convention 
Parliamentary 
privilege 
Legislative bills 
Public bill committees 
Backbenchers 
Select committees 
Opposition 
2.1  The structure and role of the House of Commons and House 
of Lords. 
• The selection of members of the House of Commons and 
House of Lords, including the different types of Peers. 
• The main functions of the House of Commons and House 
of Lords and the extent to which these functions are 
fulfilled. 
2.2  The comparative powers of the House of Commons and 
House of Lords. 
• The exclusive powers of the House of Commons. 
• The main powers of the House of Lords. 
• Debates about the relative power of the two Houses. 
2.3  The legislative process. 
• The different stages a bill must go through to become 
law. 
• The interaction between the Commons and the Lords 
during the legislative process, including the Salisbury 
Convention. 
2.4  The ways in which Parliament interacts with the Executive. 
• The role and significance of backbenchers in both Houses, 
including the importance of parliamentary privilege. 
• The work of select committees. 
• The role and significance of the opposition. 
• The purpose and nature of ministerial question time, 
including Prime Minister’s Questions. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
26 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
3 Prime Minister 
and Executive 
Key terminology 
Executive 
Cabinet 
Minister 
Government 
department 
Royal prerogative 
Secondary legislation 
Individual 
responsibility 
Collective 
responsibility 
Presidential 
government 
3.1  The structure, role, and powers of the Executive. 
• Its structure, including Prime Minister, the Cabinet, junior 
ministers and government departments. 
• Its main roles, including proposing legislation, proposing 
a budget, and making policy decisions within laws and 
budget. 
• The main powers of the Executive, including Royal 
Prerogative powers, initiation of legislation and secondary 
legislative power. 
3.2  The concept of ministerial responsibility. 
• The concept of individual ministerial responsibility. 
• The concept of collective ministerial responsibility. 
3.3  The Prime Minister and the Cabinet. 
3.3.1  The power of the Prime Minister and the Cabinet. 
• The factors governing the Prime Minister’s selection of 
ministers. 
• The factors that affect the relationship between the 
Cabinet and the Prime Minister, and the ways they have 
changed, and the balance of power between the Prime 
Minister and the Cabinet. 
3.3.2  The powers of the Prime Minster and the Cabinet to dictate 
events and determine policy. 
• Students must study the influence of one Prime Minister 
from 1945 to 1997 and one post-1997 Prime Minister. 
• Students may choose any pre-1997 and any post-1997 
Prime Minister, provided that they study them in an 
equivalent level of detail, covering both events and 
policy, with examples that illustrate both control and a 
lack of control. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
27 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
4 Relations between 
the branches 
Key terminology 
Supreme Court 
Judicial neutrality 
Judicial independence 
Judicial review 
Elective dictatorship 
European Union (EU) 
Four freedoms (EU) 
Legal sovereignty 
Political sovereignty 
Ultra vires 
4.1  The Supreme Court and its interactions with, and influence 
over, the legislative and policy-making processes. 
• The role and composition of the Supreme Court. 
• The key operating principles of the Supreme Court, 
including judicial neutrality and judicial independence and 
their extent. 
• The degree to which the Supreme Court influences both 
the Executive and Parliament, including the doctrine of 
ultra vires and judicial review. 
4.2 The relationship between the Executive and Parliament. 
• The influence and effectiveness of Parliament in holding 
the Executive to account. 
• The influence and effectiveness of the Executive in 
attempting to exercise dominance over Parliament. 
• The extent to which the balance of power between 
Parliament and the Executive has changed. 
4.3  The aims, role and impact of the European Union (EU) on 
the UK government. 
• The aims of the EU, including the ‘four freedoms’ of the 
single market, political and economic union, and the 
extent to which these have been achieved. 
• The impact of leaving the EU on UK Parliamentary 
sovereignty in relation to policy making. 
4.4  The location of sovereignty in the UK political system. 
• The distinction between legal sovereignty and political 
sovereignty. 
• The extent to which sovereignty has moved between 
different branches of government. 
• Where sovereignty can now be said to lie in the UK. 
 
Definitions of key terminology are given in Appendix 2: Key terminology glossary. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
28 
Non-core Political Ideas content 
Anarchism option 
Anarchism is an ideology which has at its heart the aim of liberating people from political 
domination and economic exploitation. Anarchism is defined by its rejection of the state and 
all forms of political authority. 
There are three content areas for this option: 
1. Anarchism: core ideas and principles 
2. Different types of anarchism 
3. Anarchist thinkers and their ideas. 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
1 Anarchism: core 
ideas and principles 
Key terminology 
Power 
Authority 
Government 
State 
Altruism 
Autonomy 
Direct action 
Core ideas and principles of anarchism and how they relate to 
human nature, the state, society and the economy: 
• rejection of the state – the state is immoral as it rules by 
physical coercion and deceit, unjust in its defence of economic 
inequality and must be rejected due to its impact on human 
nature − to cover the arguments against the state, power and 
political participation and how the state can be overthrown 
• liberty − is incompatible with any form of political authority in 
the state, society or the economy and is critical to human 
nature – to cover the differing views of liberty and human 
nature within anarchism 
• anarchy is order – to cover how social order occurs naturally 
and spontaneously, emerging from human nature, and is the 
key to the belief in a peaceful, stable, stateless society 
• economic freedom − the economy should be a space where free 
individuals can manage their own affairs without state 
ownership or regulation – to cover the different criticisms of 
existing economic systems and different ways economic 
freedom can be achieved 
• utopian − to cover the operation and benefits of an idealised 
society in order to develop a critique of existing society and the 
criticisms levelled against anarchism as unachievable and 
unrealistic. 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
2 Different types of 
anarchism 
Key terminology 
Syndicalism 
Direct democracy 
Solidarity  
Mutualism  
The different types of anarchism: 
• collectivist anarchism – committed to common ownership to 
nurture rational, altruistic and cooperative human nature: 
o anarcho-communism 
o mutualism 
o anarcho-syndicalism 
• individualist anarchism – committed to freedom where rational, 
autonomous, competitive and self-interested individuals can 
make judgements in their own best interests: 
o anarcho-capitalism 
o egoism. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
29 
Please note that content area 3 should focus on the key ideas given, rather than on the 
study of detailed biographical information on each thinker. 
 
Please note that key terminology is not exclusive to the given content area and applies 
across all three content areas. Definitions of key terminology are given in Appendix 2: Key 
terminology glossary. 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
3 Anarchist thinkers 
and their ideas 
Key terminology 
Collectivisation 
Mutual aid 
Insurrection 
The key ideas of the following thinkers, to exemplify the content 
from areas 1 and 2: 
Max Stirner (1806-1856) 
• The self-interested and rational individual – is the centre of the 
moral universe and the state. 
• The future society will be the Union of Egoists (anarchy is order) 
– this will be brought about by insurrection, not overthrow of 
the state. 
Pierre-Joseph Proudhon (1809-1865) 
• Opposition to private property and collectivism – private 
property limits limit liberty and economic freedom and should be 
replaced by mutualism. 
• The rejection and overthrow of the state – via peaceful means. 
Mikhail Bakunin (1814-1876) 
• Propaganda by the deed – this would spark revolution and the 
state must be abolished as power is oppressive. 
• Strong belief in human sociability – the need to abolish private 
property and replace it with collectivisation. 
Peter Kropotkin (1842-1921) 
• The scientific basis for mutual aid – allows human nature to 
flourish. 
• Revolution to abolish the state and private property – utopian 
vision of the future society where anarchy is order. 
Emma Goldman (1869-1940) 
• The state is a cold monster – it should be rejected as it is 
immoral. 
• All forms of political participation in the state and society are 
corrupting and futile – so revolution, not reform, is the only 
option. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
30 
Ecologism option 
Ecologism is a reaction against the process of industrialisation and urbanisation. It promotes 
sustainability and believes that a fulfilling existence needs to be based on a radical altering of 
our relationship with non-human nature and our social and political life. 
There are three content areas for this option: 
1. Ecologism: core ideas and principles 
2. Different types of ecologism 
3. Ecologist thinkers and their ideas. 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
1 Ecologism: core 
ideas and principles 
Key terminology 
Industrialism 
Consumerism  
Sustainability 
Environmental 
consciousness 
Green capitalism 
Mechanistic world view 
Core ideas and principles of ecologism and how they relate to 
human nature, the state, society and the economy: 
• ecology – to cover the extent to which the study of the 
relationship between living beings and the environment has 
implications for deep- and shallow-green views of the state, 
society and the economy 
• holism – to cover the opposition to the mechanistic world view 
of post-Enlightenment science that dominates the state and 
society in its view of the non-human world and the economy 
• environmental ethics − developing new moral standards and 
values for human relations with each other and the non-human 
world, which will underpin the state, society and economy – to 
cover the nature of ethics and how far they extend 
• environmental consciousness – a state of being where one’s 
sense of self is fully realised by a deep identification with the 
non-human world – to cover the extent to which there needs to 
be a radical change in human nature and society 
• post-materialist and anti-consumerism – to cover the criticisms 
of materialism and consumerism and how to move beyond them 
• sustainability − the capacity of the ecological system to 
maintain its health over time – to cover the need for, type and 
way of delivering sustainability, which has implications for the 
state, society and the economy. 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
2 Different types of 
ecologism 
Key terminology 
Limits to growth 
Decentralisation  
Ecocentric  
Anthropocentric 
The different types of ecologism: 
• deep green – environmental consciousness, ecocentrism and 
strong sustainability 
• shallow green – enlightened anthropocentrism and weak 
sustainability 
• social ecology – environmental degradation can be linked to 
existing social structures and sustainability is linked to radical 
social change 
o eco-socialism 
o eco-anarchism 
o eco-feminism. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
31 
Please note that content area 3 should focus on the key ideas given, rather than on the 
study of detailed biographical information on each thinker. 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
3 Ecologist thinkers 
and their ideas 
Key terminology 
Biodiversity 
Buddhist economics 
Biocentric equality 
The key ideas of the following thinkers, to exemplify the content 
from areas 1 and 2: 
Aldo Leopold (1887–1948) 
• The land ethic – extends the community to include the non-
human world and preserving the integrity, stability and beauty 
of the biotic community. 
• Conservation fails – as it is still based on an economic model 
rather than moving beyond economics to a new human-land 
relationship. 
Rachel Carson (1907–1964) 
• The state and society does not have the authority to dominate 
nature – the long-term effects of chemical pesticide use 
impact sustainability. 
• Nature should be seen holistically – it does not exist for the 
convenience of man. 
E. F. Schumacher (1911–1977) 
• Buddhist economics – economics as if people mattered, with 
the aim of the maximum of wellbeing with the minimum of 
consumption. 
• Traditional economics – based on the fallacy that goods are 
more important than humans and that materialism is more 
important than human creative activity. 
Murray Bookchin (1921–2006) 
• The environmental crisis emerges from existing social 
structures of oppression – so social structures and the state 
must be overthrown. 
• Lessons should be learned from ecology – the future should be 
built around decentralised societies, organised as a collection 
of self-sufficient communes. 
Carolyn Merchant (1936– ) 
• The oppression and death of nature are linked to gender 
oppression – so radical, societal restructuring of gender 
relations is needed. 
• Opposition to the mechanistic, male view of science and 
nature – this dominates society as it is not holistic. 
 
Please note that key terminology is not exclusive to the given content area and applies 
across all three content areas. Definitions of key terminology are given in Appendix 2: Key 
terminology glossary. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
32 
Feminism option 
Feminism is an ideology based on the belief that society is characterised by unequal gender 
power and status. All forms of feminism are committed to advancing the social role of 
women, ensuring that the disadvantages they face can and should be overthrown. 
There are three content areas for this option: 
1. Feminism: ideas and principles 
2. Different types of feminism 
3. Feminist thinkers and their ideas.  
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
1 Feminism: ideas 
and principles 
Key terminology 
Public sphere 
Private sphere 
Essentialism 
Gender stereotypes 
Core ideas and principles of feminism and how they relate to human 
nature, the state, society and the economy: 
• sex and gender – sex refers to biological differences between men 
and women, whereas gender refers to the different roles that 
society ascribes to men and women – to cover how feminists 
believe this distinction to be important in their analysis of society 
• patriarchy – society, state and the economy are characterised by 
systematic, institutionalised and pervasive gender oppression – to 
cover how patriarchy is understood by different feminists and how 
different feminists view its importance 
• the personal is political – the idea that all relationships, both in 
society and in private relationships, between men and women are 
based on power and dominance – to cover why feminists think this 
goes to the essence of patriarchy, and why some feminists believe 
this distinction is crucial and others believe it is dangerous 
• equality feminism and difference feminism – equality feminists 
seek equality for men and women in society, whereas difference 
feminists argue that men and women have a fundamentally 
different nature from one another – to cover the core differences 
between these two types of feminism and how significant they are 
• intersectionality – argues that black and working-class women’s 
experiences of patriarchy in state, society and the economy are 
different from white, middle-class women – to cover the impact of 
this newer strand of feminism to wider feminist thinking. 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
2 Different types of 
feminism 
Key terminology 
Discrimination 
Equality of opportunity 
Political equality 
Legal equality 
Reserve army of labour 
Gender equality 
Cultural feminism 
Reformist 
The different types of feminism: 
• liberal feminism − sees individualism as the basis of gender 
equality 
• socialist feminism − believes that gender inequality stems from 
economics and that capitalism creates patriarchy 
• radical feminism − believes that the biggest problem facing 
society is gender inequality 
• post-modern feminism – argues that patriarchy manifests in 
different ways depending on a woman’s race, class etc. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
33 
Please note that content area 3 should focus on the key ideas given, rather than on the 
study of detailed biographical information on each thinker. 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
3 Feminist thinkers 
and their ideas 
Key terminology 
Otherness 
Equality and difference 
feminism 
Intersectionality 
The key ideas of the following thinkers to exemplify the content from 
areas 1 and 2: 
Charlotte Perkins Gilman (1860–1935) 
• Sex and domestic economics are hand in hand – for women to 
survive, they have to depend on their sexuality and body in order 
to please their husbands. 
• Societal pressure – young girls are compelled to conform in 
society and prepare for motherhood by playing with toys and 
wearing clothes that are specifically designed for and marketed to 
them. 
Simone de Beauvoir (1908–1986) 
• Sex versus gender – ‘one is not born, but rather becomes,  
a woman’. 
• ‘Otherness’ – men are perceived as the ‘norm’ and women 
deviants from this norm. 
Kate Millett (1934– ) 
• Family – undoing the traditional family was the key to true sexual 
revolution. 
• Portrayal of women in art and literature – she showed how 
patriarchal culture had produced writers and literary works that 
were degrading to women. 
Sheila Rowbotham (1943– ) 
•  Capitalism – women are forced to sell their labour to survive and 
use their labour to support their family under the capitalist system. 
• The family – not just an instrument for disciplining and subjecting 
women to capitalism but a place where men took refuge from 
alienation under a capitalist economy. 
bell hooks (1952– ) 
• Women of colour – she brought the cultural concerns of women of 
colour into the mainstream feminist movement. 
• Intersectionality – the mainstream feminist movement had 
focused mostly on the plight of white, college-educated, 
middle/upper-class women who had no stake in the concerns of 
women of colour. 
 
Please note that key terminology is not exclusive to the given content area and applies 
across all three content areas. Definitions of key terminology are given in Appendix 2: Key 
terminology glossary. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
34 
Multiculturalism option 
Multiculturalism is concerned with the best way to respond to cultural and religious diversity 
and how to balance this diversity with civic unity. It focuses on the political accommodation 
of difference and how to integrate differing identities into an overarching, collective identity. 
There are three content areas for this option: 
1. Multiculturalism: ideas and principles 
2. Different types of multiculturalism 
3. Multiculturalist thinkers and their ideas. 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
1 Multiculturalism: 
ideas and principles 
Key terminology 
Culture 
Formal equality 
Diversity 
Identity politics 
Tolerance 
Core ideas and principles of multiculturalism and how they relate to 
human nature, the state, society and the economy: 
• politics of recognition − this is the positive endorsement and 
celebration of cultural differences – to cover how 
oppression/cultural marginalisation affects human nature and the 
importance of recognition for the human sense of self, which 
underpins integration and social cohesion 
• culture and identity – to cover how culture is critical to human 
nature and society as it shapes personal, political and social 
identity and why minority cultures should be protected, as well as 
criticisms of favouring minority cultures 
• minority rights – to cover why the state should and how it can 
address the specific needs of particular groups in society or the 
economy by granting special rights to them, based on their 
different needs as a culture, as well as criticisms of these rights 
• diversity – including different races and cultures in the state, 
society and the economy is possible, is positive and should be 
celebrated – to cover the different justifications for diversity, the 
different types of diversity and the criticisms of diversity. 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
2 Different types of 
multiculturalism 
Key terminology 
Individualist 
integration 
Multicultural 
integration 
Assimilation 
Segregation  
Cosmopolitan 
integration 
The different types of multiculturalism, particularly the features of 
integration and segregation: 
• liberal multiculturalism – a broad ideology that endorses cultural 
diversity, compatible with tolerance and personal autonomy 
within a liberal framework, and promotes civic unity in the public 
sphere 
• pluralist multiculturalism – a broad ideology where diversity is a 
value in its own right, all cultures are equal and cultural 
recognition is the basis for civic participation 
• cosmopolitan multiculturalism – diversity strengthens cultural 
hybridity, promoting global citizenship and undermining cultural 
identity as a driving force in society 
• the conservative criticism – there can be no diversity within unity. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
35 
Please note that content area 3 should focus on the key ideas given, rather than on the 
study of detailed biographical information on each thinker. 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
3 Multiculturalist 
thinkers and their 
ideas 
Key terminology 
Positive discrimination 
Value pluralism 
Group differentiated 
rights 
Universalism 
The key ideas of the following thinkers to exemplify the content from 
areas 1 and 2: 
Isaiah Berlin (1909–97) 
• Value pluralism – liberal views in society hold no more moral 
authority than illiberal beliefs, so the state and society need to 
move beyond shallow diversity. 
• Only in a liberal society, which respects liberty, can you value 
pluralism. 
Charles Taylor (1931– ) 
• The politics of recognition – based on the universal right for all to 
have their identity recognised. 
• The politics of recognition is based on the equalisation of all rights 
and entitlements and the politics of difference. 
Bhikhu Parekh (1935– ) 
• The rejection of the universalist liberalism – importance of the 
individual being culturally embedded. 
• The justifications for minority rights and deep diversity – cross-
cultural dialogue can be transformative for majority and minority 
cultures, creating common citizenship. 
Tariq Modood (1952– ) 
• Strong cultural identities are a good thing – they need a 
complement of a vibrant, national narrative that emerges from 
debate between cultures. 
• All four views of integration (assimilation, individualist, 
multiculturalism and cosmopolitanism) may be valid – provided it 
is the preferred choice of the individual or group and not imposed 
by the state or society. 
Will Kymlicka (1962– ) 
• Group differentiated rights – provided by the state, including  
self-government rights, polyethnic rights and representation 
rights. 
• The justification for these rights – to be provided by the state and 
how they ensure full and equal participation for, and integration 
of, all cultures. 
 
Please note that key terminology is not exclusive to the given content area and applies 
across all three content areas. Definitions of key terminology are given in Appendix 2: Key 
terminology glossary. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
36 
Nationalism option 
Nationalism is the belief that nations are a timeless phenomenon. It is based on the belief 
that people have been attached to the practices connected with their heritage and seeks to 
continue them freely. 
There are three content areas for this option: 
1. Nationalism: ideas and principles 
2. Different types of nationalism 
3. Nationalist thinkers and their ideas. 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
1 Nationalism: core 
ideas and principles 
Key terminology 
Civic nationalism 
Liberal internationalism 
Socialist internationalism 
Ethnicity  
Core ideas and principles of nationalism and how they relate to 
human nature, the state, society and the economy: 
• nations – people who identify themselves as a cohesive group 
based on shared values in society – to cover the idea that there 
are very different ways of defining a nation 
• self-determination – belief that nations should decide how they 
are governed – to cover the idea of the nation as a genuine 
political community capable of self-government 
• nation-state – a nation that rules itself in its own state and 
controls its own economy – to cover the understanding that the 
nation-state, while supported by most nationalists, is not 
universally supported 
• culturalism – that nationalism is based on shared cultural 
societal values – to cover the idea that some forms of 
nationalism are grounded in more mystical, emotional ties and 
also to reflect on the darker side of nationalism 
• racialism – humankind can be meaningfully divided into 
separate ‘races’, which each possess different natures – to 
cover the view held by a very small group of nationalists who 
believe that nationhood is determined purely by biological 
factors 
• internationalism – the world should unite across boundaries to 
advance their common interests in society – to cover the idea 
that some forms of nationalism also have an internationalist 
perspective, whereas other internationalists reject nationalism.  
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
2 Different types of 
nationalism 
Key terminology 
Rational 
Progressive 
Regressive 
Inclusive nationalism 
Exclusive nationalism 
Chauvinistic nationalism 
Imperialism/colonialism 
The different types of nationalism and the extent to which they 
vary: 
• liberal nationalism – seeks a world of autonomous  
nation-states 
• conservative nationalism – exists to forge a sense of cohesion 
and unity within society 
• anti/post-colonialism – rejects colonial rule and seeks to have 
governance returned to the indigenous population 
• expansionist nationalism – rejects the right of all nations to  
self-determination, usually linked to chauvinism. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
37 
Please note that content area 3 should focus on the key ideas given, rather than on the 
study of detailed biographical information on each thinker. 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
3 Nationalist thinkers 
and their ideas 
Key terminology 
Volksgeist 
Integral nationalism 
Black nationalism 
The key ideas of the following thinkers to exemplify the content from 
areas 1 and 2: 
Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712–1778) 
• General will – that government should be based on the 
indivisible collective will of the ‘community’ and that nations 
have the right to govern themselves. 
• Civic nationalism – where the state is legitimate because it is 
based on the active participation of its citizens. 
Johann Gottfried von Herder (1744–1803) 
• Cultural nationalism – suggested that every nation was different, 
and that every nation had its own unique cultural character. 
• Volk – identified the Volk (the people) as the root of national 
culture and special nature (Volksgeist), which each nation should 
try to express. 
Giuseppe Mazzini (1805–1872) 
• Nationhood – believed that humans could express themselves 
only via their nation and that human freedom rested on the 
creation of one’s own nation-state. 
• ‘Action’ – rejected intellectualism and rationalism, and created 
an idea known as ‘thought and action’. 
Charles Maurras (1868-1952) 
• Integral nationalism – an intensely emotional form of nationalism 
where individuals were encouraged to submerge themselves into 
their nation. 
• Militarism – integral nationalism encourages nations to have a 
strong military ethos. 
Marcus Garvey (1887–1940) 
• Black pride – encouraged African people to be proud of their race 
and to see beauty in their own kind. 
• Pan-Africanism – that African people, in every part of the world, 
were one people and that they would never progress if they did 
not put aside their cultural and ethnic differences. 
 
Please note that key terminology is not exclusive to the given content area and applies 
across all three content areas. Definitions of key terminology are given in Appendix 2: Key 
terminology glossary. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
38 
Assessment information 
• First assessment: June 2019. 
• The assessment is 2 hours. 
• The assessment is out of 84 marks. 
• The assessment consists of two sections. 
o Section A – UK Government: this section is worth 60 marks 
Students answer one source question requiring comparative analysis from a choice of 
two and one essay question from a choice of two. AO1, AO2 and AO3 are assessed. 
o Section B – Non-core Political Ideas: this section is worth 24 marks 
Students have a choice of two questions from the non-core idea they have studied and 
they answer one. 
AO1, AO2 and AO3 are assessed. 
These questions will focus on content areas 1 and 2 and require students to use the 
key ideas of thinkers (content area 3) in their answers. 
No other materials, for example a calculator, are required for this paper. 
Sources 
AO2 and AO3 require students to study and respond to ‘political information’. In this 
qualification, this is carried out through the questions in Section A that use a source. These 
sources will be a single written (text) source only or a single source that combines both text 
and data (pie chart, tables, simple graphs such as a bar chart), all related in some way to UK 
government. 
Sources will be selected to ensure that they give students opportunities to bring in their own 
knowledge and understanding, to engage in comparative analysis and to evaluate by making 
judgements and drawing conclusions. 
For each source, information relating to the context of the source is provided. 
This information will not be discretely assessed, however it is provided to assist students in 
engaging with the information provided in the source. 
Synoptic assessment 
Synoptic assessment requires students to work across different parts of a qualification and to 
show their accumulated knowledge and understanding of a topic or subject area. 
Synoptic assessment enables students to show their ability to combine their skills, knowledge 
and understanding with breadth and depth of the subject. 
This paper assesses synopticity in Section A in the non-source questions, which require 
students to draw on relevant knowledge and understanding from Component 1: UK politics 
and core political ideas. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and mark scheme for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 3 
Advanced GCE in Politics Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
39 
Component 3: Comparative Politics 
There are two optional sections within this component, Government and Politics of the USA 
and Global Politics. Students must study one of these. 
Government and Politics of the USA 
Overview 
The USA has been considered by some to be a ‘beacon of democracy’. As a world power, 
understanding the nature of US democracy, and the debates surrounding it, is crucial given 
the considerable impact that the USA has on UK, European and global politics. 
Students will explore the US Constitution and the arguments surrounding this guiding 
document of US democracy. In learning about the key institutions of government in the USA 
and analysing the manner in which they achieve this power and exercise it over their 
citizens, students will judge ultimately whether ‘liberty and justice for all’ has been achieved 
in the USA. Students will be expected to highlight the debates on the nature of democracy in 
the USA and evaluate the extent to which it remains an issue. 
The impact of the US government on the world beyond its borders is increasingly a feature of 
international politics. Students will begin to engage with this interaction by comparing and 
contrasting politics and institutions in the US with those in the UK. This will develop a wider 
understanding of politics as a discipline, underpinned by the theoretical concepts of 
comparative politics. 
Content 
There are six content areas: 
1. The US Constitution and federalism 
2. US Congress 
3. US presidency 
4. US Supreme Court and US civil rights 
5. US democracy and participation 
6. Comparative theories. 
Skills 
• Students must comprehend and interpret political information in relation to areas of  
US politics.  
• Students must fully understand and critically analyse and evaluate areas of US politics. 
• Students must identify parallels, connections, similarities and differences between 
content studied, providing a basis for comparing the UK with the US. 
• Students must construct and communicate arguments and explanations with relevance, 
clarity and coherence and draw reasoned conclusions about US politics. 
• Students must develop knowledge and understanding of key political concepts. The 
content supports these skills by presenting the main content for learning in the right-
hand side of the content tables. 
• Students must use appropriate vocabulary. The content supports this skill by listing key 
terminology in each content area. The lists are to support teaching of the main content 
and help students to use appropriate vocabulary in assessment. Students should, 
therefore, familiarise themselves with the definitions of key terminology for each section, 
please also see Appendix 2: Key terminology glossary. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
40 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
1 US Constitution 
and federalism 
Key terminology 
Bipartisanship 
Checks and balances 
Codification  
Constitution 
Entrenchment 
Enumerated powers 
Federalism 
Limited government 
Principle 
Separation of powers 
1.1  The nature of the US Constitution.  
• Vagueness of the document, codification and entrenchment. 
• The constitutional framework (powers) of the US branches of 
government. 
• The amendment process, including advantages and 
disadvantages of the formal process.  
1.2 The key features of the US Constitution (as listed below) and an 
evaluation of their effectiveness today. 
• Federalism. 
• Separation of powers and checks and balances. 
• Bipartisanship. 
• Limited government. 
1.3  The main characteristics of US federalism. 
• The nature of the federal system of government and its 
relationship with the states. 
1.4  Interpretations and debates around the US Constitution and 
federalism. 
• The extent of democracy within the US Constitution, its 
strengths and weaknesses and its impact on the US 
government today. 
• The debates around the extent to which the USA remains 
federal today. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
41 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
2 US Congress 
Key terminology 
Congressional 
caucuses 
Divided government 
Filibuster 
Gridlock 
Incumbency 
Mid-term elections 
Oversight 
Partisanship 
Unanimous consent  
2.1 The structure of Congress. 
• Bicameral nature, the membership of Congress and the election 
cycle. 
2.1.1 The distribution of powers within Congress: 
• powers given to Congress in the Constitution, the exclusive 
powers of each House and the concurrent powers of Congress. 
2.2  The functions of Congress. 
2.2.1  Representation. 
• Congressional elections and the significance of incumbency. 
• Factors that affect voting behaviour within Congress: 
o parties and caucuses, constituency, pressure groups and 
lobbyists.  
2.2.2 Legislative. 
• The legislative process, including the strengths and weaknesses 
of this process.  
• The differences between the legislative process in each 
chamber. 
• The policy significance of Congress – impact and effectiveness 
of laws passed. 
2.2.3 Oversight. 
• Factors that influence the relationship between Congress and 
the presidency. 
• The checks on the other branches of government and the 
extent of its institutional effectiveness. 
2.3  Interpretations and debates around Congress. 
• Changing roles and powers of Congress and their relative 
importance, and debates about adequacy of its representative 
role.  
• Changing significance of parties in Congress. 
• Significance and effectiveness of the powers outlined in the 
Constitution.  
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
42 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
3 US presidency 
Key terminology 
Domestic politics 
Electoral mandate 
Executive branch 
Executive orders 
Imperial presidency 
Imperilled presidency 
Informal powers 
Powers of persuasion 
Unified Government 
3.1  Formal sources of presidential power as outlined in the US 
Constitution and their use. 
• The role as the Head of State and as the Head of 
Government. 
The significance of these powers with reference to presidents  
since 1992. 
3.2  Informal sources of presidential power and their use. 
• The electoral mandate, executive orders, national events and 
the cabinet. 
• Powers of persuasion including the nature/characteristics of 
each president. 
• Executive Office of the President (EXOP), including the role of 
the National Security Council (NSC), Office of Management 
and Budget (OMB) and the White House Office (WHO). 
The significance of these powers with reference to presidents  
since 1992. 
3.3  The presidency. 
3.3.1 Relationships between the presidency and the following 
institutions and why this varies:  
• Congress and the Supreme Court. 
3.3.2 Limitations on presidential power and why this varies between 
presidents: 
• changing nature of power over their term in office 
• Congress, the Supreme Court and the Constitution 
• the election cycle and divided government. 
The significance of these limitations with reference to presidents 
since 1992. 
3.4 Interpretations and debates of the US presidency. 
• How effectively they have achieved their aims. 
• The imperial presidency. 
• The extent of presidential accountability to Congress. 
• The role and power of the president in foreign policy. 
With reference to presidents since 1992. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
43 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
4 US Supreme 
Court and civil 
rights 
Key terminology 
Conservative justice 
Imperial judiciary 
Judicial activism 
Judicial restraint 
Judicial review 
Liberal justice 
Living constitution 
Originalism 
Public policy 
Stare decisis 
Strict/loose 
constructionist 
Swing justice 
Constitutional rights 
Racial equality 
Affirmative action 
4.1  The nature and role of the Supreme Court. 
• The US Constitution. 
• The independent nature of the Supreme Court. 
• The judicial review process (Marbury vs Madison 1803 and  
Fletcher vs Peck 1810). 
4.2  The appointment process for the Supreme Court. 
• Strengths and weaknesses of the process. 
• Factors influencing the president’s choice of nominee. 
• The current composition and ideological balance of the 
Court. 
4.3  The Supreme Court and public policy. 
• The impact of the Supreme Court on public policy in  
the US, with a range of examples, including examples  
post-2005. 
• Political significance debate: the role of judicial activism and 
judicial restraint and criticisms of each. 
4.4  The protection of civil liberties and rights in the US today. 
• Rights protected by the Constitution, by the Bill of Rights, by 
subsequent constitutional amendments and by rulings of the 
Supreme Court. 
4.5  Race and rights in contemporary US politics. 
• The methods, influence and effectiveness of racial rights 
campaigns and the impact on current domestic policy: 
o voting rights, affirmative action and representation. 
4.6  Interpretations and debates of the US Supreme Court and civil 
rights. 
• The political versus judicial nature of the Supreme Court. 
• Living Constitution ideology as against originalism. 
• How effectively civil and constitutional rights have been 
upheld by the Supreme Court and the effectiveness of this 
protection. 
• The extent of their powers and the effectiveness of checks 
and balances. 
• The successes and failures of measures to promote equality, 
including affirmative action and immigration reform. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
44 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
5 US democracy 
and participation 
Key terminology 
Campaign finance 
Factions 
Invisible primary 
Political Action 
Committees (PACs) 
Party system 
Policy group 
Professional group 
Single interest group 
Soft/hard money 
Super PACs 
Religious right 
5.1  Electoral systems in the USA. 
5.1.1 Presidential elections and their significance. 
• The main processes to elect a US president, including the 
constitutional requirements, the invisible primary, primaries 
and caucuses, the role of National Party Conventions and the 
electoral college, and the resulting party system. 
• The importance of incumbency on a president seeking a 
second term. 
5.1.2 Campaign finance. 
• The role of campaign finance and the current legislation on 
campaign finance, including McCain-Feingold reforms 2002 
and Citizens United vs FEC 2010.  
5.2  The key ideas and principles of the Democratic and Republican 
parties. 
5.2.1 The distribution of power and changing significance of the 
parties: 
 Democrats 
• progressive attitude on social and moral issues, including 
crime  
• greater governmental intervention in the national economy 
• government provision of social welfare.  
 Republicans 
• conservative attitude on social and moral issues 
• more restricted governmental intervention in the national 
economy while protecting American trade and jobs 
• acceptance of social welfare but a preference for personal 
responsibility. 
5.2.2 The current conflicts and tendencies and the changing power and 
influence that exist within the parties. 
• Democrats: liberals, moderates and conservatives. 
• Republicans: moderates, social conservatives and fiscal 
conservatives. 
5.2.3 Coalition of supporters for each party. 
• Voters: how the following factors are likely to influence voting 
patterns and why, in relation to one recent presidential 
election campaign (since 2000) – race, religion, gender and 
education. 
5.3  Interest groups in the USA – their significance, resources, tactics 
and debates about their impact on democracy. 
• The influence, methods and power of at least one single 
interest group, professional group or policy group. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
45 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
5 US democracy 
and participation 
(continued) 
5.4 Interpretations and debates of US democracy and participation, 
including: 
• advantages and disadvantages of the electoral process and 
the Electoral College and the debate around reform 
• the role of campaign finance and difficulty in achieving 
effective reform 
• the role of incumbency in elections 
• the ways in which interest groups can influence the three 
branches of government and policy creation, including the 
role of PACs and Super PACs and their impact on democracy.  
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
6 Comparative 
approaches 
6.1  Theoretical approaches – understanding of these three 
approaches and the different ways they explain similarities and 
differences between the government and politics of different 
countries. 
 Rational 
• This approach focuses on individuals within a political 
system. 
• A rational approach suggests that such individuals will act 
rationally, choosing to act in a particular way as it will give 
them a beneficial outcome. 
 Cultural 
• This approach focuses on groups within a political system – 
this could be voters, parties, pressure groups and so on. 
• A cultural approach suggests that the shared ideas, beliefs 
and values of these groups often determine the actions of 
individuals within them. 
 Structural 
• This approach focuses on the institutions in a political system 
and the processes within them. 
• A structural approach suggests that political outcomes are 
largely determined by the formal processes laid out within a 
political system. 
6.2 Similarities and differences in the UK and USA. 
6.2.1 Compare and debate the following aspects of the UK and US 
Constitutions and the resulting impact on politics and 
government: 
• their nature (codified/uncodified) and their sources, 
provisions and principles, including separation of powers, 
checks and balances 
• the similarities and differences between the US federal 
system and the UK system of devolution. 
6.2.2 The extent to which rational, cultural and structural approaches 
can be used to account for these similarities and differences. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
46 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
6 Comparative 
approaches 
(continued) 
6.2.3 Compare and debate the following aspects of the UK and US 
legislative branches and their resulting impact on politics and 
government: 
• powers, strengths and weaknesses of each of the Houses 
• the extent to which each of the Houses are equal. 
6.2.4 The extent to which rational, cultural and structural approaches 
can be used to account for these similarities and differences. 
6.2.5 Compare and debate the following aspects of the UK and US 
executive branches and their resulting impact on politics and 
government: 
• key similarities and differences between the role and powers 
of the US President and the UK Prime Minister and their 
impact on politics and government 
• extent of accountability to the US and UK legislature. 
6.2.6 The extent to which rational, cultural and structural approaches 
can be used to account for these similarities and differences. 
6.2.7 Compare and debate the following aspects of the UK and US 
Supreme Courts and civil rights and their resulting impact on 
politics and government: 
• basis for and relative extent for their powers  
• relative independence of the Supreme Court in the US and 
UK 
• effectiveness of the protection of rights in each country 
• effectiveness of interest groups in the protection of civil 
rights in the USA and the UK. 
6.2.8 The extent to which rational, cultural and structural approaches 
can be used to account for these similarities and differences. 
6.2.9  Compare and debate the following aspects of the UK and  
US democracy and participation, and their resulting impact on 
politics and government: 
• the different nature of the party systems (two-party and  
multi-party) 
• degree of internal unity within parties 
• the policy profiles of the two main parties in each country 
• debates around campaign finance and party funding 
• the relative power, methods and influence of pressure 
groups. 
6.2.10 The extent to which rational, cultural and structural approaches 
can be used to account for these similarities and differences. 
 
Definitions of key terminology are given in Appendix 2: Key terminology glossary. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
47 
Global Politics 
Overview 
We live in a complex world with significant challenges, including global terrorism, poverty, 
economic instability, weapons proliferation, failing states and environmental degradation. 
These challenges require global co-operation if they are to be resolved. 
Global politics gives students an opportunity to develop an understanding of the local, 
national, international and global dimensions of political activity. It also gives them the 
opportunity to explore the political issues that affect all of us. Students will gain 
understanding of abstract political concepts through grounding them in contemporary  
real-world examples and case studies that will develop an international awareness and 
knowledge of multiple perspectives. 
Global politics encourages discussion and debate and requires students to study and present 
different global perspectives, as well as interpreting competing and contestable claims. The 
key mainstream perspectives on global politics are liberalism and realism, and students will 
be expected to understand how these perspectives are applied throughout all elements of the 
global politics content. 
Content 
There are six content areas: 
1. The state and globalisation 
2. Global governance: political and economic 
3. Global governance: human rights and environmental 
4. Power and developments 
5. Regionalism and the European Union 
6. Comparative theories. 
Skills 
• Students must comprehend and interpret political information in relation to areas of 
global politics. 
• Students must fully understand and critically analyse, and evaluate areas of global 
politics. 
• Students must identify parallels, connections, similarities and differences between the 
content studied, providing a basis for comparing contemporary global issues, such as 
conflict, poverty, human rights and the environment and how these are affected by the 
content in each of the sections. 
• Students must construct and communicate arguments and explanations with relevance, 
clarity and coherence, and draw reasoned conclusions about global politics. 
• Students must develop knowledge and understanding of key political concepts. 
The content supports these skills by presenting the main content for learning in the 
right-hand side of the content tables. 
• Students must use appropriate vocabulary. The content supports this skill by listing key 
terminology in each content area. The lists are to support teaching of the main content 
and help students to use appropriate vocabulary in assessment. These lists support 
teaching of the main content and to help students use appropriate vocabulary in 
assessment. Students should, therefore, familiarise themselves with the definitions of 
key terminology for each section, please also see Appendix 2: Key terminology glossary. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
48 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
1 The state and 
globalisation 
Key terminology 
Sovereignty  
Nation state  
Non-state actors  
Globalisation  
Economic 
globalisation  
Political globalisation  
Cultural globalisation  
Homogenisation and 
monoculture  
Interconnectedness 
World government 
Global governance 
1.1  The state: nation-state and of national sovereignty. 
1.1.1 Characteristics of a nation state and of national sovereignty. 
• Nation-state – political community bound together by 
citizenship and nationality. 
• National sovereignty – the state’s absolute power over citizens 
and subjects. 
1.2  Globalisation. 
1.2.1 The process of globalisation: 
• complex web of interconnectedness – the factors driving 
globalisation are the interlinking of people (social), countries, 
institutions, culture, economics, technology and politics. 
1.2.2 Its impact on the state system. 
• Widening and deepening interconnectedness and 
interdependence. 
• Challenge to state control over citizens in areas such as law. 
• On the development of international law. 
• Humanitarian and forcible intervention. 
• The debate between hyperglobalisers, globalisation sceptics 
and transformationalists, including the realist and liberal 
views. 
1.3  Debates about the impact of globalisation including its 
advantages and disadvantages. 
• The impact of globalisation, and its implications for the nation 
state and national sovereignty. 
1.4  The ways and extent to which globalisation addresses and 
resolves contemporary issues, such as poverty, conflict, human 
rights and the environment. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
49 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
2 Global 
governance: 
political and 
economic  
Key terminology 
NGOs 
Structural 
Adjustment 
Programme (SAP) 
Key terminology: 
political 
The United Nations 
Security Council 
NATO 
Key terminology: 
economic 
International 
Monetary Fund (IMF) 
World Bank 
World Trade 
Organisation (WTO) 
G7(8)/G20 
North-South divide 
Dependency theory 
2.1  Political 
2.1.1 The United Nations (UN). 
• Origins and development of the UN, including its 1945 
charter. 
• Role and significance of the UN to include the Security 
Council, General Assembly, Economic and Social Council, 
International Court of Justice including their strengths and 
weaknesses. 
2.1.2 North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) 
• Role and significance of NATO including its changing role, 
particularly since the end of the Cold War, and strengths and 
weaknesses. 
2.2  Economic 
2.2.1 International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank. 
• Role and significance of these institutions, including their 
strengths and weaknesses. 
2.2.2 The World Trade Organisation (WTO) and G7/G8 and G20. 
• Role and significance of these institutions, including their 
strengths and weaknesses. 
2.2.3 Significance of how global economic governance deals with the 
issue of poverty, including: 
• The North-South divide and other measurements to include 
world-systems theory, dependency, orthodox and alternative 
measurements of poverty. 
• Classical economic development theory, structural theory, 
neo-classical development theory. 
2.3  The ways and extent to which these institutions address and 
resolve contemporary global issues, such as those involving 
conflict, poverty, human rights and the environment. 
 In particular to focus on: 
• how the following prevents the UN Security Council from 
effectively addressing and resolving the issues above: 
o the membership and structure 
o the use of veto 
• how the following prevents the IMF and World Bank from 
effectively addressing and resolving the issues above 
• pressure for reform and criticism, including Structural 
Adjustment Programmes (SAPs), global economic crisis. 
2.3.2 The role and significance of the global civil society and non-state 
actors, including non-governmental organisations (NGOs) in 
addressing and resolving the issues above. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
50 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
3 Global 
governance: 
human rights and 
environmental 
Key terminology: 
human rights 
International law 
International Court 
of Justice (ICJ) 
International 
Criminal Court (ICC) 
International 
tribunals 
Human rights/ 
Universal human 
rights 
Humanitarian 
intervention 
Key terminology: 
environmental  
United Nations 
Framework 
Convention on 
Climate Change 
(UNFCCC) 
Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC) 
Global commons 
Tragedy of the 
commons 
Sustainability/  
Sustainable 
development  
3.1  Human rights 
3.1.1 Origins and development of international law and institutions 
(International Court of Justice, International Criminal Court, 
special UN tribunals and European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) 
in creating the concept of global politics. 
• Sources of authority, including the 1948 Universal Declaration 
of Human Rights. 
3.1.2 The key issues of these institutions in dealing with human rights: 
• impact on state sovereignty 
• rise of humanitarian interventions and growth in 1990s, with 
examples of successful and unsuccessful intervention 
• reasons for selective interventionism, development of 
responsibility to protect and conflict with state sovereignty 
• examples of alleged Western double standards/hypocrisy. 
3.2  Environmental 
3.2.1 The role and significance of the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). 
• The creation of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC) and its role and significance. 
3.3  The ways and extent to which these institutions address and 
resolve contemporary global issues, such as those involving 
conflict, poverty, human rights and the environment. 
3.3.1 How the following issues affect international law from effectively 
addressing and resolving the issues above: 
• debate about the effectiveness and implications for state 
sovereignty and the extent to which international law is 
accepted and enforced 
• performance of the international courts, including 
controversies. 
3.3.2 How the following issues affect global environmental governance 
from effectively addressing and resolving the issues above: 
• competing views about how to tackle environmental issues to 
include: 
o shallow-green ecology versus deep-green ecology 
o sustainable development and tragedy of the commons. 
• Strengths and weaknesses of international agreements, 
including key highlights from Rio, Kyoto, Copenhagen, Paris. 
• Obstacles to international co-operation and agreement, 
including sovereignty, developed versus developing world 
division and disagreement over responsibility and 
measurement. 
3.3.3 The role and significance of the global civil society and non-state 
actors, including non-governmental organisations (NGOs) in 
addressing and resolving the issues above. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
51 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
4 Power and 
developments 
Key terminology 
Hard power  
Soft power  
Great power  
Superpower 
Emerging power 
Polarity/Unipolarity/ 
Bipolarity  
Multipolarity  
Democratic state 
Semi-democratic 
state/non-
democratic state 
Autocratic state 
Failed states 
Rogue states 
4.1  Different types of power. 
• The use and effectiveness of the follow types of power: 
o hard: military and economic  
o soft: diplomatic and cultural. 
4.2  Differing significance of states in global affairs and how and why 
state power is classified. 
• State power classifications: 
o great powers 
o superpowers, including the USA 
o emerging powers, including BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, 
China and South Africa). 
4.3  Polarity. 
• The implications of the following polar structures: 
o unipolarity/hegemony 
o bipolarity 
o multipolarity 
• Consideration of the changing nature of world order since 
2000.  
4.4  Different systems of government. 
• The characteristics, examples and consequences for global 
order of: 
o democratic, semi-democratic, non-democratic, autocratic 
states, failed states and rogue states. 
4.5  Development and spread of: 
• liberal economies 
• rule of law 
• democracy. 
4.6  The ways and extent to which the changing relationships and 
actions of states in relation to power and developments address 
and resolve contemporary global issues, such as those involving 
conflict, poverty, human rights and the environment. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
52 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
5 Regionalism and 
the EU 
Key terminology 
Regionalism 
European Union (EU) 
European integration 
Sovereignty 
Supranationalism  
Intergovernmentalism 
Federalism 
Global actor 
Widening-deepening 
5.1  Regionalism 
5.1.1 The different forms. 
• Growth of regionalism and regionalism in different forms, 
including economic, security and political. 
5.1.2 Debates about and the reasons for and significance of 
regionalism. 
• The relationship between regionalism and globalisation. 
• Prospects for political regionalism and regional governance. 
• The impact on state sovereignty 
5.2 Development of regional organisations, excluding the EU. 
• North American Free Trade Association (NAFTA) 
• African Union (AU) 
• Arab League 
• Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN). 
5.3  Factors that have fostered European integration and the 
major developments through which this has occurred. 
• Formation, role, objectives and development of the 
European Union (EU). 
• Establishment and powers of its key institutions and the 
process of enlargement. 
• Key treaties and agreements. 
• Economic and monetary union. 
• Debates about supranational versus intergovernmental 
approaches. 
5.4  Significance of the EU as an international body/global actor, 
including the constraints and obstacles affecting: 
• its political, economic, structural and military influence in 
global politics. 
5.5  The ways and extent to which regionalism addresses and 
resolves contemporary global issues involving conflict, 
poverty, human rights and the environment. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
53 
 
Subject content Students should gain knowledge and understanding of:  
6 Comparative 
theories 
Key terminology 
Realism 
Liberalism  
International anarchy  
Security dilemma  
Complex 
interdependence 
Global governance 
Anarchical society and 
society of states  
6.1  Main ideas of realism. 
• States as key actors in global politics and the balance of 
power (state sovereignty). 
• International anarchy and its implications.  
• Inevitability of war. 
• The security dilemma. 
6.2 Main ideas of liberalism. 
• The significance of morality and optimism on human nature. 
• Possibility of harmony and balance. 
• Complex interdependence. 
• Likelihood of global governance. 
• Impact and growth of international organisations. 
6.3  Divisions between realism and liberalism in relation to: 
• human nature and power 
• order and security and the likelihood of conflict 
• impact of international organisations and the significance of 
states. 
6.4  Main ideas of the anarchical society and society of states theory. 
• Acceptance that there is anarchy in the global system – 
absence of overarching authority. 
• States have an informal understanding that ensures a degree 
of co-operation – based on norms and rules that increase 
levels of trust and reciprocal behaviour. 
6.5  An evaluation of the extent to which realism and liberalism 
explain recent developments (since 2000) in global politics. 
 This should be done through the study of relevant case studies 
that cover each of the other content sections: 
• the state and globalisation 
• global governance: political and economic 
• global governance: human rights and environmental 
• power and developments 
• regionalism and the EU. 
 
Definitions of key terminology are given in Appendix 2: Key terminology glossary. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
54 
Assessment information 
• First assessment: June 2019. 
• The assessment is 2 hours. 
• The assessment is out of 84 marks. 
• The assessment consists of three sections. 
o Section A: this section is worth 12 marks. 
Students answer one question from a choice of two. 
AO1 and AO2 are assessed. 
o Section B: this section is worth 12 marks. 
Students answer one compulsory question, which will focus on topics from the 
comparative theories section. 
AO1 and AO2 are assessed. 
o Section C: this section is worth 60 marks. 
Students answer two questions worth 30 marks each from a choice of three. 
AO1, AO2 and AO3 are assessed. 
No other materials are required for this paper such as calculators, which are not permitted. 
Synoptic assessment 
Synoptic assessment requires students to work across different parts of a qualification and to 
show their accumulated knowledge and understanding of a topic or subject area. 
Synoptic assessment enables students to show their ability to combine their skills, knowledge 
and understanding with breadth and depth of the subject. 
This paper assesses synopticity in Papers 3A and 3B. In Paper 3A, this is assessed in 
Sections A and B as students are required to draw on relevant knowledge and understanding 
from Component 1: UK politics and Component 2: UK government. In Paper 3B, this is 
assessed in Section B as students are required to draw on relevant knowledge and 
understanding of core political ideas from Component 1. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and mark scheme for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel  
Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
55 
Assessment Objectives 
 
Students must: 
% GCE  
A Level 
AO1 Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of political 
institutions, processes, concepts, theories and issues. 
35 
AO2 Analyse aspects of politics and political information, including in 
relation to parallels, connections, similarities and differences. 
35 
AO3 Evaluate aspects of politics and political information, including to 
construct arguments, make substantiated judgements and draw 
conclusions. 
30 
Total 100% 
 
 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
 
Component 
Assessment Objectives Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives AO1 % AO2 % AO3 % 
Component 1: UK Politics 11.1 11.1 11.1 33⅓  
Component 2: UK 
Government 11.1 11.1 11.1 33⅓ 
Component 3: Comparative 
Politics 12.7 12.7 7.9 33
⅓ 
Total for GCE A Level 35 35 30 100% 
 
NB Totals have been rounded either up or down. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
56 
3 Administration and general information 
Entries 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for this qualification can be found in 
our UK Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations officers and is 
available on our website: qualifications.pearson.com 
Discount code and performance tables 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more than one GCE qualification with 
the same discount code will have only one of the grades they achieve counted for the 
purpose of the school and college performance tables. This will be the grade for the larger 
qualification (i.e. the A Level grade rather than the AS grade). If the qualifications are the 
same size, then the better grade will be counted (please see Appendix 6: Codes). 
Please note that there are two codes for AS GCE qualifications; one for Key Stage 4 (KS4) 
performance tables and one for 16–19 performance tables. If a KS4 student achieves both a 
GCSE and an AS with the same discount code, the AS result will be counted over the  
GCSE result. 
Students should be advised that if they take two GCE qualifications with the same discount 
code, colleges, universities and employers to which they wish to progress are likely to take 
the view that this achievement is equivalent to only one GCE. The same view may be taken if 
students take two GCE qualifications that have different discount codes but have significant 
overlap of content. Before embarking on their programmes, students or their advisers who 
have any doubts about their subject combinations should check with the institution to which 
they wish to progress. 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, 
special consideration and malpractice 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality policy requires all students to 
have equal opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our qualifications 
to be awarded in a way that is fair to every student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
• students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the Equality Act 2010) are not, 
when they are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in comparison to 
students who do not share that characteristic 
• all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification and that 
this achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their peers. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be available in English. All student work must be  
in English. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
57 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with special 
educational needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to: 
• access the assessment 
• show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the assessment. 
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an individual 
student with a disability, without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding bodies comply with the duty under the 
Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students will 
then know what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for assessment.  
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable adjustments 
where a person with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in undertaking an 
assessment. The awarding organisation is required to take reasonable steps to overcome 
that disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be unique to that individual and 
therefore might not be in the list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of factors, 
including: 
• the needs of the student with the disability 
• the effectiveness of the adjustment 
• the cost of the adjustment; and 
• the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding 
organisation, or affects timeframes or the security or integrity of the assessment. This is 
because the adjustment is not ‘reasonable’. 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student's mark or grade to 
reflect temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the examination/ 
assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a material effect on a 
candidate’s ability to take an assessment or demonstrate their level of attainment in  
an assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to apply for access arrangements 
and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special 
consideration, please refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
58 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that compromises or seeks to 
compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in examinations must be reported to Pearson using a JCQ Form M1 
(available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form should be emailed to 
candidatemalpractice@pearson.com. Please provide as much information and supporting 
documentation as possible. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies 
with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice constitutes staff or centre malpractice. 
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and maladministration of 
our qualifications. As with candidate malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is any act that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the 
integrity of the qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported 
immediately, before any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson on a  
JCQ Form M2(a) (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form, 
supporting documentation and as much information as possible should be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions 
lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the document 
General and Vocational Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments Policies and Procedures, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice. 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to comply with the requirements of 
Ofqual's General Conditions of Recognition. This A Level qualification will be graded and 
certificated on a six-grade scale from A* to E, using the total subject mark. Individual 
components are not graded. 
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum judged by Pearson to be of 
sufficient standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U result. 
The first certification opportunity for this qualification will be 2019. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
59 
Student recruitment and progression 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that: 
• they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard 
• they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression 
• equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this qualification. 
Students who would benefit most from studying this qualification are likely to have Level 2 
qualifications, such as GCSEs. 
Progression 
Students can progress from this qualification to: 
• university courses that relate directly to government and politics 
• university courses that will benefit from the skills acquired from this GCE, for example 
law, economics, philosophy 
• employment where analytical skills are essential, for example management, finance, 
government, industry and business environments. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
60 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
61 
 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Question paper command words 63 
Appendix 2: Key terminology glossary 64 
Appendix 3: The context for the development of this qualification 93 
Appendix 4: Transferable skills 95 
Appendix 5: Level 3 Extended Project qualification 96 
Appendix 6: Codes 98 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
62 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
63 
Appendix 1: Question paper command 
words 
The following command words summarise the essential skills required of students in 
responding to questions. To ensure that students have a full understanding as to how to 
respond, please refer to the relevant levels-based mark schemes provided in the sample 
assessment booklet. 
 
Command word Definition AO assessed 
Evaluate  To review ideas, issues and/or information and 
make substantiated judgements and draw 
conclusions. 
AO1 (10 marks) 
AO2 (10 marks) 
AO3 (10 marks) 
To what extent  To review political ideas and make substantiated 
judgements and draw conclusions. 
AO1 (8 marks) 
AO2 (8 marks) 
AO3 (8 marks) 
Analyse  To deconstruct ideas, issues and/or information in 
detail in order to find connections, similarities 
and/or differences and provide evidence of 
reasoned thinking. 
AO1 (6 marks) 
AO2 (6 marks) 
Examine To consider an idea/concept carefully and in detail 
to identify what the idea/concept is and why it 
exists and compare ideas/concepts. 
AO1 (6 marks) 
AO2 (6 marks) 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
64 
Appendix 2: Key terminology glossary 
This glossary is provided to help centres to teach students about subject-specific key terms. 
The list is not exhaustive and centres are free to add to the glossary as appropriate.  
UK Politics 
1. Democracy and participation 
Key term Definition 
Legitimacy The rightful use of power in accordance with pre-set criteria or  
widely-held agreements, such as a government’s right to rule 
following an election or a monarch’s succession based on the agreed 
rules.  
Direct democracy All individuals express their opinions themselves and not through 
representatives acting on their behalf. This type of democracy 
emerged in Athens in classical times and direct democracy can be 
seen today in referendums. 
Representative 
democracy 
A more modern form of democracy through which an individual 
selects a person (and/or political party) to act on their behalf to 
exercise political choice.  
Pluralist democracy A type of democracy in which a government makes decisions as a 
result of the interplay of various ideas and contrasting arguments 
from competing groups and organisations. 
Democratic deficit A flaw in the democratic process where decisions are taken by 
people who lack legitimacy, not having been appointed with 
sufficient democratic input or subject to accountability. 
Participation crisis A lack of engagement by a significant number of citizens to relate to 
the political process either by choosing not to vote or to join or 
become members of political parties or to offer themselves for public 
office. 
Franchise/suffrage Franchise and suffrage both refer to the ability/right to vote in public 
elections. Suffragettes were women campaigning for the right to 
vote on the same terms as men. 
Think tanks A body of experts brought together to collectively focus on a certain 
topic(s) – to investigate and offer solutions to often complicated and 
seemingly intractable economic, social or political issues. 
Lobbyists A lobbyist is paid by clients to try to influence the government 
and/or MPs and members of the House of Lords to act in their 
clients’ interests, particularly when legislation is under consideration. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
65 
 
2. Political parties 
Key term Definition 
Old Labour (social 
democracy) 
Key Labour principles embodying nationalisation, redistribution of 
wealth from rich to poor and the provision of continually improving 
welfare and state services, which largely rejected Thatcherite/ 
free-market reforms or a Blairite approach. 
New Labour  
(Third Way) 
A revision of the traditional Labour values and ideals represented by 
Old Labour. Influenced by Anthony Giddens, the ‘Third Way’ saw 
Labour shift in emphasis from a heavy focus on the working class to 
a wider class base, and a less robust alliance with the trade unions. 
One Nation A paternalistic approach adopted by Conservatives under the 
leadership of Benjamin Disraeli in the 19th century and continued by 
David Cameron and Theresa May in the 21st century, that the rich 
have an obligation to help the poor. 
New Right There are two elements – (i) the neo (or new) Conservatives who 
want the state to take a more authoritarian approach to morality 
and law and order and (ii) the neo-liberals who endorsed the free-
market approach and the rolling back of the state in people’s lives 
and businesses. 
Classical liberals Classical liberalism is a philosophy developed by early liberals who 
believed that individual freedom would best be achieved with the 
state playing a minimal role. 
Modern liberals Modern liberalism emerged as a reaction against free-market 
capitalism, believing this had led to many individuals not being free. 
Freedom could no longer simply be defined as ‘being left alone’. 
Party systems The way or manner in which the political parties in a political system 
are grouped and structured. There are several variants that could 
apply to the UK, these include one-party dominant, two-party,  
two-and-a-half party and multi-party systems. 
Left-wing A widely-used term for those who desire change, reform and 
alteration to the way in which society operates. Often this involves 
radical criticisms of the capitalism made by liberal and socialist 
parties. 
Right-wing This term reflects support for the status quo, little or no change, 
stressing the need for order, stability and hierarchy – generally 
relates to Conservative parties. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
66 
 
3. Electoral systems 
Key term Definition 
First-past-the-post 
(FPTP) 
An electoral system where the person with the most number of 
votes is elected. Victory is achieved by having one more vote than 
other contenders – it is also called a plurality system. 
Additional Member 
System (AMS) 
A hybrid electoral system that has two components or elements. 
The voter makes two choices. Firstly, the voter selects a 
representative on a simple plurality (FPTP) system then a second 
vote is apportioned to a party list for a second or ‘additional’ 
representative. 
Single Transferable 
Vote (STV) 
This system allows voters to rank their voting preferences in 
numerical order rather than simply having one voting choice. In 
order to obtain a seat, a candidate must obtain a quota. After the 
votes are cast, those with the least votes are eliminated and their 
votes transferred and those candidates with excess votes above 
the quota also have their votes transferred. 
Supplementary Vote 
(SV) 
 
This is a majoritarian system. The voter makes two choices (hence 
the term ‘supplementary’). If one candidate obtains over 50% on 
the first vote then the contest is complete. If no candidate attains 
this level, all but the top two candidates are eliminated. Then the 
supplementary choices are re-distributed and whoever gets most 
votes from the remaining two, wins the seat. This form of voting 
for mayors and police and crime commissioners was ended by the 
Elections Act in 2022. 
Safe seat A seat in which the incumbent has a considerable majority over the 
closest rival and which is largely immune from swings in voting 
choice. The same political party retains the seat from election to 
election. 
A majority of seats in UK Westminster constituencies are safe 
seats. 
Marginal seat A seat held by the incumbent with a small majority. There is no 
precise percentage or winning margin to which this aligns but a 
10% margin would need only a swing of 5% to the rival party to 
take it. Marginal seats are important as they are where the 
outcomes of elections are decided. Only a minority of seats in UK 
Westminster constituencies are marginal. 
Minority government A government that enters office but which does not have a 
majority of seats in the legislature (Parliament). This makes 
passing legislation very difficult. 
Coalition government A government that is formed of more than one political party. It is 
normally accompanied by an agreement over policy options and 
office of state, as was the Conservative-Liberal-Democrat coalition 
from 2010–2015 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
67 
 
4. Voting behaviour and the media 
Key term Definition 
Class dealignment The process where individuals no longer identify themselves as 
belonging to a certain class and for political purposes fail to make a 
class connection with their voting pattern. 
Partisan dealignment The process where individuals no longer identify themselves on a  
long-term basis by being associated with a certain political party. 
Governing 
competency 
The perceived ability of the governing party in office to manage the 
affairs of the state well and effectively. It can also be a potential view 
of opposition parties and their perceived governing competency if 
they were to secure office. 
Disillusion and 
apathy 
A process of disengagement with politics and political activity. Having 
no confident in politics and politicians as being able to solve issues 
and make a difference. Manifested in low turnout at elections and 
poor awareness of contemporary events. 
Manifesto In its manifesto, a political party will spell out in detail what actions 
and programmes it would like to put in place if it is successful in the 
next election – a set of promises for future action. 
Mandate The successful party following an election claims it has the authority 
(mandate) to implement its manifesto promises and also a general 
permission to govern as new issues arise. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
68 
Core Political Ideas 
Conservatism 
1. Core ideas and principles 
Key term Definition 
Hierarchy The Conservative belief that society is naturally organised in fixed 
tiers, where one’s position is not based on individual ability. 
Authority For Conservatives, this is the idea that people in higher positions in 
society are best able to make decisions in the interests of the 
whole society; authority thus comes from above. 
Change to conserve That society should adapt to changing circumstances rather than 
reject change outright and risk rebellion and/or revolution. 
Atomism That society is made up of self-interested and self-sufficient 
individuals (also known as egoistical individualism). 
 
2. Differing views and tensions within conservatism 
Key term Definition 
Noblesse oblige The duty of the wealthy and privileged to look after those less 
fortunate. 
Anti-permissiveness A rejection of permissiveness, which is the belief that people should 
make their own moral choices, suggesting there is no objective 
right and wrong. 
Radical Belief whose ideas favour drastic political, economic and social 
change. 
Human imperfection The traditional conservative belief that humans are flawed in a 
number of ways which makes them incapable of making good 
decisions for themselves. 
 
3.Conservative thinkers and their ideas 
Key term Definition 
Laissez-faire A preference towards minimal government intervention in business 
and the state. 
Empiricism The idea that knowledge comes from real experience and not from 
abstract theories. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
69 
 
Liberalism 
1. Core ideas and principles 
Key term Definition 
Foundational equality Rights that all humans have by virtue of being born which cannot 
be taken away (also known as natural rights and inalienable 
rights). 
Formal equality The idea that all individuals have the same legal and political 
rights in society. 
Equality of opportunity The idea that all individuals should have equal chances in life to 
rise and fall. 
Social contract The idea that the state/society is set up with agreement from the 
people to respect its laws which serve to protect them. 
Meritocracy A society organised on the basis that success is based on ability 
and hard work. 
Mechanistic theory The idea that the state was created by ‘man’ to serve the people 
and act in their interests. 
Tolerance A willingness to respect values, customs and beliefs with which one 
disagrees. 
Limited government The role of government is limited by checks and balances, and a 
separation of powers because of the corrupting nature of power. 
 
2. Differing views and tensions within liberalism 
Key term Definition 
Egoistical individualism The idea that individual freedom is associated with self-interest and 
self-reliance (see also atomism). 
Developmental 
individualism 
The idea that individual freedom is linked to human flourishing. 
Negative freedom The absence of external constraints in society as well as no 
interference in the private sphere. 
Positive freedom The idea that freedom is about personal fulfilment and realisation 
of potential. 
Laissez-faire capitalism An economic system, organised by the market, where goods are 
produced for exchange and profit, and wealth is privately owned. 
Keynesianism An economic system that requires government involvement to 
stimulate the economy to achieve full employment and price 
stability. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
70 
 
3. Liberal thinkers and their ideas 
Key term Definition 
Harm principle The idea that individuals should be free to do anything except harm 
other individuals. 
Minimal state The idea that the role of the state must be restricted in order to 
preserve individual liberty. 
Enabling state A larger state that helps individuals to achieve their potential and 
be free. 
 
Socialism 
1. Core ideas and principles 
Key term Definition 
Fraternity The bonds of comradeship between human beings. 
Co-operation Working collectively to achieve mutual benefits. 
Capitalism An economic system, organised by the market, where goods are 
produced for profit and wealth is privately owned. 
Common ownership Is the common ownership of the means of production so that all 
are able to benefit from the wealth of society and to participate in 
its running. 
Communism The communal organisation of social existence based on the 
common ownership of wealth. 
 
2. Differing views and tensions within socialism 
Key term Definition 
Evolutionary socialism A parliamentary route, which would deliver a long-term, radical 
transformation in a gradual, piecemeal way through legal and 
peaceful means, via the state. 
Marxism An ideological system, within socialism, that drew on the writings 
of Marx and Engels and has at its core a philosophy of history that 
explains why it is inevitable that capitalism will be replaced by 
communism. 
Revisionism A move to re-define socialism that involves a less radical view of 
capitalism and a reformed view of socialism. 
Social justice A distribution of wealth that is morally justifiable and implies a 
desire to limit inequality. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
71 
 
3. Socialist thinkers and their ideas 
Key term Definition 
Class consciousness The self-understanding of social class that is a historical 
phenomenon, created out of collective struggle. 
Historical materialism Marxist theory that the economic base (the economic system) 
forms the superstructure (culture, politics, law, ideology, religion, 
art and social consciousness). 
Dialectic A process of development that occurs through the conflict between 
two opposing forces. In Marxism, class conflict creates internal 
contradictions within society, which drives historical change. 
Keynesian economics Government intervention – can stabilise the economy and aims to 
deliver full employment and price stability. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
72 
UK Government 
1. The Constitution 
Key term Definition 
Constitution A set of rules determining where sovereignty lies in a political 
system, and establishing the relationship between the government 
and the governed. 
Unentrenched 
(entrenched) 
A constitution with no special procedure for amendment. 
Uncodified (codified) A constitution not contained in a single written document. 
Unitary (federal) A political system where all legal sovereignty is contained in a single 
place. 
Parliamentary 
sovereignty 
The principle that Parliament can make, amend or unmake any law, 
and cannot bind its successors or be bound by its predecessors. 
The rule of law The principle that all people and bodies, including government, must 
follow the law and can be held to account if they do not. 
Statue law Laws passed by Parliament. 
Common law Laws made by judges where the law does not cover the issue or is 
unclear. 
Conventions Traditions not contained in law but influential in the operation of a 
political system. 
Authoritative works Works written by experts describing how a political system is run, 
they are not legally binding but are taken as significant guides. 
Treaties Formal agreements with other countries, usually ratified by 
Parliament. 
Devolution The dispersal of power, but not sovereignty, within a political 
system. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
73 
 
2. Parliament 
Key term Definition 
Parliament The British legislature made up of the House of Commons, the  
House of Lords and the monarch. 
House of Commons The primary chamber of the UK legislature, directly elected by 
voters. 
House of Lords The second chamber of the UK legislature, not directly elected by 
voters. 
Confidence and 
supply 
The rights to remove the government and to grant or withhold 
funding. Also used to describe a type of informal coalition agreement 
where the minority partner agrees to provide these things in 
exchange for policy concessions. 
Salisbury Convention The convention whereby the House of Lords does not delay or block 
legislation that was included in a government’s manifesto. 
Parliamentary 
privilege 
The right of MPs or Lords to make certain statements within 
Parliament without being subject to outside influence, including law. 
Legislative bills Proposed laws passing through Parliament. 
Public bill committees Committees responsible for looking at bills in detail. 
Backbenchers MPs or Lords who do not hold any government office. 
Select committees Committee responsible for scrutinising the work of government, 
particularly of individual government departments. 
Opposition The MPs and Lords who are not members of the governing party or 
parties. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
74 
 
3. Prime Minister and the government 
Key term Definition 
Executive The collective group of Prime Minister, Cabinet and junior ministers, 
sometimes known as ‘The Government’. 
Cabinet The Prime Minister and senior ministers, most of whom lead a 
particular government department. 
Minister An MP or member of the House of Lords appointed to a position in the 
government, usually exercising specific responsibilities in a 
department. 
Government 
department 
A part of the executive, usually with specific responsibility over an 
area such as education, health or defence. 
Royal prerogative A set of powers and privileges belonging to the monarch but normally 
exercised by the Prime Minister or Cabinet, such as the granting of 
honours or of legal pardons. 
Secondary legislation Powers given to the Executive by Parliament to make changes to the 
law within certain specific rules. 
Individual 
responsibility 
The principle by which ministers are responsible for their personal 
conduct and for their departments. 
Collective 
responsibility 
Principle by which ministers must support Cabinet decisions or leave 
the Executive. 
Presidential 
government 
An executive dominated by one individual, this may be a President 
but is also used to describe a strong, dominant Prime Minister. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
75 
 
4. Relations between the branches 
Key term Definition 
Supreme Court The highest court in the UK political system. 
Judicial neutrality The principle that judges should not be influenced by their personal 
political opinions and should remain outside of party politics. 
Judicial 
independence 
The principle that judges should not be influenced by other branches 
of government, particularly the Executive. 
Judicial review The power of the judiciary to review, and sometimes reverse, actions 
by other branches of government that breach the law or that are 
incompatible with the Human Rights Act. 
Elective dictatorship A government that dominates Parliament, usually due to a large 
majority, and therefore has few limits on its power. 
European Union (EU) A political and economic union of a group of European countries. 
Four freedoms (EU) The principle of free movement of goods, services, capital and people 
within the EU’s single market. 
Legal sovereignty The legal right to exercise sovereignty – i.e. sovereignty in theory. 
Political sovereignty The political ability to exercise sovereignty – i.e. sovereignty in 
practice. 
Ultra vires Literally ‘beyond the powers’. An action that is taken without legal 
authority when it requires it. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
76 
Non-core Political Ideas 
Anarchism 
1. Core ideas and principles 
Key term Definition 
Power From the anarchist viewpoint, power is the means or instruments 
such as the law, the police and the use of ideology, by which the 
state and other social institutions secure their authority. 
Authority From the anarchist perspective, authority is the right of one person 
or institution to influence the behaviour of others and is seen as 
commanding, controlling and corrupting. 
Government From an anarchist perspective, government is a particular system of 
rule, from monarchism to dictatorship to liberal democracy, based on 
deceit and violence. 
State From an anarchist perspective, the state is seen as a sovereign body 
that exerts total authority over all individuals and groups living 
within its defined geographical limits.  
Altruism Concern for the interest and welfare of others based on rational 
self-interest or a belief that humans are social beings with a capacity 
for social solidarity. 
Autonomy A form of self-government or legislation, a combination of freedom 
and responsibility, in which the individual is not subject to the will of 
the state or any other person. 
Direct action A whole range of political actions from non-violent to violent actions 
taken outside of the legal and constitutional framework. 
 
2. Different types of anarchism 
Key term Definition 
Syndicalism Revolutionary trade unionism that uses direct action and the mass 
strike as an expression of working-class power to inspire popular 
revolt. 
Direct democracy From an anarchist perspective, citizens making law and policy 
decisions in person rather than through elected representatives in a 
form of popular, self-government. 
Solidarity From an anarchist perspective, a relationship of sympathy, co-
operation and harmony between people, which means that they 
have no need to be regulated by the state and any regulation makes 
solidarity impossible. 
Mutualism A system of equitable exchange between self-governing producers, 
organised individually or in association and small-scale private 
property based on use or possession. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
77 
 
3. Anarchist thinkers and their ideas 
Key term Definition 
Collectivisation The abolition of private property and its replacement by a system of 
common ownership. 
Mutual aid The most successful species are those that employ solidarity and co-
operation rather than individualistic competition. 
Insurrection Is not synonymous with revolution but is rather egoistic, not a 
political or social act, that allows individuals to elevate themselves 
above the established institutions, leaving the establishment to 
decay and die. 
 
Ecologism 
1. Core ideas and principles 
Key term Definition 
Industrialism  Based on large-scale production, a faith in science and technology, 
and the accumulation of capital and continuous growth to satisfy 
material needs, which is the super ideology of the complete left-right 
political spectrum. 
Consumerism A psychological and cultural view that focuses on consuming goods 
and services as a means to feel good about ourselves and drive 
economic growth. 
Sustainability The capacity of the ecological system to maintain its health over 
time, one of the most contested ideas in ecologism. 
Environmental 
consciousness  
A state of being where your sense of self is fully realised by a deep 
identification with the non-human world; this is the basis for a new 
form of ethics and social organisation. 
Green capitalism The market will deliver environmental solutions based on a strong 
faith in technology solutions and capitalism’s response to 
ecologically-aware consumers. 
Mechanistic world 
view 
Post-Enlightenment science sees nature exist for the convenience of 
humankind and nature as a machine where the parts can be 
understood, fixed or replaced in isolation from the whole. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
78 
 
2. Different types of ecologism 
Key term Definition 
Limits to growth The finite earth, with the scarcity it implies, places limits on 
industrial growth. 
Decentralisation Decentralised societies based around communes, villages or 
bioregions that can achieve sustainability through a high level of 
self-sufficiency, making them dependent on their natural 
environment. 
Ecocentric A nature-centred rather than a human-centred system of values that 
gives priority to ecological balance. 
Anthropocentric The non-human world is there purely as a means to human ends and 
non-human nature has only human instrumental value. 
 
3. Ecologist thinkers and their ideas 
Key term Definition 
Biodiversity The diversity of species within a biotic community, which brings the 
benefits of health and stability to the community. 
Buddhist economics This is economics as if people mattered based on the principle of 
meeting all human needs with no more consumption than is 
necessary. 
Biocentric equality The radical idea that all beings within the biotic community have 
equal intrinsic value. 
 
 
Feminism 
1 Core ideas and principles 
Key term Definition 
Public sphere The area in society where relationships are public, specifically life 
outside the home, particularly society and work. 
Private sphere The area in society where relationships are seen as private, 
specifically home and domestic life. 
Essentialism The belief that biological factors are significant in the different 
character and behaviour of men and women. 
Gender stereotypes The different way society expects men and women to behave 
according to gender roles. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
79 
 
2. Different types of feminism 
Key term Definition 
Discrimination Less favourable treatment of one group of people compared to other 
groups. 
Equality of 
opportunity 
All humans, irrespective of sex, should have an equal chance in 
society to rise and fall. 
Political equality Equal right to vote, one person one vote, equal right to protest. 
Legal equality That the law applies equally to all and that no one is above the law. 
Reserve army of 
labour 
The idea that women constitute a spare workforce that can be called 
on as and when needed. 
Gender equality The idea that society should treat everyone the same, irrespective of 
their gender. 
Cultural feminism A form of difference feminism that seeks to challenge the dominance 
of male culture in society, instead seeking to promote ‘women's 
values’. 
Reformist Seeking to change society gradually and peacefully. 
Waves of feminism  Feminism has been described as going through certain time periods 
or waves where a particular theme has been at the core of the 
movement, and as one wave has raised the profile of a certain area 
feminism confronts other challenges in a fresh wave. 
 
3. Feminist thinkers and their ideas 
Key term Definition 
Otherness The idea that women were considered to be fundamentally different 
from men, who were seen as the ‘norm’ and women, deviants from 
this norm. 
Equality and 
difference feminism 
Feminists who argue that men and women are fundamentally 
different from one another. 
Intersectionality An idea that challenged the notion that 'gender' was the singular 
factor in determining a woman's fate, arguing that black and working 
class women’s experiences of patriarchy are different from that of 
white, middle-class women. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
80 
 
Multiculturalism 
1. Core ideas and principles 
Key term Definition 
Culture Involves values, customs and beliefs that are passed on through the 
generations via learning. 
Formal equality Based on the individual's status in society, all have the same legal 
and political rights. 
Diversity Different races and cultures within a state are possible, is positive 
and should be celebrated, although the extent to which diversity 
should extend is contentious. 
Identity politics Advances a critique of liberal universalism as cultural oppression, 
where minorities are marginalised and the claiming of an authentic 
sense of identity by groups is an act of political liberation. 
Tolerance From a multiculturalist view, tolerance is a willingness to accept 
values, customs and beliefs with which one disagrees. 
 
2. Different types of multiculturalism 
Key term Definition 
Individualist 
integration 
Institutional adjustments for migrants or minorities as those of 
individual claimants and bearers of rights as equal citizens. 
Multicultural 
integration 
The processes of integration are seen as two way, different for 
different groups and individuals, to create a new national identity, 
where all citizens have not just rights but a sense of belonging to the 
whole, as well as to their own group identity/identities. 
Assimilation The processes affecting change and the relationship between social 
groups are one way, with minorities adopting the values, customs 
and beliefs of the majority. 
Segregation Multiculturalism has led to ethnic and religious groups becoming 
increasingly separated. 
Cosmopolitan 
integration 
The maximum freedom for minority, as well as majority, individuals, 
to mix with, borrow and learn from all cultures. 
 
3. Multiculturalist thinkers and their ideas 
Key term Definition 
Positive 
discrimination 
Preferential treatment for groups in society to correct structural 
inequality or compensate for historical wrongs. 
Value pluralism  There is no one absolute conception of the 'good life' but rather 
multiple, competing and equally legitimate conceptions. 
Group differentiated 
rights 
Rights that belong to a group, in contrast to a right held by 
individuals, includes self-government rights, polyethnic rights and 
representation rights. 
Universalism From a multiculturalist view, universalism is where certain values are 
applicable to all individuals and all societies, regardless of culture, 
history, geography or any other differences.  
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
81 
 
Nationalism 
1. Core ideas and principles 
Key term Definition 
Civic nationalism A form of nationalism based on the active participation of its citizens 
and a shared vision of equal citizens. 
Liberal 
internationalism 
The idea that sovereign nations should cooperate and create a level 
of interdependency to avoid international conflict. 
Socialist 
internationalism 
The idea that class solidarity is more powerful and politically 
significant than national identity. As Marx said: ‘Working men of all 
countries, unite!’. 
 Ethnicity The sense of belonging to the social group that shares a common 
and distinctive culture, religion, language, or the like. 
 
2. Different types of nationalism 
Key term Definition 
Rational The idea that humans are capable of reasoned thought and are able 
to make logical decisions for themselves. 
Progressive Ideas that move towards improving society. 
Regressive Ideas that seek to revert society to a former or less advanced state. 
Inclusive nationalism A form of nationalism that believes that joining a nation is 
straightforward and quick, as it is not based on shared previous 
experiences. 
Exclusive nationalism A form of nationalism that believes that it takes time to be a part of 
the nation, as membership is based on shared history and language.  
Chauvinistic 
nationalism 
A form of nationalism that believes its nation is superior to others, 
seeing them as a threat to their survival. 
Imperialism/  
colonialism 
The extension of control by one country over another by settlement 
or economic domination. 
 
3. Nationalist thinkers and their ideas 
Key term Definition 
Volksgeist The ‘spirit’ of a nation, the unique identity of a people based on their 
culture. 
Integral nationalism An intense, hysterical form of patriotism in which the individual is 
absorbed into the nation. 
Black nationalism A reaction to white oppression originating in the mid-20th century. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
82 
USA 
1. US Constitution 
Key term Definition 
Bipartisanship Attempts within the structure of the US Congress to try and ensure 
that the two main parties must work together in order to fulfil 
Congressional functions. 
Checks and balances The division of power between the three branches of government 
where each branch has a direct ability to prevent action from 
another branch. 
Codification A constitution that is written down in one document. 
Constitution A set of rules determining where sovereignty lies in a political 
system, and establishing the precise relationship between the 
government and the governed. 
Entrenchment A system by which the US Constitution is protected from change by 
law; in this case, by the Amendment Process of Article V. 
Enumerated powers Such powers are stated explicitly in the US Constitution – for 
example Article 1, Section 8 provides a list of Congressional powers. 
Federalism The US system in which sovereignty is shared between a central 
government (federal government) and the individual states, with 
each having their own specific rights.  
Limited government The power of the US federal government over its states and citizens 
is subject to limitations as laid out in the Constitution. 
‘Principle’ The core structural aspects of how the US Constitution was defined 
by the Founding Fathers when it was drafted. 
Separation of powers The three key bodies of government, legislature, executive and 
judiciary each have their own powers, personnel and buildings. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
83 
 
2. US Congress 
Key term Definition 
Congressional 
caucuses 
These are groups of legislators who share special interests and meet 
to pursue common legislative objectives, e.g. black caucus, women’s 
caucus, Hispanic caucus 
Divided government When the House of Representatives, Senate and presidency are not 
all controlled by one party. 
Filibuster When a senator gives a prolonged speech on the floor of the Senate 
in order to obstruct legislative progress of a bill or confirmation of 
appointments to the Executive or judiciary. 
Gridlock A situation in US politics where the president and Congress are 
equally powerful, constantly preventing each other from acting, 
resulting in difficulty passing legislation. 
Incumbency The current holder of a political office re House or Senate seat or 
presidency. 
Mid-term elections Congressional elections held mid-way through a President’s four-
year term. 
Oversight The ability of one branch of government to supervise the work of 
another. 
Partisanship A situation in which Congressmen/women are incredibly loyal to 
their party, even when it means that the result is gridlock. 
Unanimous consent A senator or Congressman/woman may request unanimous consent 
on the floor to set aside a specified rule of procedure so as to 
expedite proceedings. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
84 
 
3. US presidency 
Key term Definition 
Domestic politics Issues within the USA that directly concern citizens,  
e.g. healthcare, gun control, racial issues. 
Electoral mandate An electoral mandate is the permission granted to a political leader 
or winning party to govern and act on their behalf, e.g. to President 
Obama in 2008 and 2012. The mandate is more or less in effect for 
as long as the government is in power. 
Executive branch The executive branch, headed by the president, is one of the three 
branches of government; the other two are the legislative branch 
(headed by Congress) and the judiciary (headed by the Supreme 
Court). 
Executive orders Official documents issued by the executive branch with the force of 
law, through which the president directs federal officials to take 
certain actions. Since the 1900s executive orders have been 
numbered and recorded in the Federal Register. 
Imperial presidency A dominant presidency with ineffective checks and balances from the 
other branches. 
Imperilled presidency This is the contrasting theory to that of an imperial presidency – it is 
claimed that the president does not have enough power to be 
effective.  
Informal powers Powers of the president not listed in the Constitution but taken 
anyway. 
Powers of persuasion This is an informal power of the president in which they can use the 
prestige of their job, and other bargaining methods in order to get 
people to do as they wish. 
Unified government Where both Houses of Congress and the presidency are controlled by 
people from the same political party. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
85 
 
4. US Supreme Court and civil rights 
Key term Definition 
Conservative justice A Justice with a strong belief in stare decisis, with a more narrow 
view of the Constitution, more likely to believe in a literal 
interpretation of the wording and believing in a generally smaller 
government. 
Imperial judiciary A judiciary that is all powerful and on which checks and balances are 
weak and ineffective. 
Judicial activism An approach to judicial decision making that holds that a Justice 
should use their position to promote desirable social ends. 
Judicial restraint An approach to judicial decision making that holds that a Justice 
should defer to the executive and legislative branches, which are 
politically accountable to the people, and should put great stress on 
the principle established in previous court decisions. 
Judicial review The ability of the Supreme Court to declare acts of Congress, and 
acts or actions of the presidency, unconstitutional and therefore null 
and void. 
Liberal Justice A Justice who interprets the Constitution more broadly in order to 
give the people more freedom and bring about social change. 
Living Constitution The idea that the Constitution is an evolutionary document that can 
change over time through re-interpretation by the Supreme Court 
(linked to loose constructionism). 
Originalism The idea that the meaning of the US Constitution is fixed and should 
not be subject to interpretation. 
Public policy Legislation and judicial decisions made on any policy that affect the 
whole of the US population. 
Stare decisis This doctrine is built on the idea of standing by decided cases, 
upholding precedents and maintaining former adjudications – thus 
tends to favour status quo – this is the opposite of the ‘living 
Constitution’ approach. 
Strict/loose 
constructionist 
‘Loose construction’ is a legal philosophy that favours a broad 
interpretation of a document's language. This term is often used to 
contrast with strict construction, a philosophy that favours looking 
solely at the written text of the law. 
Swing Justice An informal name for the Justice on the Supreme Court who falls 
ideologically in the centre of the nine current Justices. 
Constitutional rights The rights specifically outlined for citizens within the US 
Constitution, Bill of Rights and subsequent Amendments. 
Racial equality Racial equality is an equal regard to all races. It can refer to a belief 
in biological equality of all human races and to social equality for 
people of different races. In the USA, there remain calls for 
desegregation and voter registration in the south, and better jobs, 
housing and school integration in the north. 
Affirmative action A policy of favouring historically disadvantaged members of a 
community. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
86 
 
5. US democracy and participation 
Key term Definition 
Campaign finance Campaign finance refers to all funds raised to promote candidates, 
political parties or policy initiatives and their agendas during an 
election. 
Factions The groups (factions) that make up political parties – ideological 
wings, particular age and occupation groups, citizens concerned 
about particular issues – are now a feature of modern politics. 
Invisible primary This is the period between when a candidate announces their bid 
for public office and when the actual primaries take place. It is also 
sometimes called the ‘money primary’ since candidates spend most 
of their time during this period raising money in an effort to show 
political strength. 
Political Action 
Committee (PACs) 
This raises and spends money in order to elect/defeat electoral 
candidates, with a donation limit of $5,000 per candidate per 
election. 
Party system The number of parties that have a realistic chance of forming 
government within a political system. 
Policy group A group that attempts to influence a whole policy area,  
e.g. American Israeli PAC (AIPAC). 
Professional group A group that represents the economic interests of its members,  
e.g. American Medical Association (AMA), American Bar Association 
(ABA). 
Single interest group A group that advocates policy surrounding a small specific issue,  
e.g. National Rifle Association (NRA). 
Soft/hard money When cash is contributed directly to a political candidate, it is ‘hard 
money’, which may come only from an individual or a political 
action committee. When cash is contributed to a political party with 
no limits attached to the amount that can be received, this is a ‘soft 
money’ contribution. 
Super PACs A Super-Political Action Committee (Super PAC) raises and spends 
unlimited amounts of money to support or oppose political 
candidates but without directly donating or co-ordinating with these 
candidates  
(a result of Citizens United vs FEC 2010). 
Religious right The movement, which generally gives support to the Republican 
Party, is an ultraconservative religious response to the sexual 
revolution and an attempt to translate this into public policy, 
promoting family values, opposing abortion and the 1973 Roe v 
Wade judgment, opposing same-sex marriage, civil partnerships 
and non-discrimination laws. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
87 
Global Politics  
1. The state and globalisation 
Key term Definition 
Sovereignty Absolute and unlimited power and authority. 
Nation state Autonomous political community held together by citizenship and 
nationality. 
Non-state actors Participants in international relations with significant power and 
influence, which are not states. 
Globalisation Emergence of a complex web of interconnectedness in many forms. 
Economic 
globalisation 
Growing economic integration and interdependence of economies 
through intensified cross-border movement of goods, services, 
technologies and capital. 
Political globalisation Growing importance of international organisations. 
Cultural globalisation Growing transmission of ideas, meanings and values around the 
world. 
Homogenisation and 
monoculture 
Coming together of global cultures and development of a single, 
homogeneous culture without diversity or dissension. 
Interconnectedness Mutual reliance of two or more groups. 
World government Idea of a common political authority with legislative and executive 
power over states. 
Global governance Broad and complex process of decision making at a global level. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
88 
 
2. Global governance: political and economic 
Key term Definition 
Non-governmental 
organisations (NGOs) 
This is any non-profit, voluntary citizens' group organised on a local, 
national or international level – e.g. Christian Aid. NGOs perform a 
variety of service and humanitarian functions, bring citizens’ 
concerns to governments, advocate and monitor policies and 
encourage political participation through provision of information. 
Structural Adjustment 
Programme (SAP) 
Conditional loans provided by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
and the World Bank to countries that experienced economic crises. 
Political 
The United Nations Organisation created in 1945, following the Second World War, to 
promote international co-operation and to prevent another such 
conflict. 
Security Council The United Nations' most powerful body, with primary responsibility 
for the maintenance of international peace and security. 
NATO North Atlantic Treaty Organisation – military alliance based on the 
North Atlantic Treaty, signed in 1949. 
Economic 
International 
Monetary Fund (IMF) 
International organisation working to foster global monetary  
co-operation, secure financial stability, facilitate international trade, 
promote high employment and sustainable economic growth, and 
reduce poverty around the world. 
World Bank International organisation that offers concessional loans and grants 
to the world's poorest developing countries in order to reduce 
poverty. 
World Trade 
Organization (WTO) 
Organisation that regulates international trade. 
G7(8) Organisation – Group of Seven states/Eight states. 
G20 Organisation – Group of Twenty states. 
North-South divide Global socio-economic and political divide. 
Dependency theory Emphasises structural imbalances within capitalism that impose 
dependency on poorer states. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
89 
 
3. Global governance human rights and environmental 
Key term Definition 
Human rights 
International law Law that governs states and other international actors. 
International Court 
of Justice (ICJ) 
Principal judicial organ of the United Nations. 
International 
Criminal Court (ICC) 
Organisation that prosecutes individuals for the international crimes 
of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes. 
International 
tribunals 
Organisations set up to prosecute individuals in specific states for the 
crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes. 
Human rights Rights that people are entitled to by virtue of being human. 
Universal human 
rights 
Rights that apply to people of all societies regardless of cultural or 
other differences. 
Humanitarian 
intervention 
Military intervention carried out in pursuit of humanitarian rather than 
other objectives. 
Environmental 
United Nations 
Framework 
Convention on 
Climate Change 
(UNFCCC) 
An international environmental treaty negotiated at the Earth Summit 
in Rio de Janeiro in 1992. 
Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC) 
UN body set up as an internationally accepted authority on climate 
change. 
Global commons Areas and resources that are un-owned and consequently beyond 
national jurisdiction. 
Tragedy of the 
commons 
Situation within a shared-resource system where individual users 
acting independently and rationally according to their own self-
interest behave contrary to the common good of all users by 
depleting that resource. 
Sustainability The capacity to endure. 
Sustainable 
development 
Development that meets the needs of the present, without 
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own 
needs. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
90 
 
4. Power and developments 
Key term Definition 
Hard power Hard power is the use of military and economic means to influence 
the behaviour or interests of other political bodies. 
Soft power The ability to attract and co-opt and to shape the preferences of 
others through appeal and attraction. 
Great power State that is recognised as having the ability and expertise to exert its 
influence on a global scale. 
Superpower State with a dominant position in international relations, pre-eminent 
among great powers, and characterised by its unparalleled ability to 
exert influence or project power on a global scale. 
Emerging power State that is considered to be rising, primarily in economic power and 
influence. 
Polarity Describes the nature of the international system at any given time in 
terms of how power is distributed. 
Unipolarity International system in which there is one dominant pole. 
Bipolarity International system revolving around two poles. 
Multipolarity International system revolving around three or more poles. 
Democratic state A state with a system of government in which all the people are 
involved in making decisions about its affairs. 
Semi-democratic 
state 
A stable state that combines democratic and authoritarian elements. 
Non-democratic 
state 
A state that lacks the central characteristics of a democratic state. 
Autocratic state A state that is ruled by a single person with unlimited power. 
Failed state A state that is unable to operate as a viable political unit. 
Rogue state A state that has a foreign policy that poses a threat to other states. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
91 
 
5. Regionalism and the EU 
Key term Definition 
Regionalism Creation and implementation of institutions that express a particular 
identity and shape collective action within a geographical region. 
European Union (EU) Political-economic union of 28 member states (2015) located in 
Europe. 
European integration Process of industrial, political, legal, economic, social and cultural 
integration of states in Europe. 
Sovereignty Absolute and unlimited power and authority. 
Supranationalism Refers to a large amount of power given to an authority, which, in 
theory, is placed higher than the state. 
Intergovernmentalism Interaction among states based on sovereign independence. 
Federalism Legal and political structures where power is distributed between 
two distinct levels of government on the basis that neither is 
subordinate to the other. 
Global actor Entity that participates or acts in international relations. 
Widening–deepening Process by which the EU has attempted to expand membership while 
furthering integration. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
92 
 
6.  Comparative theories  
Key term Definition 
Realism Wide school of thought in international relations theory that has a 
belief that world politics will remain a field of conflict among actors 
pursuing power. 
Liberalism Wide school of thought in international relations theory that rejects 
power politics as the sole outcome of international relations and 
emphasises mutual benefits and co-operation. 
International anarchy Concept that the world system is leaderless: there is no universal 
sovereign or worldwide government. 
Security dilemma Theory that actions by a state intended to increase its security, such 
as increasing its military strength, can lead to other states 
responding with similar measures, producing increased tensions that 
create conflict. 
Complex 
interdependence 
Theory that states and their fortunes are inextricably tied together. 
Global governance Movement towards political integration of transnational actors aimed 
at negotiating responses to problems that affect more than one state 
or region. 
Anarchical society and 
society of sates 
Theory that the states of the world can be members of a society 
despite the anarchical nature of the international system. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
93 
Appendix 3: The context for the 
development of this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] and our 
ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
• reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with those 
taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
• consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including learned bodies, 
subject associations, higher-education academics and teachers to ensure this 
qualification is suitable for a UK context 
• reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in their 
documents GCE Qualification Level Conditions and Requirements and GCE Subject Level 
Conditions and Requirements for Politics, published in May 2016. 
 
 
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification Principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
• demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning and 
measuring higher-order skills 
• rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and valid 
assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in end users of the knowledge, skills 
and competencies of certified students 
• inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students develop at 
different rates and have different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
• empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills, see Appendix 4. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
94 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
May 2014 
“The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important change to the 
education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications will assist them in 
helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an ‘Expert 
Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or because of 
our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the world as diverse as 
Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification development 
process that has included: 
• extensive international comparability of subject content against the highest-performing 
jurisdictions in the world 
• benchmarking assessments against UK and overseas providers to ensure that they are at 
the right level of demand 
• establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-specific 
expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
• subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future oriented. The 
design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, meaning learner outcomes 
have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a learner’s 
success in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident that we have 
supported the development of qualifications that are outstanding for their coherence, 
thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as representing world-class best 
practice.
”    
  
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Lee Sing Kong 
Director, National Institute of Education, 
Singapore 
  
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
  
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
 
All titles correct as at May 2014 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
95 
Appendix 4: Transferable skills 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently flagged the 
need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable them to respond with 
confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines skills, or 
competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that can be learned and 
that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform an activity or task and can be 
built upon and extended through learning.’ [1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected and 
evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this process, we 
identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the most evidence-based and 
robust skills framework. We adapted the framework slightly to include the Program for 
International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT Literacy and Collaborative Problem Solving 
(CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves: [2]  
Cognitive skills 
• Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
• Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
• Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve general 
cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
• ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and communicate. [3]  
Interpersonal skills 
• Communication – active listening, oral communication, written communication, 
assertive communication and non-verbal communication. 
• Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, service 
orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and negotiation. 
• Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared understanding, 
taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team organisation. 
Intrapersonal skills 
• 
Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work stress, 
adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, and physical 
adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
• Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual teams, 
work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and able to acquire 
new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher education, 
as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the teaching and learning of 
this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning materials, developed with 
stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
 
 
[1]  OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012) 
[2]  Koenig J A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop (National 
Academies Press, 2011) 
[3]  PISA – The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy (2011) 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
96 
Appendix 5: Level 3 Extended Project 
qualification 
What is the Extended Project? 
The Extended Project is a standalone qualification that can be taken alongside GCEs. It 
supports the development of independent learning skills and helps to prepare students for 
their next step – whether that be higher education or employment. The qualification:  
• is recognised by higher education for the skills it develops 
• is worth half of an Advanced GCE qualification at grades A*–E 
• carries UCAS points for university entry. 
The Extended Project encourages students to develop skills in the following areas: research, 
critical thinking, extended writing and project management. Students identify and agree a 
topic area of their choice for in-depth study (which may or may not be related to a GCE 
subject they are already studying), guided by their teacher. 
Students can choose from one of four approaches to produce: 
• a dissertation (for example an investigation based on predominately secondary research)  
• an investigation/field study (for example a practical experiment) 
• a performance (for example in music, drama or sport) 
• an artefact (for example creating a sculpture in response to a client brief or solving an 
engineering problem). 
The qualification is non-examination assessment based and students are assessed on the 
skills of managing, planning and evaluating their project. Students will research their topic, 
develop skills to review and evaluate the information, and then present the final outcome of 
their project. 
The Extended Project has 120 guided learning hours (GLH) consisting of a 40-GLH taught 
element that includes teaching the technical skills (for example research skills) and an  
80-GLH guided element that includes mentoring students through the project work. The 
qualification is 100% internally assessed and externally moderated. 
How to link the Extended Project with politics 
The Extended Project creates the opportunity to develop transferable skills for progression to 
higher education and to the workplace, through the exploration of either an area of personal 
interest or a topic of interest from within the politics qualification content. 
Through the Extended Project, students will develop skills that support their study of politics, 
including: 
• conducting, organising and using research 
• independent reading in the subject area 
• planning, project management and time management 
• collecting, handling and interpreting data and evidence 
• evaluating arguments and processes, including arguments in favour of alternative 
interpretations of data and evaluation of experimental methodology 
• critical thinking. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
97 
 
In the context of the Extended Project, critical thinking refers to the ability to identify and 
develop arguments for a point of view or hypothesis and to consider and respond to 
alternative arguments. This supports the development of evaluative skills, through 
evaluating business arguments and using qualitative and quantitative evidence to support 
informed judgements and propose evidence-based solutions to political issues. 
Types of Extended Project related to politics 
Students can produce a dissertation on any topic that can be researched and argued, for 
example a controversial political issue such sovereignty, participation in the democratic 
process and international challenges. 
A dissertation might involve an investigation such as: 
• the turnout of different groups in elections 
• the relative powers of different organisations in dealing with global challenges. 
Using the Extended Project to support breadth and depth 
In the Extended Project, students are assessed on the quality of the work they produce and 
the skills they develop and demonstrate through completing this work. Students should 
demonstrate that they have extended themselves in some significant way beyond what they 
have been studying in politics. Students can demonstrate extension in one or more 
dimensions: 
• deepening understanding – where a student explores a topic in greater depth than in 
the specification content 
• broadening skills – where a student learns a new skill. This might be learning how to 
use a new statistical technique that can be used in the analysis of either primary or 
secondary data collected by the student 
• widening perspectives – where the student’s project spans different subjects.  
A student studying politics with English may wish to research the use of rhetoric in 
speeches over a certain period. A student studying politics with history may wish to use 
statistical techniques to analyse voting data and link this with social history or suffrage 
reform and research one aspect of this in more detail. 
A wide range of information to support the delivery and assessment of the Extended Project, 
including the specification, teacher guidance for all aspects, an editable scheme of work and 
exemplars for all four approaches, can be found on our website. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Politics – Specification 
Issue 3 – August 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
98 
Appendix 6: Codes 
 
Type of code Use of code Code 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for performance 
tables is assigned a discount code 
indicating the subject area to which it 
belongs. 
Discount codes are published by the DfE.  
Please see the GOV.UK 
website* 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an 
Ofqual Regulated Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) code. 
The RQF code is known as a Qualification 
Number (QN). This is the code that 
features in the DfE Section 96 and on the 
LARA as being eligible for 16–18 and 19+ 
funding, and is to be used for all 
qualification funding purposes. The QN will 
appear on students’ final certification 
documentation. 
The QN for this 
qualification is: 
603/1223/3 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to 
enter students for a qualification. Centres 
will need to use the entry codes only when 
claiming students’ qualifications. 
A Level – 9PL0 
Paper codes These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be 
entered for individual papers. 
Paper 1: 9PL0/01 
Paper 2: 9PL0/02 
Paper 3: 9PL0/3A 
Paper 3: 9PL0/3B 
 
*www.gov.uk/government/publications/2018-performance-tables-discount-codes 
 
DB010822 9781446933602_GCE2017_AL_POLITICS_ISSUE3.DOC.1–105/0 
 
0B0B About Pearson 
1B1B We are the world’s leading learning company operating in countries all around the world. We 
provide content, assessment and digital services to learners, educational institutions, 
employers, governments and other partners globally. We are committed to helping equip 
learners with the skills they need to enhance their employability prospects and to succeed in 
the changing world of work. We believe that wherever learning flourishes so do people.  
2B2B References to third party materials made in this specification are made in good faith. Pearson 
does not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may be 
subject to change, or any opinions expressed therein. (Materials may include textbooks, 
journals, magazines and other publications and websites.) 
 
3B3B All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
 
ISBN 978 1 446 93360 2 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2022 
 
         
     
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office:  80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121
