This draft qualification has not yet been accredited by Ofqual. It is published to enable teachers to have early sight of our 
proposed approach to Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9 - 1) in Music (1MU0). Further chang
es may be required 
and no assurance can be given at this time that the proposed qualification will be made available in its current form, or 
that it will be accredited in time for first teaching in September 2016 and first award in 2018.
Specification
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9 - 1) in Japanese (1JA0)
First teaching from September 2017
First certification from June 2019
GCSE (9-1)
Japanese
Issue 5

 
 
Summary of Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2  
GCSE (9-1) in Japanese Specification 
Issue 5 changes  
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this current issue  Page 
number  
Removal of Subject Advisor name: 
‘Our subject advisor service and online community…’ 
3 
Update to Foundation tier paper timing: 
‘Foundation tier: 1 hour 20 minutes…’ 
6 and 38 
Update to Foundation tier Assessment Information for Paper 4, bullet point 5: 
‘Question 2 has two options from which students have to select one. This question 
assesses students on their ability to note down key points and convey information. 
Students must use the formal register.’ 
38 
Reference to ‘GCE AS’ removed in the following sentence: 
This qualification offers a suitable progression route to GCE A level in Japanese.  
67 
 
If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, contact us via our website 
at: qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/contact-us.html. 
 
 
Contents 
1 Introduction 2 
Why choose Edexcel GCSE Japanese? 2 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this qualification 3 
Qualification at a glance 4 
2 Subject content 7 
Themes and topics 8 
Paper 1: Listening and understanding in Japanese 10 
Paper 2: Speaking in Japanese 12 
Paper 3: Reading and understanding in Japanese 35 
Paper 4: Writing in Japanese 37 
Assessment Objectives 63 
3 Administration and general information 64 
Entries 64 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special consideration and 
malpractice 64 
Student recruitment and progression 67 
Appendix 1: Candidate speaking examination record form (CS2) 71 
Appendix 2: Grammar list 72 
Appendix 3: Vocabulary list 77 
Appendix 4: Kanji list 129 
Appendix 5: The context for the development of this 
qualification 130 
Appendix 6: Transferable skills 132 
Appendix 7: Codes 133 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
2 
1 Introduction 
Why choose Edexcel GCSE Japanese? 
We believe languages should be accessible for all students. Our new Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Japanese has been developed to help students of all abilities 
progress and develop a passion for languages, through culturally engaging content. 
We’ve listened to feedback from the languages community and have developed an engaging 
and inspirational course of study that will enable your students to manipulate and use the 
target language effectively, independently and creatively, so that they have a solid basis 
from which to progress to A Level or employment. 
Engaging and popular topics 
Our specification includes both familiar and new topics that you have told us you like and 
that motivate your students. 
Manageable content 
Our content has been structured across five themes. This flexible programme of study allows 
time for a focused revision period at the end of the course. 
Content and assessments that provide an engaging real-world focus 
The authentic situations and stimuli enable students to see language in context and learn 
about the culture of the target language country. Our assessments allow for spontaneity and 
test grammar as well as providing plenty of opportunities for students to apply their 
knowledge independently, creatively and in authentic situations. 
Straightforward assessments that are accessible to all students 
Special care has been taken to ensure that all our papers are designed to be clear and 
concise and, where appropriate, questions feature scaffolding to help all students’ progress 
through the assessments confidently. Both papers are also structured so that they are 
progressive in their level of demand with the most demanding question being the final 
question in the paper. Translation tasks are progressive in their level of difficulty and are of 
appropriate demand at each tier. 
Carefully selected texts 
We have worked closely with teachers and expert practitioners to ensure we include 
interesting and relevant texts at the right level for students at each tier and that will 
encourage the use of a wide range of texts in the classroom. 
Clear and precise assessment criteria 
Our mark schemes have been trialled with sample student answers to ensure they reward 
students appropriately and that it is clear what is expected of students at each band. 
Continuous progression 
Our content builds on the understanding developed at prior language learning experience at 
Key Stage 3 while also ensuring that students new to the subject are appropriately 
supported, and provides a firm foundation for students to make a smooth transition to 
A Level. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
3 
Supporting you in planning and implementing 
this qualification 
Planning 
● To support you in delivering this specification, our Getting Started Guide, available on 
our website, gives you an overview of the new GCSE qualification to help you to get to 
grips with the changes to content and assessment and to help you understand what these 
changes mean for you and your students. 
● We will give you an editable course planner and scheme of work that you can adapt to 
suit your department. 
● Our mapping documents highlight key differences between the new and 2009 
qualification. 
Teaching and learning 
There are lots of free teaching and learning support to help you deliver the new qualification, 
including: 
● a guide to questions in the target language 
● student guide 
● online and face-to-face training events. 
Preparing for exams 
We also provide a range of resources to help you prepare your students for the assessments, 
including: 
● marked exemplars of student work with examiner commentaries 
ResultsPlus 
ResultsPlus provides the most detailed analysis available of your students’ exam 
performance. It can help you identify the topics and skills where further learning would 
benefit your students. 
Get help and support 
Our subject advisor service and online community will ensure you receive help and guidance 
from us and that you can share ideas and information with other teachers. You can sign up 
to receive e-newsletters to keep up to date with qualification updates and product and 
service news. 
Learn more at qualifications.pearson.com 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
4 
Qualification at a glance 
Content and assessment overview 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Japanese consists of four externally 
examined papers based on the following skills: listening, speaking, reading and writing. 
Students must complete their speaking assessment in April/May and all other assessments in 
May/June in any single year. 
Each paper is available at Foundation tier or Higher tier. Students must be entered for a 
single tier across all papers. 
The use of dictionaries is not permitted. For Paper 2 this includes during the 
preparation time. 
 
Paper 1: Listening and understanding in Japanese (*Paper code: 1JA0/1F and 1H) 
Written examination 
Foundation tier: 35 minutes, including 5 minutes’ reading time; 50 marks 
Higher tier: 45 minutes, including 5 minutes’ reading time; 50 marks 
25% of the total qualification 
Content overview 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes and topics. 
Assessment overview 
Students are assessed on their understanding of standard spoken Japanese by one or more 
speakers in a range of public and social settings. Students will respond to multiple-response 
and short-answer open-response questions based on a recording featuring male and female 
Japanese speakers. 
Students must answer all questions in both sections. 
There is no requirement for students to produce written responses in Japanese. 
Foundation tier 
● All questions are set in English. The instructions to students are in English. 
Higher tier 
● All questions are set in English. The instructions to students are in English. 
The listening audio files are available on our website. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
5 
 
Paper 2: Speaking in Japanese (*Paper code: 1JA0/2F and 2H) 
Internally conducted and externally assessed 
Foundation tier: 7–9 minutes plus 12 minutes’ preparation time; 70 marks 
Higher tier: 10–12 minutes plus 12 minutes’ preparation time; 70 marks 
25% of the total qualification 
Content overview 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes and topics. 
Assessment overview 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate and interact effectively through 
speaking in Japanese for different purposes and in different settings. 
There are three tasks which must be conducted in the following order: 
● Task 1 – a role play based on one topic that is allocated by Pearson 
● Task 2 – questions based on a picture stimulus based on one topic that is allocated by 
Pearson 
● Task 3 – conversation based on two themes. The first theme is based on the topic chosen by 
the student in advance of the assessment. The second theme is allocated by Pearson. 
The assessments are conducted by teachers in one session within a prescribed assessment 
window, the recordings are then submitted to Pearson for external marking. 
 
Paper 3: Reading and understanding in Japanese (*Paper code: 1JA0/3F and 3H) 
Written examination 
Foundation tier: 50 minutes; 50 marks. Higher tier: 1 hour 5 minutes; 50 marks 
25% of the total qualification 
Content overview 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes and topics. 
Assessment overview 
Students are assessed on their understanding of written Japanese across a range of different 
types of texts, including advertisements, emails, letters, articles and literary texts. Students 
are required to respond to multiple-response and short-answer questions based on these texts. 
Students must answer all questions in each of the three sections: 
● Section A is set in English. The instructions to students are in English. 
● Section B includes a translation passage from Japanese into English with instructions in 
English. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
6 
 
Paper 4: Writing in Japanese (*Paper code: 1JA0/4F and 4H) 
Written examination 
Foundation tier: 1 hour 20 minutes; 60 marks 
Higher tier: 1 hour 25 minutes; 60 marks 
25% of the total qualification 
Content overview 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes and topics. 
Assessment overview 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate effectively through writing in Japanese 
for different purposes and audiences. Students are required to produce responses of varying 
lengths and types to express ideas and opinions in Japanese. The instructions to students are 
in English. Character counts are specified for each question. Students must answer all 
questions. 
Foundation tier 
There are three open-response questions and one translation into Japanese. 
Higher tier 
There are two open-response questions and one translation into Japanese. 
 
*See Appendix 7: Codes for a description of this code and all codes related to this 
qualification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
7 
2 Subject content 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Japanese allows students to develop 
their ability to communicate with Japanese native speakers in both speech and writing. 
Students will study across a variety of contexts relevant to their age and interests and will 
also develop a greater awareness of the culture of Japanese-speaking communities and 
countries. These contexts are listed under Themes and topics. 
Students will need to develop and use their knowledge and understanding of Japanese 
grammar progressively through their course of study. Grammar requirements are given in 
the grammar list (see Appendix 2: Grammar list). 
To help students build on their range of vocabulary, a list is provided of words that students 
are expected to use and understand (see Appendix 3: Vocabulary list). These lists are not 
exhaustive but are intended as a guide; students at both tiers will be required to understand 
and respond to common words (appropriate to the tier) that are not on the lists. 
Qualification aims and objectives 
The aims and objectives of this qualification are to enable students to: 
● develop their ability to communicate confidently and coherently with native speakers in 
speech and writing, conveying what they want to say with increasing accuracy 
● express and develop thoughts and ideas spontaneously and fluently 
● listen to and understand clearly articulated, standard speech at near normal speed 
● deepen their knowledge about how language works and enrich their vocabulary in order 
for them to increase their independent use and understanding of extended language in a 
wide range of contexts 
● acquire new knowledge, skills and ways of thinking through the ability to understand and 
respond to a rich range of authentic spoken and written material, adapted and abridged, 
as appropriate, including literary texts 
● develop awareness and understanding of the culture and identity of the countries and 
communities where the language is spoken 
● be encouraged to make appropriate links to other areas of the curriculum to enable 
bilingual and deeper learning, where the language may become a medium for constructing 
and applying knowledge 
● develop language-learning skills both for immediate use and to prepare them for further 
language study and use in school, higher education or employment 
● develop language strategies, including repair strategies. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
8 
Themes and topics 
Questions across all four language skills are set in common contexts, addressing a range of 
relevant contemporary and cultural themes. They are organised into five themes, each 
broken down into topics and sub-topics. 
The five themes are: 
● Identity and culture 
● Local area, holiday, travel 
● School 
● Future aspirations, study and work 
● International and global dimension. 
All themes and topics must be studied in the context of both the students’ home 
country and that of countries and communities where Japanese is spoken. 
For listening and reading assessments, the majority of contexts are based on the culture and 
countries where the assessed language is spoken. Students may also refer to the culture of 
the assessed language country/countries or communities in the speaking and writing papers. 
It is, therefore, important that students are exposed to materials relating to Japanese-
speaking countries throughout the course. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
9 
Each topic has been highlighted in bold. 
All topics must be studied in the context of both the students’ home country and 
that of countries and communities where Japanese is spoken. 
 
Theme 1: Identity and culture 
● Who am I?: relationships; when I was younger; what my friends and family are like; 
what makes a good friend; interests; socialising with friends and family; role models 
● Daily life: customs and everyday life; food and drink; shopping; social media and 
technology (use of, advantages and disadvantages) 
● Cultural life: celebrations and festivals; reading; music; sport; film and television 
 
Theme 2: Local area, holiday and travel 
● Holidays: preferences; experiences; destinations 
● Travel and tourist transactions: travel and accommodation; asking for help and 
dealing with problems; directions; eating out; shopping 
● Town, region and country: weather; places to see; things to do 
 
Theme 3: School 
● What school is like: school types; school day; subjects; rules and pressures; celebrating 
success 
● School activities: school trips; events and exchanges 
 
Theme 4: Future aspirations, study and work 
● Using languages beyond the classroom: forming relationships; travel; employment 
● Ambitions: further study; volunteering; training 
● Work: jobs; careers and professions 
 
Theme 5: International and global dimension 
● Bringing the world together: sports events; music events; campaigns and good causes 
● Environmental issues: being ‘green’; access to natural resources 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
10 
Paper 1: Listening and understanding in Japanese 
Content 
Students are assessed on their understanding of standard spoken Japanese in a variety of 
scenarios. 
Students will need to:  
● identify the overall message, key points, details and opinions 
● deduce meaning from a variety of spoken texts 
● recognise the relationship between past, present and future events 
● recognise and respond to key information, important themes and ideas in spoken text, 
including authentic sources, adapted and abridged, as appropriate 
● be able to answer questions, extract information, evaluate and draw conclusions. 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes (see Themes and 
topics). 
Students are presented with recorded scenarios involving one or more speakers in public and 
social settings. Recordings include authentic sources and are based on the themes. Recorded 
material features both male and female voices and represents different age groups. 
Students should be given the opportunity to become accustomed to hearing the Japanese 
language spoken in a range of styles. 
Recordings for individual questions within the assessment vary in length, including both short 
and longer spoken passages, using both familiar language and, where appropriate, more 
complex language and abstract material, as appropriate to the tier. 
To prepare students adequately for this assessment, teachers should present and exploit a 
range of vocabulary relevant to each theme listed and build on the Key Stage 3 Programme 
of Study, where appropriate. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
11 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2019. 
● The assessment is out of 50 marks. 
● Students must be allocated five minutes in which to read through the paper before the 
first extract of the recording starts. This gives students an opportunity to familiarise 
themselves with the length and the layout of the paper and to read the questions before 
hearing the first extract. 
● Students will listen to the recording featuring Japanese-language speakers who will speak 
at a rate appropriate to the expected level of student understanding. 
● Each passage is recorded twice, with pauses following the second hearing to allow each 
student sufficient time to write or note their response to each question (or part of a 
question) and to read the next question before the related extract is played. 
● Recordings will be issued as digital sound files accessed via a secure download. 
● Each question is set in a context drawn from the topics. The assessment tasks will feature 
general content that is familiar and accessible to all students. 
● Students must answer all questions in both sections.  
● Foundation tier 
o 35 minutes is given for the assessment, including 5 minutes’ reading time. 
o The question paper contains 14 questions set in English. Question types comprise both 
multiple-response and short-answer open-response questions. The instructions to 
students are in English. 
● Higher tier 
o 45 minutes is given for the assessment, including 5 minutes’ reading time. 
o The question paper contains 10 questions set in English. Question types comprise both 
multiple-response and short-answer open-response questions. The instructions to 
students are in English. 
● Four of the questions will be common to both tiers. 
● For both tiers, there is no requirement for students to produce written responses 
in Japanese. 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and mark scheme for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Japanese Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
12 
Paper 2: Speaking in Japanese 
Content 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate and interact effectively through 
speaking in Japanese for different purposes. 
Students will need to: 
● convey information and narrate events coherently and confidently, using and adapting 
language for different purposes 
● speak spontaneously, responding to unpredictable questions, points of view or situations, 
sustaining communication by using rephrasing or repair strategies, as appropriate 
● use a range of vocabulary and grammatical structures accurately, including some more 
complex forms, with reference to past, present and future events 
● make creative and more complex use of the language, as appropriate, to express and 
justify their own thoughts and points of view 
● use accurate pronunciation and intonation in order to be understood by a native speaker, 
however they will be able to access the highest marks available for each task without a 
‘perfect’ command of Japanese. 
These are assessed through a series of three consecutive tasks. 
Task 1 – Role play 
The role play is an interaction requiring the student to ask and answer questions, to 
exchange information and to use different registers (see definition of registers beneath the 
Role play mark grid within the marking guidance section of the specification). The role play 
relates to either formal or familiar contexts, in turn inviting the student to use either formal 
or familiar language relevant to the scenario. Each role play stimulus card includes an 
instruction to the student on whether to use language appropriate for a formal or familiar 
context. 
All role plays are marked for communication only. 
The role plays are set and provided by Pearson at the time of assessment together with a 
sequencing grid and instructions. For an example, please see the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Japanese Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document – 
Paper 2: Speaking in Japanese, General instructions to the teacher section. 
Scenarios require an exchange of information. Some scenarios are transactional in nature. 
The scenarios are based on any of the topics from themes 1 to 4 (listed on page 9), i.e. not 
on the theme International and global dimension as this theme lends itself better to the 
picture-based task and the conversation. 
Task 2 – Picture-based task 
The assessment scenario is based on any of the topics (listed on page 9). The topic is 
allocated by Pearson at the time of assessment together with a sequencing grid and 
instructions. For an example, please see the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in 
Japanese Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document – Paper 2: Speaking in Japanese, 
General instructions to the teacher section.  
This assessment allows students to: 
● describe and narrate events 
● give information 
● express, justify and exchange opinions. 
Students are required to refer to past, present and future events in this assessment at both 
Foundation and Higher tiers, using different timeframes. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
13 
Task 3 – Conversation 
The conversation allows students to cover all of the requirements outlined in the Content 
section on page 12, including conveying information, giving points of view, developing and 
initiating conversation and discussion and producing extended sequences of speech. 
The conversation is based on any two themes (see Themes and topics) and is in two parts. 
For the first part of the conversation, the student selects one topic from one theme in 
advance of the assessment. The choice of topic must be agreed between the student and the 
teacher and must be selected no later than two weeks before the assessment takes place. 
This part of the conversation task starts with this first topic and then may move on to other 
topics within the same theme. 
The second part of the conversation must be on a different theme. This will be prescribed by 
Pearson through instructions on a sequencing grid. For an example please see the Pearson 
Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Japanese Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) 
document – Paper 2: Speaking in Japanese, General instructions to the teacher section. 
This part of the conversation may focus on one or more topics from within the selected 
theme (see page 9). 
Students are required to refer to past, present and future events in this assessment, using a 
range of tenses and timeframes. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
14 
Assessment information 
General information  
● First assessment: April/May 2019. 
● The entire assessment must be conducted in Japanese. 
● Students complete three tasks. 
o Task 1 – a role play based on one topic. This is allocated by Pearson at the time of 
assessment. 
o Task 2 – a task containing a picture and questions drawn from one topic. This is 
allocated by Pearson at the time of assessment. 
o Task 3 – conversation based on two themes. The first theme is based on the topic 
chosen by the student in advance of the assessment. The second theme is selected by 
the teacher from a choice of two themes allocated by Pearson. 
Each role play stimulus card includes an instruction to the student on whether to use 
language appropriate for a formal or familiar context. 
At the time of assessment, Pearson will issue a prescribed order per student for their role 
play, picture-based task and two themes for the second part of the conversation. The 
teacher does not choose the order of the cards. Pearson will provide instructions on 
sequencing and a sequencing grid. For an example please see the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Japanese Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document – 
Paper 2: Speaking in Japanese, General instructions to the teacher, section. 
This grid has been designed to help ensure that each student covers a broad range of 
themes from this specification. 
● Assessments are conducted by centres within a five-week assessment period in April and 
May in any single year. Dates for the assessment period will be confirmed in the UK 
Information Manual at the start of each academic year. The assessment period will not 
always be continuous or be the same period each year, for example it will need to 
accommodate the Easter break which changes each year. 
● The assessment materials provided by Pearson for all tasks may be accessed by the 
teacher no more than three working days before the prescribed five week assessment 
period. This is to enable the teacher to prepare for the assessment. The assessment 
materials in this pack must not be removed from the centre premises.   
● Assessments are conducted by teachers in one session within a prescribed assessment 
window and then submitted to Pearson for external marking. 
● Students are presented with instructions in English but must communicate entirely in 
German for the duration of the assessment. 
● Complete, unedited recordings of all assessments must be submitted to Pearson via the 
online Learner Work Transfer (LWT) portal. 
● Each question is set in a context drawn from the topics. The assessment tasks will feature 
general content that is familiar and accessible to all students. 
● Students must be permitted 12 minutes’ preparation time to consider the questions and 
stimulus cards for Tasks 1 and 2. 
● Students are assessed on the quality of responses rather than length of assessment, 
however the assessment times are different to reflect the demand of each tier. 
● All assessments are marked against assessment criteria, please see Marking Guidance for 
Paper 2. 
● Centres must have procedures in place to verify the identity of all students at the time of 
the assessment and confirm this on the Candidate speaking examination record form 
(CS2) (see Appendix 1). Centres are required to submit to Pearson one completed 
CS2 form for all students for each tier. 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted during the preparation time or during 
the assessment. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
15 
Foundation tier assessment time and marks 
● The total assessment for the three tasks is 7 to 9 minutes plus 12 minutes’ preparation 
time. 
● The assessment is worth 70 marks. 
● The assessment consists of the following three tasks, which must be conducted in the 
following order: 
o Task 1 – one role play recommended to last between one to one-and-a-half minutes for 
10 marks 
o Task 2 – one picture-based task recommended to last between two-and-a-half to three 
minutes for 24 marks 
o Task 3 – a conversation recommended to last between three-and-a-half to  
four-and-a-half minutes for 36 marks. 
Higher tier assessment time and marks 
● The total assessment for the three tasks is 10 to 12 minutes plus 12 minutes’ preparation 
time. 
● The assessment is worth 70 marks. 
● The assessment consists of the following three tasks, which must be conducted in the 
following order: 
o Task 1 – one role play recommended to last between two to two-and-a-half minutes for 
10 marks 
o Task 2 – one picture-based task recommended to last between three to  
three-and-a-half minutes for 24 marks 
o Task 3 – a conversation recommended to last between five to six minutes for 36 marks. 
Preparation time 
Students are allocated 12 minutes’ preparation time, under supervised conditions, 
immediately prior to the assessment for Tasks 1 and 2. The purpose is to consider the 
questions and stimulus for the role play and picture-based scenarios allocated. 
Students are permitted to make notes (up to a maximum of one side of A4 for both Tasks 1 
and 2) during this period and they can refer to them during the role play and picture-based 
assessment, but not during the conversation task. Students must return their notes to the 
teacher before commencing Task 3 (conversation). 
The notes should be for reference only and students must not read out whole, prepared 
sentences in answer to questions. 
Any notes made during the preparation time must be kept securely by the centre until the 
end of October in the year the assessment is completed, after which time they should be 
securely destroyed. 
Students cannot have access to a dictionary, or any other resource, during the preparation 
time. 
Task 1 – Role play 
Pearson will set and provide ten different sets of role plays for each tier. Each role play 
consists of two cards – one for the teacher and one for the student. 
Teacher cards 
The teacher cards contain instructions on how to conduct the role play and the exact 
questions to ask. 
Each role play opens with an introduction from the teacher who then asks the first question. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
16 
Candidate cards 
The candidate cards include prompts as a guide and highlight where the candidate needs to 
ask a question (indicated by the symbol ‘?’), and where an unpredictable question is posed 
to them by the teacher (indicated by the symbol ‘!’). 
Students have access to this during their preparation time to help in preparing for the 
assessment. 
For each candidate card, both the instructions and the task are in English. The context of the 
role play is provided in both sections. Candidates must read both sections fully to support 
understanding of each bullet point. 
At Foundation tier, the candidate cards contain five bullet points, eliciting five utterances. 
Students need to ask one question and respond to one unpredictable question. Students are 
required to speak only in the present tense or they may use a conditional sentence where it 
is more natural to do so. 
At Higher tier, the candidate cards contain five bullet points, eliciting five utterances. 
Students need to ask two questions and respond to one unpredictable question. For four of 
the prompts, students are required to speak in the present tense or they may use a 
conditional sentence if it is more natural to do so. They must respond to one question set in 
a past tense. 
Task 2 – Picture-based task 
Pearson will provide ten different sets of picture-based tasks for each tier. Each task consists 
of two cards – one for the teacher and one for the student. 
Teacher cards 
The teacher cards contain instructions on how to conduct this task and the five questions to 
ask the student. Teachers are allowed to repeat questions and use set prompts to enable 
students to give a developed response. They are not allowed to deviate from the set 
prompts. 
Each task opens with the teacher asking the first question, which is based on the picture. 
The first question is directly based on the picture; the remaining questions extend beyond 
the picture, but are based on the overall topic from which the picture is drawn, inviting an 
exchange of views or opinions. 
Candidate cards 
At Foundation tier, students are provided with a picture and five bullets in English to help 
in preparing for the five questions that will be asked during the assessment. Students are 
allowed to ask for questions to be repeated. 
Students have access to this during their preparation time. 
At Higher tier, students are provided with a picture and five bullets in English to help in 
preparing for the five questions that will be asked during the assessment. The final bullet is 
marked by the symbol ‘!’ to denote one unpredictable question. Students are allowed to ask 
for questions to be repeated. 
Students have access to this during their preparation time. 
Task 3 – Conversation 
The first part of the conversation opens with the topic chosen by the student. The student 
may choose to focus on any aspect(s) of the topic as each has a number of different 
features. For example, a student who has selected the topic What school is like may: 
● choose to focus on ‘school types’ and ‘rules and pressures’, or 
● choose to focus only on ‘rules and pressures’. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
17 
To enable them to make a confident start, the teacher should allow the student to state their 
chosen aspect(s) from their nominated topic and to talk about this aspect/these aspects for 
up to one minute. 
The teacher continues the conversation on the chosen topic and then may move on to other 
topics within the same theme, if necessary, to ensure that students use the recommended 
time for this task most effectively. 
The second part of the conversation is based on a different theme allocated by Pearson and 
covers any of the topics across that single theme. 
Teachers must ensure that an equal amount of time is allocated to both parts of the 
conversation. 
Throughout the conversation, in order to facilitate a genuine and spontaneous interaction, 
the nature of questions from the teacher should enable students to: 
● answer questions freely, in turn allowing them to produce extended sequences of speech 
● develop conversations and discussions 
● give and justify own thoughts and opinions 
● refer to past, present and future events. 
Administration and general information about the conduct of the 
speaking assessment 
Preparation time and notes for Tasks 1 and 2 only 
● The notes made during the preparation time should be a reference only, and students 
should not read out whole, prepared sentences. 
● The preparation time must be supervised. It can take place either in the examination 
room with the teacher or outside of the room with an invigilator. 
● Students are not permitted to write on the candidate cards. 
● Students must return their notes and candidate cards to the teacher at the end of the 
second task (picture-based task). 
● Any notes made during the preparation time must be kept securely by the centre until the 
end of October in the year the assessment is completed, after which time they should be 
securely destroyed. 
● Students cannot have access to a dictionary, or any other resource, during the preparation 
time. 
Sample assessment materials 
Sample candidate and teacher cards for the role-play and picture-based tasks and 
accompanying marking guidance and assessment criteria can be found in the Pearson 
Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Japanese Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) 
document. 
Marking guidance and assessment criteria are also provided in this document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
18 
Marking guidance for Paper 2: Speaking in Japanese 
This marking guidance is for the use of Pearson-appointed external examiners. The guidance 
has been included for teacher reference to aid understanding of how the assessment criteria 
will be applied. 
General guidance on using levels-based mark schemes 
Step 1 Decide on a band 
● The examiner will first of all consider the answer as a whole and then decide which descriptors 
most closely match the answer and place it in that band. The descriptors for each band 
indicate the different features that will be seen in the student’s answer for that band. 
● When assigning a band they will look at the overall quality of the answer and not focus 
disproportionately on small and specific parts of the answer where the student has not 
performed quite as well as the rest. If the answer covers different aspects of different 
bands of the mark scheme they will use a ‘best fit’ approach for defining the band and 
then use the variability of the response to help decide the mark within the band, for 
example if the response is predominantly band 5–8 with a small amount of band 9–12 
material, it would be placed in band 5–8 but be awarded a mark near the top of the band 
because of the band 9–12 content. 
Step 2 Decide on a mark 
● Once they have decided on a band they will then need to decide on a mark within the 
band. 
● They will decide on the mark to award based on the quality of the answer; they will award 
a mark towards the top or bottom of that band depending on how the student has 
evidenced each of the descriptor bullet points. 
● They will modify the mark based on how securely the trait descriptors are met at that band. 
● They will need to go back through the answer as they apply the mark scheme to clarify 
points and assure themselves that the band and the mark are appropriate. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
19 
Assessment criteria for the Foundation tier – Part 1 
Role play – Foundation tier (10 marks) 
For this task, students’ work is marked by Pearson using the following assessment criteria. 
The mark grid is applied once to each individual response to the prompts. There is a 
maximum of 2 marks for each of the five prompts on the role-play cards. 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable communication; highly ambiguous OR pronunciation prevents 
communication 
1 Partially clear/ambiguous OR partially appropriate within the context of the  
role play; pronunciation may affect clarity of communication 
2 Clearly communicated; appropriate within the context of the role play; 
unambiguous; pronunciation supports clear communication 
 
Exemplification of how to apply the role-play mark grid can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Japanese Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Additional guidance 
Appropriate: relevant response related to the prompt, uses appropriate register for 
the scenario. 
Familiar register includes language that students would use with friends and people of a 
similar age, such as endearments and familiar greetings and forms of address where 
appropriate. Examples of familiar features of language are those used in greetings（おはよ
う）, terms of address (ひろし君、あけみちゃん） and vocabulary（オッケーです）. 
Formal register includes language that students would use with adults, for example 
teachers, employers, customers, officials, in a formal context. It includes avoidance of slang, 
over-familiar language, exaggeration and endearments. It also includes the use of formal 
greetings and forms of address where appropriate, as well as using polite social conventions 
such as saying “please” when making requests. 
Partially clear/pronunciation may affect clarity of communication: makes speech 
difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is eventually understood)/forces the 
listener to strain to understand what is meant. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
20 
Assessment criteria for the Foundation tier – Part 2 
Picture-based task – Foundation tier (24 marks) 
There are two mark grids to be applied to this task: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
Picture-based task: communication and content – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–4 ● Limited response to set questions, likely to consist of single-word answers. 
● Minimal success in adapting language to describe, narrate, inform using 
individual words/phrases; sometimes unable to respond. 
● A straightforward opinion may be expressed but without justification. 
● Pronunciation and intonation are inconsistently intelligible with inaccuracies that 
lead to frequent impairment in communication. 
5–8 ● Responds briefly to set questions, there is much hesitation and continuous 
prompting needed. 
● Some limited success in adapting language, to describe, narrate and inform in 
response to the set questions; may occasionally be unable to respond. 
● Straightforward, brief opinions are given but without justification. 
● Pronunciation and intonation are mostly intelligible but inaccuracies lead to some 
impairment in communication. 
9–12 ● Responds to set questions with some development, some hesitation and some 
prompting necessary. 
● Some effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform in 
response to the set questions. 
● Expresses opinions with occasional, brief justification. 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, occasionally inaccuracies affect 
clarity of communication. 
13–16 ● Responds to set questions with frequently developed responses, occasional 
hesitation, occasional prompting necessary. 
● Frequently effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform in 
response to the set questions. 
● Expresses opinions and gives justification with some development. 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, inaccuracies are minimal and have 
no impact on clarity of communication. 
Additional guidance 
Adaptation of/adapting language to describe, narrate and inform: adapts language to 
achieve different purposes in the language; students may adapt language more effectively 
for one purpose than another, for example they may use language effectively to inform but 
less effectively to narrate. 
Straightforward opinions and justification are those that form part of a 
minimum/standard/predictable response. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
21 
Picture-based task: linguistic knowledge and accuracy – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Limited accuracy when responding to set questions; minimal success when 
referring to past, present and future events. 
● Individual words and phrases are coherent when responding to set questions; 
high frequency of errors prevent meaning being conveyed throughout most of 
the conversation. 
3–4 ● Occasionally accurate grammatical structures when responding to set questions; 
occasional success when referring to present events, limited success when 
referring to future or past events, much ambiguity. 
● Some coherent phrases and sentences within responses to set questions; regular 
errors prevent coherent overall speech and frequently prevent meaning being 
conveyed. 
5–6 ● Some accurate grammatical structures, including some successful references to 
past, present and future events in response to the set questions, some 
ambiguity. 
● Responses are partially coherent, errors occur that sometimes hinder clarity of 
communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed. 
7–8 ● Generally accurate grammatical structures, generally successful references to 
past, present and future events in response to the set questions, occasional 
ambiguity. 
● Responses are generally coherent although errors occur that occasionally hinder 
clarity of communication. 
Additional guidance 
Errors: the mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have 
on clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example using the particle wa (は) instead of ga (が) 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the listener from the content of what is being said. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make speech difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force listeners to strain to understand what is meant, 
for example inappropriate tense formation, such as Ashita ikimashita (あした行きました) 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the listener from the content of what is 
being said. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, for example missing subject, incorrect 
word order 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
22 
Assessment criteria for the Foundation tier – Part 3 
Conversation – Foundation tier (36 marks) 
There are three mark grids to be applied to this task: 
● communication and content 
● interaction and spontaneity 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
Conversation: communication and content – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Communicates limited information relevant to the topics and questions. 
● Uses language to express limited, straightforward ideas and thoughts; occasional 
straightforward opinion expressed without justification. 
● Uses limited vocabulary and expression with much repetition; communication is 
disjointed and frequently breaks down because of restricted range of vocabulary. 
● Pronunciation and intonation are inconsistently intelligible with inaccuracies that 
lead to frequent impairment in communication. 
4–6 ● Communicates brief information relevant to the topics and questions. 
● Uses language to produce straightforward ideas and thoughts; expresses 
straightforward opinions with limited justification. 
● Uses repetitive vocabulary and expression; communication is often constrained 
and occasionally breaks down because of restricted range of vocabulary. 
● Pronunciation and intonation are mostly intelligible but inaccuracies lead to some 
impairment in communication. 
7–9 ● Communicates information relevant to the topics and questions, with occasionally 
extended sequences of speech. 
● Uses language to produce straightforward ideas, thoughts and opinions with 
occasional justification. 
● Uses a limited variety of mainly straightforward vocabulary, communication for 
some purposes is constrained because of restricted range of vocabulary. 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, occasionally inaccuracies affect 
clarity of communication. 
10–12 ● Communicates information relevant to the topics and questions, with some 
extended sequences of speech. 
● Occasionally uses language creatively to express some individual thoughts, ideas 
and opinions, some of which are justified. 
● Occasional variety in use of vocabulary, including some examples of uncommon 
language with some variation of expression, fulfils most purposes. 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, inaccuracies are minimal and have 
no impact on clarity of communication. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
23 
Additional guidance 
Uses language creatively – examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● manipulating language, including high-frequency and simple language, to respond to 
unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to maintain 
interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, to 
convince. 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view which go 
beyond the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
Straightforward ideas, thoughts and opinions are those that give the minimum/standard/ 
predictable response. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
24 
Conversation: interaction and spontaneity – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Basic exchange where only some questions are responded to; answers rely on 
rehearsed language that is frequently irrelevant to the question. 
● Short, undeveloped responses, many incomplete. 
● Isolated examples of ability to sustain communication, pace is slow and hesitant 
throughout. 
4–6 ● Responds with limited spontaneity; answers rely on rehearsed language that is 
occasionally irrelevant to the question. 
● Short responses, any development depends on teacher prompting. 
● Limited ability to sustain communication, pace is mostly slow and hesitant. 
7–9 ● Occasionally able to respond spontaneously with some examples of natural 
interaction although often stilted. 
● Occasionally able to initiate and develop responses independently but regular 
prompting needed. 
● Occasionally able to sustain communication, using rephrasing/repair strategies if 
necessary to continue the flow; frequent hesitation. 
10–12 ● Responds spontaneously to some questions, interacting naturally for parts of the 
conversation. 
● Sometimes able to initiate and develop the conversation independently, some 
prompting needed. 
● Sometimes able to sustain communication, using rephrasing/repair strategies if 
necessary to continue the flow; some hesitation. 
Additional guidance 
Rephrasing/repair strategies: strategies that aid communication and allow the 
conversation to be sustained, for example rephrasing, circumlocution, adjusting the 
message, asking for clarification/repetition, repair strategies such as self-correction; these 
strategies enable students to deliver the message when exact vocabulary or expressions are 
not known. 
Responds/responding spontaneously: gives a relevant, impromptu response based on 
what they have heard. 
Rehearsed language: language learned by heart, which may not give a relevant, 
impromptu response based on what has been heard (not spontaneous). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
25 
Conversation: linguistic knowledge and accuracy – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Uses straightforward, individual words/phrases; limited evidence of language 
manipulation. 
● Limited accuracy, minimal success when referring to past, present and future 
events. 
● Individual words and phrases are coherent; high frequency of errors prevent 
meaning being conveyed throughout much of the conversation. 
4–6 ● Uses straightforward, repetitive, grammatical structures. 
● Occasionally accurate grammatical structures, occasional success when referring 
to present events, limited success when referring to future or past events, much 
ambiguity. 
● Some coherent phrases and sentences; regular errors prevent coherent overall 
speech and frequently prevent meaning being conveyed. 
7–9 ● Manipulates a limited variety of mainly straightforward grammatical structures, 
minimal use of complex structures. 
● Some accurate grammatical structures, some successful references to past, 
present and future events, some ambiguity. 
● Sequences of coherent speech although errors occur that often hinder clarity of 
communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed. 
10–12 ● Manipulates grammatical structures with occasional variation, complex structures 
used but repetitive. 
● Generally accurate grammatical structures, generally successful references to 
past, present and future events. 
● Generally coherent speech although errors occur that sometimes hinder clarity of 
communication. 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be:  
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language. 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: the mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on 
clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example using the particle wa (は) instead of ga (が) 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the listener from the content of what is being said. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
26 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make speech difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force listeners to strain to understand what is meant, 
for example inappropriate tense formation, such as Ashita ikimashita (あした行きました) 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the listener from the content of what 
is being said. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, for example missing subject, incorrect 
word order 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
27 
Assessment criteria for the Higher tier – Part 1 
Role play – Higher tier (10 marks) 
For this task, students’ work is marked by Pearson using the following assessment criteria. 
The mark grid is applied once to each individual response to the prompts. There is a 
maximum of 2 marks for each of the five prompts on the role-play cards. 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable communication; highly ambiguous OR pronunciation prevents 
communication 
1 Partially clear/ambiguous OR partially appropriate within the context of the role 
play; pronunciation may affect clarity of communication 
2 Clearly communicated; appropriate within the context of the role play; 
unambiguous; pronunciation supports clear communication 
 
Exemplification of how to apply the role-play mark grid can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Additional guidance 
Appropriate: relevant response related to the prompt, uses appropriate register for the 
scenario. 
Familiar register includes language that students would use with friends and people of a 
similar age, such as endearments and familiar greetings and forms of address where 
appropriate. Examples of familiar features of language are those used in greetings（おはよ
う）, terms of address (ひろし君、あけみちゃん） and vocabulary（オッケーです）. 
Formal register includes language that students would use with adults, for example 
teachers, employers, customers, officials, in a formal context. It includes avoidance of slang, 
over-familiar language, exaggeration and endearments. It also includes the use of formal 
greetings and forms of address where appropriate, as well as using polite social conventions 
such as saying “please” when making requests. 
Partially clear/pronunciation may affect clarity of communication: makes speech 
difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is eventually understood)/forces the 
listener to strain to understand what is meant. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
28 
Assessment criteria for the Higher tier – Part 2 
Picture-based task – Higher tier (24 marks) 
There are two mark grids to be applied to this task: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
Picture-based task: communication and content – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–4 ● Responds to set questions with some development, some hesitation and some 
prompting necessary. 
● Some effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform in 
response to the set questions. 
● Expresses opinions with occasional, brief justification. 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, occasionally inaccuracies affect 
clarity of communication. 
5–8 ● Responds to set questions with frequently developed responses, occasional 
hesitation, occasional prompting necessary. 
● Frequently effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform in 
response to the set questions. 
● Expresses opinions and gives justification with some development. 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, inaccuracies are minimal and have 
no impact on clarity of communication. 
9–12 ● Responds to set questions with mostly developed and fluent responses, minimal 
hesitation and minimal prompting necessary. 
● Predominantly effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform, 
in response to the set questions. 
● Expresses opinions effectively and gives justification which is mostly developed. 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible and predominantly accurate. 
13–16 ● Responds to the set questions with consistently fluent and developed 
responses. 
● Consistently effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform, 
in response to the set questions. 
● Expresses opinions with ease and gives fully-developed justification. 
● Pronunciation and intonation are consistently accurate and intelligible. 
Additional guidance 
Adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform: adapts language to achieve 
different purposes in the language; students may adapt language more effectively for one 
purpose than another, for example they may use language effectively to inform but less 
effectively to narrate. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
29 
Picture-based task: linguistic knowledge and accuracy – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Some accurate grammatical structures, including some successful references to 
past, present and future events in response to the set questions, some 
ambiguity. 
● Responses are partially coherent, errors occur that sometimes hinder clarity of 
communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed. 
3–4 ● Generally accurate grammatical structures, generally successful references to 
past, present and future events in response to the 
set questions, occasional ambiguity. 
● Responses are generally coherent although errors occur that occasionally hinder 
clarity of communication. 
5–6 ● Predominantly accurate grammatical structures, mostly successful references to 
past, present and future events in response to the set questions. 
● Responses are predominantly coherent, errors occur but they rarely hinder 
clarity of communication. 
7–8 ● Consistently accurate grammatical structures, successful references to past, 
present and future events in response to the set questions. 
● Responses are coherent, any errors do not hinder the clarity of the 
communication. 
Additional guidance 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free speech in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example using the particle wa (は) instead of ga (が) 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the listener from the content of what is being said. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make speech difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force listeners to strain to understand what is meant, 
for example inappropriate tense formation, such as Ashita ikimashita (あした行きました) 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they distract the listener from the content of what 
is being said. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message  
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, for example missing subject, incorrect 
word order 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
30 
Assessment criteria for the Higher tier – Part 3 
Conversation – Higher tier (36 marks) 
There are three mark grids to be applied to this task: 
● communication and content 
● interaction and spontaneity 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
Conversation: communication and content – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Communicates information relevant to the topics and questions, with 
occasionally extended sequences of speech. 
● Uses language to produce straightforward ideas, thoughts and opinions with 
occasional justification. 
● Uses a limited variety of mainly straightforward vocabulary, communication for 
some purposes is constrained because of restricted range of vocabulary. 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, occasionally inaccuracies affect 
clarity of communication. 
4–6 ● Communicates information relevant to the topics and questions, with some 
extended sequences of speech. 
● Occasionally uses language creatively to express some individual thoughts, 
ideas and opinions, some of which are justified. 
● Occasional variety in use of vocabulary, including some examples of uncommon 
language with some variation of expression, fulfils most purposes. 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, inaccuracies are minimal and have 
no impact on clarity of communication. 
7–9 ● Communicates detailed information relevant to the topics and questions, usually 
with extended sequences of speech. 
● Frequently uses language creatively to express and justify a variety of 
individual thoughts, ideas and opinions. 
● Uses a variety of vocabulary, including frequent use of uncommon language, to 
regularly vary expression for different purposes. 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible and predominantly accurate. 
10–12 ● Communicates detailed information relevant to the topics and questions, 
consistently extended sequences of speech. 
● Consistently uses language creatively to express and justify a wide variety of 
individual thoughts, ideas and opinions. 
● Consistently uses a wide variety of vocabulary, including uncommon language, 
to consistently vary expression for different purposes. 
● Pronunciation and intonation are consistently accurate and intelligible. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
31 
Additional guidance 
Uses language creatively: examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● manipulating language, including high-frequency and simple language, to respond to 
unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to maintain 
interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, to 
convince. 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view that go beyond 
the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
Straightforward ideas, thoughts and opinions are those that give the minimum/standard/ 
predictable response. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
32 
Conversation: interaction and spontaneity – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Occasionally able to respond spontaneously with some examples of natural 
interaction although often stilted. 
● Occasionally able to initiate and develop responses independently but regular 
prompting needed. 
● Occasionally able to sustain communication, using rephrasing/repair strategies if 
necessary to continue the flow; frequent hesitation. 
4–6 ● Responds spontaneously to some questions, interacting naturally for parts of the 
conversation. 
● Sometimes able to initiate and develop the conversation independently, some 
prompting needed. 
● Sometimes able to sustain communication, using rephrasing/repair strategies if 
necessary to continue the flow; some hesitation. 
7–9 ● Responds to most questions spontaneously, resulting in mostly natural 
interaction. 
● Mostly able to initiate and develop the conversation independently. 
● Able to sustain communication throughout most of the conversation, using 
rephrasing/repair strategies if necessary to continue the flow, occasional 
hesitation. 
10–12 ● Responds spontaneously and with ease to questions, resulting in natural 
interaction. 
● Consistently able to initiate and develop the conversation independently. 
● Able to sustain communication throughout, using rephrasing/repair strategies if 
necessary to continue the flow. 
Additional guidance 
Respond(s) spontaneously: gives a relevant, impromptu response based on what they 
have heard. 
Rephrasing/repair strategies are strategies that aid communication and allow the 
conversation to be sustained, for example rephrasing, circumlocution, adjusting the 
message, asking for clarification/repetition, repair strategies such as self-correction; these 
strategies enable students to deliver the message when exact vocabulary or expressions are 
not known. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
33 
Conversation: linguistic knowledge and accuracy – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Manipulates a limited variety of mainly straightforward grammatical structures, 
minimal use of complex structures. 
● Some accurate grammatical structures, some successful references to past, 
present and future events, some ambiguity. 
● Sequences of coherent speech although errors occur that often hinder clarity of 
communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed. 
4–6 ● Manipulates grammatical structures with occasional variation, complex structures 
used but repetitive. 
● Generally accurate grammatical structures, generally successful references to 
past, present and future events. 
● Generally coherent speech although errors occur that sometimes hinder clarity of 
communication. 
7–9 ● Manipulates a variety of grammatical structures, some variety of complex 
structures. 
● Predominantly accurate grammatical structures, mostly successful references to 
past, present and future events. 
● Predominantly coherent speech; errors occur but they rarely hinder clarity of 
communication. 
10–12 ● Manipulates a wide variety of grammatical structures, frequent use of complex 
structures. 
● Consistently accurate grammatical structures, consistently successful references 
to past, present and future events. 
● Fully coherent speech; any errors do not hinder the clarity of the communication. 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● all grammar and structures included in the grammar list that are specific to Higher tier 
GCSE 
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free speech in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example using the particle wa (は) instead of ga (が) 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the listener from the content of what is being said. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
34 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make speech difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force listeners to strain to understand what is meant, 
for example inappropriate tense formation, such as Ashita ikimashita (あした行きました) 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the listener from the content of what is 
being said. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message  
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, for example missing subject, incorrect 
word order 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
35 
Paper 3: Reading and understanding in Japanese 
Content 
Students are assessed on their understanding of written Japanese across a range of different 
types of texts. 
Students need to: 
● identify the overall message, key points, details and opinions in texts 
● deduce meaning from a variety of written texts 
● recognise the relationship between past, present and future events 
● understand texts, organise and present relevant details, and, where appropriate, draw 
inferences in context and recognise implicit meaning 
● recognise and respond to key information, important themes and ideas in more extended 
written text, including authentic sources, adapted and abridged as appropriate, by being 
able to extract information and answer questions. 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes (see Themes and 
topics). 
Texts for individual questions within the assessment use high-frequency language and vary 
in length, including both short and longer written passages. Texts include authentic sources 
that introduce more complex language and unfamiliar materials.  
The range of text types include: 
● advertisements, emails, letters, articles and literary texts 
● a short passage to be translated from Japanese into English. 
Literary texts consist of short extracts from texts that may have been adapted and abridged 
from authentic sources to be appropriate to this level – from letters, short stories, novels or 
plays to contemporary and historical sources. Students are also expected to translate a short 
passage of written Japanese into English to demonstrate an ability to transfer meaning 
accurately into English. 
Scenarios in the texts are set either at home or, more frequently, in a Japanese-speaking 
country, allowing students to develop appropriate cultural awareness and understanding. 
To prepare students adequately for this assessment, teachers should present and exploit a 
range of vocabulary relevant to each theme listed, building on the Key Stage 3 Programme 
of Study, where appropriate. 
Students should be presented with Japanese language in a range of styles and in a variety of 
different contexts, as appropriate to their age and level of understanding. Students should 
also be presented with different fonts and formats, for example short, printed messages, 
articles and email messages. The amount of kanji used in the question papers increases as 
the demand of the questions increases. The initial questions of the Foundation tier question 
paper only have hiragana and katakana in their texts.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
36 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2019. 
● The assessment time is: 
o Foundation tier – 50 minutes in length 
o Higher tier – 1 hour 5 minutes in length. 
● The assessment is out of 50 marks. 
● The assessment consists of 10 questions. 
● Students must answer all questions from each of the three sections. 
● Students are required to respond to questions based on passages of text from a range of 
sources. Each question is set in a context drawn from the themes. 
● Section A has nine questions set in English. Question types comprise both multiple-
response and short-answer open response questions. The instructions to students are in 
English. 
● Section B contains one translation passage from Japanese into English. The instructions to 
students are in English. 
● Four of the questions are common to both tiers. 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and mark scheme for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Japanese Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
37 
Paper 4: Writing in Japanese 
Content 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate effectively through writing in 
Japanese. 
Students need to:  
● communicate effectively in writing for a variety of purposes across a range of specified 
contexts  
● write short texts, using simple sentences and language familiar to students accurately to 
convey meaning and exchange information 
● produce clear and coherent text of extended length to present facts and express ideas and 
opinions appropriately for different purposes and in different settings 
● make accurate use of a variety of vocabulary and grammatical structures, including some 
more complex forms, to describe and narrate with reference to past, present and future 
events 
● manipulate the language, using and adapting a variety of structures and vocabulary with 
increasing accuracy and fluency for new purposes, including using appropriate style and 
register 
● make independent, creative and more complex use of the language, as appropriate, to 
note down key points, express and justify individual thoughts and points of view, in order 
to interest, inform or convince 
● translate sentences and short texts from English into the assessed language to convey key 
messages accurately and to apply grammatical knowledge of language and structures in 
context. 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2019. 
● The assessment is out of 60 marks. 
● Each question is set in a context drawn from the themes and topics. The assessment tasks 
feature general content that is familiar and accessible to all students. 
● Students are required to produce responses of varying lengths and types to express facts, 
ideas and opinions in Japanese. 
● The length of each response required and complexity of language increases across the 
paper. Recommended character counts are specified for each question. Students will not 
be penalised for writing more or fewer characters than recommended in the character 
count or for going beyond the mandatory bullets. 
● One question is a translation of a short passage from English into Japanese. 
● All assessments are marked against assessment criteria, please see Marking guidance for 
Paper 4: Writing in Japanese. 
● The instructions to students are in English. 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
38 
● Foundation tier 
o The assessment time is 1 hour and 20 minutes in length. 
o The paper consists of three open questions and one translation from English into 
Japanese. 
o Students must answer all questions. 
o Question 1 assesses students on their ability to write to describe and to express 
opinions. 
o Question 2 has two options from which students have to select one. This question 
assesses students on their ability to note down key points and convey information. 
Students must use the formal register, please see the definition in Marking guidance for 
Paper 4: Writing in Japanese. 
o Question 3 has two options from which students have to select one. This question 
assesses students on their ability to convey information, narrate, express opinions, 
interest, and convince the reader about a certain point. Students must use the familiar 
register, please see the definition in Marking guidance for Paper 4: Writing in Japanese. 
This question is common to the Higher tier. 
o Question 4 is the translation question. Students are required to translate five sentences 
from English to Japanese. The sentences are ordered by increasing level of difficulty. 
● Higher tier 
o The assessment time is 1 hour and 25 minutes in length. 
o The paper consists of two questions and one translation from English into Japanese. 
o Students must answer all questions. 
o Question 1 has two options from which students have to select one. This question 
assesses students on their ability to convey information, narrate, express opinions, 
interest, and convince the reader about a certain point. Students must use the familiar 
register, please see the definition in Marking guidance for Paper 4: Writing in Japanese. 
This question is common to the Foundation tier. 
o Question 2 has two options from which students have to select one. This question 
assesses students on their ability to convey information, narrate, express and justify 
ideas and opinions, and interest or convince the reader. Students must use the formal 
register, please see the definition in Marking guidance for Paper 4: Writing in Japanese. 
o Question 3 is the translation question. Students are required to translate a short 
paragraph from English into Japanese. The individual sentences are ordered by 
increasing level of difficulty. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample question paper and accompanying marking guidance and assessment criteria can 
be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Japanese Sample Assessment 
Materials (SAMs) document. 
Marking guidance and assessment criteria are also provided in this document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
39 
Marking guidance for Paper 4: Writing in Japanese 
This marking guidance is for the use of Pearson-appointed external examiners. The guidance 
has been included for teacher reference to aid understanding of how the assessment criteria 
will be applied. 
General guidance on using levels-based mark schemes 
Step 1 Decide on a band 
● The examiner will first of all consider the answer as a whole and then decide which descriptors 
most closely match the answer and place it in that band. The descriptors for each band 
indicate the different features that will be seen in the student’s answer for that band. 
● When assigning a band they will look at the overall quality of the answer and not focus 
disproportionately on small and specific parts of the answer where the student has not 
performed quite as well as the rest. If the answer covers different aspects of different 
bands of the mark scheme they will use a ‘best fit’ approach for defining the band and 
then use the variability of the response to help decide the mark within the band, for 
example if the response is predominantly band 5–8 with a small amount of band 9–12 
material, it would be placed in band 5–8 but be awarded a mark near the top of the band 
because of the band 9–12 content. 
Step 2 Decide on a mark 
● Once they have decided on a band they will then need to decide on a mark within the 
band. 
● They will decide on the mark to award based on the quality of the answer; they will award 
a mark towards the top or bottom of that band depending on how the student has 
evidenced each of the descriptor bullet points. 
● They will modify the mark based on how securely the trait descriptors are met at that band. 
● They will need to go back through the answer as they apply the mark scheme to clarify 
points and assure themselves that the band and the mark are appropriate. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
40 
Assessment criteria for the Foundation tier 
Question 1 – Foundation tier (12 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria given in two 
mark grids: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
The student is expected to produce 25–50 characters for this task. The number of characters 
is approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer characters than 
recommended in the character count. All work produced by the student must be marked. 
Any work in romaji will not be credited. 
Question 1: communication and content mark grid – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Some relevant, basic information without development 
● Uses language to inform, give short descriptions and express opinions with 
limited success 
● Uses limited selection of common vocabulary and expression with frequent 
repetition; written in hiragana 
3–4 ● Mostly relevant information, minimal extra detail 
● Uses language to give short descriptions, simple information and opinions with 
variable success 
● Uses small selection of common vocabulary and expression with some 
repetition; written in hiragana 
5–6 ● Relevant information with occasional extra detail 
● Uses language to give short descriptions, simple information and opinions with 
some success 
● Uses small selection of common vocabulary and expression with little repetition; 
written in hiragana 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
41 
Question 1: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Produces simple, short sentences in isolation 
● Limited accurate application of a small selection of straightforward grammatical 
structures, limited success in referring to present events; frequently errors 
prevent meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Produces simple, short sentences with little linking 
● Inconsistently accurate application of a small selection of straightforward 
grammatical structures, inconsistently successful reference to present events; 
often errors occur that hinder clarity of communication and occasionally 
prevent meaning 
5–6 ● Produces simple sentences with some linking 
● Accurate application of a small selection of straightforward grammatical 
structures, refers successfully to present events as appropriate to the task; 
occasionally errors occur that hinder clarity of communication 
Additional guidance 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: the mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on 
coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example using the particle 'wa は' instead of 'ga が'. 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing 
● errors in formation of kana and kanji, for example a ろthat looks more like the number 3 
than ろ. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, such as 'Ashita ikimashita  あした 行
きました。' 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing 
● kanji or kana that are misformed to the extent that they force readers to re-read, for 
example an お with a missing dot written instead of an あ. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action 
● incorrect kanji use, for example きのういきま下 or 工園 written instead of 公園 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
42 
Question 2 – Foundation tier (16 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria given in two 
mark grids: 
● communication and content  
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
This question requires students to write in a formal style/register (see Additional guidance). 
The student is expected to produce 50–80 characters for this task. The number of characters 
is approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer characters than 
recommended in the character count. All work produced by the student must be marked. 
Any work in romaji will not be credited. 
Question 2: communication and content mark grid – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Limited information given likely to consist of single words and phrases 
● Limited ability to use language to present simple facts, inform and note down 
key points; expression is frequently constrained and communication often 
breaks down 
● Repetitive use of a limited selection of common words and phrases; written in 
hiragana and katakana 
● Knowledge of register and style is rarely evident because of restricted use of 
vocabulary and expression 
3–4 ● Some brief information given, basic points made without development 
● Occasional success in using language to present simple facts, information and to 
note down key points but expression is sometimes constrained and 
communication occasionally breaks down 
● Limited use of common, vocabulary and expression with 
frequent repetition; written in hiragana and katakana 
● Occasional appropriate use of register and style 
5–6 ● Some relevant information given appropriate to the task, basic points made with 
little development 
● Uses language with some success, to present simple facts, information and to 
note down key points, expression is occasionally constrained 
● Uses a small range of common vocabulary and expression with some repetition; 
written in hiragana and katakana 
● Mostly appropriate use of register and style, mostly sustained 
7–8 ● Relevant information given appropriate to the task, basic points made with 
some development  
● Uses language mostly with success, to present simple facts, information and to 
note down key points using simple ideas  
● Uses common vocabulary and expression with little repetition; written in 
hiragana and katakana with minimal kanji 
● Appropriate use of register and style sustained 
Additional guidance 
Register and style definition: Formal register and style – this includes language that 
students would use with adults, for example teachers, employers, customers, officials, in a 
formal context. It includes avoidance of slang, over-familiar language, exaggeration, 
endearments, writing in a conversational style, inappropriate abbreviations used in social 
media chat. It also includes using polite social conventions such as writing “please” when 
making requests. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
43 
Question 2: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Repetitive use of minimal selection of straightforward grammatical structures 
● Produces individual words/set phrases 
● Limited accuracy in grammatical structures used, limited success in referring to 
present and future events; regular errors prevent meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Use of a restricted range of straightforward grammatical structures, 
frequent repetition 
● Produces simple, short sentences, which are not linked 
● Occasional accuracy in grammatical structures used, occasional success in 
referring to present and future events; sometimes errors prevent meaning being 
conveyed 
5–6 ● Uses straightforward grammatical structures, some repetition 
● Produces simple, short sentences; minimal linking 
● Some accurate use of straightforward grammatical structures, some success in 
referring to present and future events to meet the requirements of the task; 
occasionally errors prevent meaning being conveyed 
7–8 ● Uses straightforward grammatical structures, occasional repetition 
● Produces predominantly simple sentences occasionally linked together 
● Mostly accurate use of straightforward grammatical structures, mostly successful 
references to present and future events to meet the requirements of the task; 
occasionally errors hinder clarity of communication 
Additional guidance 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: the mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have 
on coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example using the particle 'wa は' instead of 'ga が'. 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing 
● errors in formation of kana and kanji, for example a ろthat looks more like the number 3 
than ろ. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, such as 'Ashita ikimashita  あした 行
きました。' 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing 
● kanji or kana that are misformed to the extent that they force readers to re-read, for 
example an お with a missing dot written instead of an あ. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
44 
 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action 
● incorrect kanji use, for example きのういきま下 or 工園 written instead of 公園 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
45 
Question 3 – Foundation tier (20 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria given in two 
mark grids: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
This question contains four bullet points that form part of the task. Failure to cover all four 
bullet points will impact on the marks that can be awarded against the requirements of the 
two mark grids for this question. There is no requirement for even coverage of the bullet 
points in any band. However, in order to access marks in the top band, students must refer 
to all bullet points and meet the other assessment criteria in the top band. 
This question requires students to write in a familiar style/register (see Additional guidance). 
The student is expected to produce 160–180 characters for this task. The number of 
characters is approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer 
characters than recommended in the character count. All work produced by the student must 
be marked. Any work in romaji will not be credited. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
46 
Question 3: communication and content mark grid – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Communicates brief information relevant to the task with little development 
● Uses straightforward language to narrate, inform and interest; straightforward 
personal opinions are given with limited justification 
● Expresses straightforward thoughts and ideas; uses common vocabulary and 
expression with repetition, limited kanji 
● Variable use of appropriate register and style 
4–6 ● Communicates information relevant to the task, with development of the 
occasional key point and idea 
● Some effective adaptation of language to narrate and inform; attempts are 
made to interest and give convincing personal opinions that are occasionally 
successful 
● Expresses mainly straightforward thoughts and ideas with the occasional 
individual thought/idea; some different examples of common vocabulary and 
expression, including some different examples of common kanji 
● Appropriate use of register and style is evident but with inconsistencies 
7–9 ● Communicates information relevant to the task, with development of some key 
points and ideas 
● Mostly effective adaptation of language to narrate and inform, some effective 
language to interest and give convincing personal opinions 
● Some examples of creative language use to express individual thoughts and 
ideas; a variety of mainly common vocabulary and expression, including a 
variety of mainly common kanji 
● Appropriate use of register and style is evident but with occasional 
inconsistency 
10–12 ● Communicates information relevant to the task with some expansion of key 
points and ideas 
● Effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest and give convincing 
personal opinions 
● Frequent examples of creative language use to express individual thoughts and 
ideas; a variety of vocabulary and expression, including a variety of kanji 
● Appropriate use of register and style throughout, with minimal inconsistency 
Additional guidance 
Creative language use – examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● using language, including common, high-frequency and simple language, to respond to 
uncommon/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to maintain 
interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, to 
convince. 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view which go 
beyond the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
47 
 
Register and style definition: familiar register and style – this includes language that 
students would use with friends and people of a similar age, such as endearments and 
informal greetings and forms of address where appropriate. 
Adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest and give convincing opinions: 
adapts language to achieve different purposes in the language; students may adapt language 
more effectively for one purpose than another, for example they may use language 
effectively to narrate but less effectively to interest or give a convincing opinion. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
48 
Question 3: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Uses straightforward grammatical structures, some repetition 
● Produces brief, simple sentences, limited linking of sentences 
● Variable accuracy with language and structures, variable success when referring 
to past, present and future events, regular ambiguity; often errors prevent 
meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Uses mostly straightforward grammatical structures, occasional repetition 
● Produces occasionally extended sentences linked with common, straightforward 
conjunctions 
● Some accurate language and structures, including some successful references to 
past, present and future events, some ambiguity; often errors occur that hinder 
clarity of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
5–6 ● Different examples of straightforward grammatical structures are evident 
● Produces some extended sentences that are linked with common, straightforward 
conjunctions 
● Frequently accurate language and structures, including mostly successful 
references to past, present and future events, occasional ambiguity; sometimes 
errors occur that hinder clarity of communication 
7–8 ● Some variation of grammatical structures, occasional complex structure 
● Produces frequently extended sentences, well linked together 
● Generally accurate language and structures, including successful references to 
past, present and future events; occasionally errors occur that hinder clarity of 
communication 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language. 
Straightforward grammatical structures is considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example using the particle 'wa は' instead of 'ga が'. 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing 
● errors in formation of kana and kanji, for example a ろthat looks more like the number 3 
than ろ. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
49 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, such as 'Ashita ikimashita  あした 行
きました。' 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing 
● kanji or kana that are misformed to the extent that they force readers to re-read, for 
example an お with a missing dot written instead of an あ. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action 
● incorrect kanji use, for example きのういきま下 or 工園 written instead of 公園 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
50 
Question 4 – Foundation tier (12 marks) 
Translation mark grids and example responses 
Mark grid for sentences (a), (b) and (c), which are worth 2 marks each. The mark 
grid will be applied to each individual sentence. Any work in romaji will not be 
credited. 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1 ● Meaning partially communicated with errors that hinder clarity or prevent meaning 
being conveyed 
2 ● Meaning fully communicated with occasional errors that do not hinder clarity 
 
Mark grid for sentences (d) and (e), which are worth 3 marks each. The mark grid 
will be applied to each individual sentence. Any work in romaji will not be credited. 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1 ● Some words are communicated but the overall meaning of the sentence is not 
communicated 
2 ● The meaning of the sentence is partially communicated 
● Linguistic structures and vocabulary are mostly accurate with some errors that 
hinder clarity or prevent meaning being conveyed 
3 ● The meaning of the sentence is fully communicated 
● Linguistic structures and vocabulary are accurate with only occasional errors that 
do not hinder clarity 
Additional guidance 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example using the particle 'wa は' instead of 'ga が'. 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing 
● errors in formation of kana and kanji, for example a ろthat looks more like the number 3 
than ろ. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, such as 'Ashita ikimashita  あした 行
きました。' 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing 
● kanji or kana that are misformed to the extent that they force readers to re-read, for 
example an お with a missing dot written instead of an あ. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
51 
 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action 
● incorrect kanji use, for example きのういきま下 or 工園 written instead of 公園 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
52 
Assessment criteria for the Higher tier 
Question 1 – Higher tier (20 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria given in two 
mark grids: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
This question contains four bullet points that form part of the task. Failure to cover all four 
bullet points will impact on the marks that can be awarded against the requirements of the 
two mark grids for this question. There is no requirement for even coverage of the bullet 
points in any band. However, in order to access marks in the top band, students must refer 
to all bullet points and meet the other assessment criteria in the top band. 
This question requires students to write in a familiar style/register (see Additional guidance). 
The student is expected to produce 160–180 characters for this task. The number of 
characters is approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer 
characters than recommended in the character count. All work produced by the student must 
be marked. Any work in romaji will not be credited. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
53 
Question 1: communication and content mark grid – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Communicates brief information relevant to the task with little development 
● Limited adaptation of language to narrate, inform and interest; straightforward 
personal opinions are given with limited justification 
● Expresses straightforward thoughts and ideas; uses common vocabulary and 
expression with repetition, limited kanji 
● Variable use of appropriate register and style 
4–6 ● Communicates information relevant to the task, with development of the 
occasional key point and idea 
● Some effective adaptation of language to narrate and inform; attempts are 
made to interest and give convincing personal opinions that are occasionally 
successful 
● Expresses mainly straightforward thoughts and ideas with the occasional 
individual thought/idea; some different examples of common vocabulary and 
expression, including some different examples of common kanji 
● Appropriate use of register and style is evident but with inconsistencies 
7–9 ● Communicates information relevant to the task, with development of some key 
points and ideas 
● Mostly effective adaptation of language to narrate and inform, some effective 
language to interest and give convincing personal opinions 
● Some examples of creative language use to express individual thoughts and 
ideas; a variety of mainly common vocabulary and expression, including a 
variety of mainly common kanji 
● Appropriate use of register and style is evident but with occasional 
inconsistency 
10–12 ● Communicates information relevant to the task with expansion of key points 
and ideas 
● Effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest and give convincing 
personal opinions 
● Frequent examples of creative language use to express individual thoughts and 
ideas; a variety of vocabulary and expression, including a variety of kanji 
● Appropriate use of register and style throughout, with minimal inconsistency 
Additional guidance 
Creative language use: examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● using language, including common, high frequency and simple language, to respond to 
uncommon/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to maintain 
interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, to 
convince. 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view that go beyond 
the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
54 
Register and style definition: familiar register and style – this includes language that 
students would use with friends and people of a similar age, such as endearments and 
informal greetings and forms of address where appropriate. 
Adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest and give convincing opinions: 
adapts language to achieve different purposes in the language; students may adapt language 
more effectively for one purpose than another, for example they may use language 
effectively to narrate but less effectively to interest or give a convincing opinion. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
55 
Question 1: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Uses straightforward grammatical structures, some repetition 
● Produces brief, simple sentences, limited linking of sentences 
● Variable accuracy with language and structures, variable success when referring 
to past, present and future events, regular ambiguity; often errors prevent 
meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Uses mostly straightforward grammatical structures, occasional repetition 
● Produces occasionally extended sentences linked with common, straightforward 
conjunctions 
● Some accurate language and structures, including some successful references to 
past, present and future events, some ambiguity; often errors occur that hinder 
clarity of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
5–6 ● Different examples of straightforward grammatical structures are evident 
● Produces some extended sentences that are linked with common, straightforward 
conjunctions 
● Frequently accurate language and structures, including mostly successful 
references to past, present and future events, occasional ambiguity; sometimes 
errors occur that hinder clarity of communication 
7–8 ● Some variation of grammatical structures, occasional complex structure 
● Produces frequently extended sentences, well linked together 
● Generally accurate language and structures, including successful references to 
past, present and future events; occasionally errors occur that hinder clarity of 
communication 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● all grammar and structures included in the grammar list that are specific to Higher tier 
GCSE 
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language. 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example using the particle 'wa は' instead of 'ga が'. 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing 
● errors in formation of kana and kanji, for example a ろthat looks more like the number 3 
than ろ. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
56 
 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, such as 'Ashita ikimashita  あした 行
きました。' 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing 
● kanji or kana that are misformed to the extent that they force readers to re-read, for 
example an お with a missing dot written instead of an あ. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action 
● incorrect kanji use, for example きのういきま下 or 工園 written instead of 公園 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
57 
Question 2 – Higher tier (28 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria contained in 
two mark grids: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
This question contains four bullet points that form part of the task. Failure to cover all four 
bullet points will impact on the marks that can be awarded against the requirements of the 
two mark grids for this question (see below). There is no requirement for even coverage of 
the bullet points in any band. However, in order to access marks in the top band, students 
must refer to all bullet points and meet the other assessment criteria in the top band. 
This question requires students to write in a formal register/style (see Additional guidance). 
The student is expected to produce 260–300 characters for this task. The number of 
characters is approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer 
characters than recommended in the character count. All work produced by the student must 
be marked. Any work in romaji will not be credited. 
Question 2: communication and content mark grid – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–4 ● Communicates occasionally detailed information relevant to the task with 
occasionally effective development of key points and ideas 
● Some effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest/convince 
● Occasional examples of creative use of language to express individual thoughts, 
ideas and points of view, occasional justification; variety of mainly common 
vocabulary and expression, including a variety of mainly common kanji  
● Appropriate use of register and style with the occasional inconsistency 
5–8 ● Communicates some detailed information relevant to the task, frequently 
effective development of key points and ideas 
● Frequently effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, 
interest/convince 
● Examples of creative use of language to express some individual thoughts, 
ideas and points of view, some justified; some variation of vocabulary and 
expression, including some variation in use of kanji 
● Appropriate use of register and style with few inconsistencies 
9–12 ● Communicates detailed information relevant to the task, with mostly effective 
development of key points and ideas 
● Mostly effective adaptation of language, to narrate, inform, interest/convince 
● Creative use of language to express a range of individual thoughts, ideas and 
points of view, most of which are justified; variety of vocabulary and 
expression, including a variety of kanji 
● Predominantly appropriate use of register and style 
13–16 ● Communicates detailed information relevant to the task, with consistently 
effective development of key points and ideas 
● Consistently effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, 
interest/convince 
● Creative use of language to express and fully justify a wide range of individual 
thoughts, ideas and points of view; wide variety of vocabulary and expression, 
including a wide variety of kanji 
● Consistent use of appropriate register and style throughout 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
58 
 
Additional guidance 
Creative use of language: examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● using language, including common, high frequency and simple language, to respond to 
uncommon/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to maintain 
interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, to 
convince. 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view that go beyond 
the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
Adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest/convince: adapts language to 
achieve different purposes in the language; students may adapt language more effectively 
for one purpose than another, for example they may use language effectively to narrate but 
less effectively to interest/convince. 
Register and style definition: Formal register and style – this includes language that 
students would use with adults, for example teachers, employers, customers, officials, in a 
formal context. It includes avoidance of slang, over-familiar language, exaggeration, 
endearments, writing in a conversational style, inappropriate abbreviations used in social 
media chat. It also includes using polite social conventions such as writing “please” when 
making requests. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
59 
Question 2: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Uses a variety of mainly straightforward grammatical structures, occasional 
examples of repetitive complex language 
● Occasional sequences of fluent writing, occasionally extended, well-linked 
sentences 
● Straightforward grammatical structures are largely accurate with occasional 
accurate use of complex language, some successful references to past, present 
and future events but some ambiguity; errors occur that sometimes hinder clarity 
of communication 
4–6 ● Some variation of grammatical structures, including some repetitive instances of 
complex language 
● Prolonged sequences of fluent writing, some extended, well-linked sentences 
● Generally accurate language and structures, frequently successful references to 
past, present and future events, occasional ambiguity; errors occur that 
occasionally hinder clarity of communication 
7–9 ● Uses a variety of grammatical structures including some different examples of 
complex language 
● Predominantly fluent response; frequent extended sentences, mostly 
well linked 
● Mostly accurate language and structures, mostly successful references to past, 
present and future events; errors occur but they rarely hinder clarity of 
communication 
10–12 ● Uses a wide variety of grammatical structures, including complex language 
● Fluent response throughout with extended, well-linked sentences 
● Consistently accurate language and structures, consistently successful references 
to past, present and future events; any errors do not hinder the clarity of the 
communication 
 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● all grammar and structures included in the grammar list that are specific to Higher tier 
GCSE 
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language. 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
60 
 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example using the particle 'wa は' instead of 'ga が'. 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing 
● errors in formation of kana and kanji, for example a ろthat looks more like the number 3 
than ろ. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, such as 'Ashita ikimashita  あした 行
きました。' 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing 
● kanji or kana that are misformed to the extent that they force readers to re-read, for 
example an お with a missing dot written instead of an あ. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action 
● incorrect kanji use, for example きのういきま下 or 工園 written instead of 公園 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
61 
Question 3 – Higher tier (12 marks) 
Translation mark grid and example response 
Translation mark grid assesses both communication and content and linguistic knowledge 
and accuracy. When awarding marks, the student’s response across the whole paragraph 
should be considered. Any work in romaji will not be credited. 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Meaning of some individual words or phrases is conveyed; frequent 
omissions/incorrectly communicated words and phrases/mother-tongue 
interference 
● Some straightforward structures are accurate but regular errors prevent meaning 
of individual phrases/sentences being conveyed 
4–6 ● The meaning of the passage is partially communicated, some words and phrases 
are omitted/incorrectly communicated 
● Language and structures are accurate in some phrases and sentences but some 
errors prevent meaning being conveyed 
7–9 ● The meaning of the passage is mostly communicated, occasional words are 
omitted/incorrectly communicated 
● Mostly accurate language and structures; errors occur that occasionally hinder 
clarity and in rare instances prevent meaning being conveyed 
10–12 ● The meaning of the passage is fully communicated 
● Consistently accurate language and structures, any errors do not hinder clarity 
Additional guidance 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example using the particle 'wa は' instead of 'ga が'. 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing 
● errors in formation of kana and kanji, for example a ろ that looks more like the number 3 
than ろ. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, such as 'Ashita ikimashita  あした 行
きました。' 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing 
● kanji or kana that are misformed to the extent that they force readers to re-read, for 
example an お with a missing dot written instead of an あ. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
62 
 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action 
● incorrect kanji use, for example きのういきま下 or 工園 written instead of 公園 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
63 
Assessment Objectives 
 
Students must: % in GCSE 
AO1 Listening – understand and respond to different types of spoken 
language 
25 
AO2 Speaking – communicate and interact effectively in speech 25 
AO3 Reading – understand and respond to different types of written 
language 
25 
AO4 Writing – communicate in writing 25 
Total 100% 
 
 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
 
Paper 
Assessment Objectives Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives AO1 % AO2 % AO3 % AO4 % 
Paper 1: Listening and 
understanding in Japanese 
25 0 0 0 25% 
Paper 2: Speaking in 
Japanese 
0 25 0 0 25% 
Paper 3: Reading and 
understanding in Japanese 
0 0 25 0 25% 
Paper 4: Writing in Japanese 0 0 0 25 25% 
Total for GCSE 25% 25% 25% 25% 100% 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
64 
3 Administration and general information 
Entries 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for this qualification can be found in 
our UK Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations officers and is 
available on our website: qualifications.pearson.com 
Discount code and performance tables 
Students taking the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Japanese must take all 
assessments in either the Foundation tier or the Higher tier only. 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more than one GCSE, or other Level 2 
qualifications with the same discount code, will have only the grade for their 'first entry' 
counted for the purpose of the school and college performance tables (please see Appendix 
7: Codes). For further information about what constitutes 'first entry' and full details of how 
this policy is applied, please refer to the DfE website: 
www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-education 
Students should be advised that if they take two GCSEs with the same discount code, 
schools and colleges they wish to progress to are likely to take the view that this 
achievement is equivalent to only one GCSE. The same view may be taken if students take 
two GCSEs or other Level 2 qualifications that have different discount codes but have 
significant overlap of content. Students or their advisers who have any doubts about their 
subject combinations should check with the institution they wish to progress to before 
embarking on their programmes. 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, 
special consideration and malpractice 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality policy requires all students to 
have equal opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our qualifications 
to be awarded in a way that is fair to every student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the Equality Act 2010) are not, 
when they are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in comparison to 
students who do not share that characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification and that 
this achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their peers. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be available in English only 
For speaking and writing assessments, all student work must be in Japanese. For listening 
and reading, all student work must be in English. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
65 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with special 
educational needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to: 
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the assessment. 
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an individual 
student with a disability, without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding bodies comply with the duty under the 
Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students will 
then know what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for assessment. 
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable adjustments 
where a person with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in undertaking an 
assessment. The awarding organisation is required to take reasonable steps to overcome 
that disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be unique to that individual and 
therefore might not be in the list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of factors, 
including: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding 
organisation, or affects timeframes or the security or integrity of the assessment. This is 
because the adjustment is not ‘reasonable’. 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student's mark or grade to 
reflect temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the 
examination/assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a material 
effect on a candidate’s ability to take an assessment or demonstrate their level of attainment 
in an assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to apply for access arrangements 
and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special 
consideration, please refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
66 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that compromises or seeks to 
compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in examinations must be reported to Pearson using a JCQ Form M1 
(available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to Investigations Team, Pearson, 190 High Holborn, 
London, WC1V 7BH. Please provide as much information and supporting documentation as 
possible. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice constitutes staff or centre malpractice. 
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and maladministration of 
our qualifications. As with candidate malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is any act that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the 
integrity of the qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported 
immediately, before any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson on a 
JCQ Form M2(a) (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form, 
supporting documentation and as much information as possible can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to Investigations Team, Pearson, 
190 High Holborn, London, WC1V 7BH. Note that the final decision regarding 
appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the document 
General and Vocational Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments Policies and Procedures, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice. 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to comply with the requirements of 
Ofqual's General Conditions of Recognition. 
The raw marks for papers 1, 3 and 4 in this qualification will be scaled by Pearson to 
represent the relative weighting of 25% for each paper. 
Foundation and Higher tier 
Paper  Weighting  Raw marks Scaling factor Scaling mark 
1 25% 50 1.400 70 
2 25% 70 1.000 70 
3 25% 50 1.400 70 
4 25% 60 1.167 70 
 
This GCSE qualification will be graded and certificated on a nine-grade scale from 9 to 1 
using the total subject mark where 9 is the highest grade. Individual papers are not graded. 
For Foundation tier, grades 1–5 are available and for Higher tier, grades 4–9 are available, 
however if the mark achieved is a smaller number of marks below the 4/3 grade boundary, 
then a grade 3 may be awarded. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
67 
The first certification opportunity for this qualification will be 2019. 
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum judged by Pearson to be of 
sufficient standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U result. 
Student recruitment and progression 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this qualification. 
Progression 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Japanese builds on the programme of 
study at Key Stages 2 and 3, focusing on the development of all four language skills, 
listening, speaking, reading and writing. Grammar and the mastering of linguistic features 
are key elements of this specification as is the inclusion of authentic written and spoken 
sources. 
Students will be expected to be able to talk about themselves as well as matters that go 
beyond their immediate experience. They should be able to express and justify their own 
opinions in speech and writing, building on the fluency and spontaneity developed at  
Key Stage 3. 
The skill of translation will be developed from those skills initiated from Key Stage 3. The 
broader range of topics promotes a clear progression in grammar and vocabulary from Key 
Stage 3 and will increase linguistic and cognitive demand. The grammar and vocabulary lists 
illustrate the level required for this qualification. 
This qualification offers a suitable progression route to GCE A Level in Japanese. In addition, 
the study of one language at GCSE can facilitate and help promote the learning of other 
languages. The qualification may also add to an individual’s employability profile. 
Students will be able to apply their knowledge, skills and understanding to authentic, real-life 
contexts. They will develop transferable skills that support higher education study and the 
transition to employment, together with an understanding and appreciation of Japan and 
Japanese-speaking communiuties and their cultures. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
68 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
69 
 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Candidate speaking examination record form (CS2) 71 
Appendix 2: Grammar list 72 
Appendix 3: Vocabulary list 77 
Appendix 4: Kanji list 129 
Appendix 5: The context for the development of this qualification 130 
Appendix 6: Transferable skills 132 
Appendix 7: Codes 133 
 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
70 
 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
71 
 
 
Appendix 1: Candidate speaking examination record form (CS2) 
A separate form must be submitted for Foundation tier and Higher tier candidates. Please indicate the tier below. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Japanese 1JA0:       2F/2H*                     (*Please delete as appropriate) 
Centre name:  Centre number:  
 
Candidate name and number Declaration and permissions signature 
and date* 
Role play Picture-
based 
discussion 
Conversation 
(1)                  (2) 
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
Teacher name Declaration and permissions signature 
and date* 
        
            
 
*I declare that the above examinations have been carried out in line with Pearson and JCQ documentation for the conduct of the examinations and agree to 
this work being used to support teachers and examiners. 
Please photocopy and continue on a separate sheet as necessary. Please do not write in shaded boxes – these areas are for Pearson Examiner use 
only. A ‘Word’ version of this form is available on our website to facilitate administration in centres. 
 

 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
72 
Appendix 2: Grammar list 
GCSE students will be expected to have acquired knowledge and understanding of Japanese 
grammar during their course. In the examination they will be required to apply their 
knowledge and understanding, drawing from the following lists. The examples in brackets are 
indicative, not exclusive.  
Japanese (Foundation tier) 
Copula:  
Polite form: で、では・じゃありません、でした、では・じゃありませんでした 
Linking form: で (e.g. 父はアメリカ人で、55 才です。) 
I Adjectives: 
With a noun (e.g. 赤い花) 
As a sentence ending: polite form: present positive and past positive (e.g. 赤いです、赤かった
です) 
Linking form (e.g. 赤くて – この花は赤くてきれいです。) 
Na Adjectives: 
With a noun (e.g. 静かな公園)  
As a sentence ending: polite form: present positive and past positive (e.g. 静かです、静かでし
た) 
Linking form (e.g. 静かで – この公園は静かでいいです。) 
Adverbs: 
Of frequency: よく、時々、あまり、ぜんぜん 
Of quantity: たくさん、少し、ちょっと、とても、たいへん 
Verbs: 
Polite form: ます、ません、ました、ませんでした 
Endings derived from ますform: ましょう（か）、たいです 
て forms 
Endings derived from て form:  
てください 
てもいいです 
てはいけません 
て、て、て link (e.g. 朝おきて、朝ご飯を食べて、学校へ行きます。) 
てから (e.g. 勉強してから、テレビを見ます。) 
ています for present progressive (e.g. テレビを見ています。) 
ています for present state (e.g. 銀行につとめています。) 
Verbs of existence:  
ある and いる 
 With location (e.g. 新聞はつくえの上にあります。) 
 With です replacing the verb (e.g. 新聞はつくえの上です。) 
 With quantity (e.g. 部屋に子供が三人います。) 
Verb of giving and receiving: あげる and もらう 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
73 
Questions: 
Use of か to form a question 
Question words: いつ、どこ、だれ、何、どう、いかが、どのくらい、どうして、どなた、どんな、ど
れ、どの、いくつ、どうやって、いくら、どちら、何＋ counter (e.g. 何週間、何人) 
Or questions (e.g. バスで行きますか、タクシーでいきますか。) 
Question word plus も plus negative (e.g. 何もたべませんでした。) 
Conjunctions: 
Use of が (e.g. 教室に行きましたが、ひろ子さんはいませんでした。) 
Use of から for reasons  (e.g. スポーツが好きですから、野球クラブに入りました。) 
(e.g. 今日は遠足に行きません、雨が降っていますから。) 
こそあど words: 
ここ そこ あそこ どこ 
この その あの どの 
これ それ あれ どれ 
こんな そんな あんな どんな 
こちら そちら あちら どちら 
 
Particles:  
Some of these particles may be used as double particles, but a detailed treatment of double 
particles is not expected. 
か (1) For questions これはりんごですか。 
 (2) For or バスかタクシーで行きます。 
ぐらい Approximately 200g ぐらいあります。 
ごろ Approximately 3 時ごろ行きます。 
の (1) For possessive これは私の車です。 
 (2) For pronoun 大きいのをください。 
 (3) For apposition シルクのネクタイを買いました。 
は (1) For subject 私は高校生です。 
 (2) For negative テニスは好きじゃありません。 
も Also 私はイギリス人です。トム君もイギリス人です。 
で (1) For location プールで泳ぎます。 
 (2) For a tool バスで行きます。フォークで食べます。 
 (3) After a number 三人で行きました。四つで百円です。 
へ With verbs of motion 学校へ行きます。 
を With direct object コーヒーを飲みます。 
や For non-exclusive and バナナやリンゴを買いました。 
と (1) For and 新聞とざっしを買いました。 
 (2) For with 父と町に行きました。 
に (1) After a time 三時に行きます。 
 (2) With verbs of motion 公園に行きます。 
 (3) For frequency 一日に三回薬を飲みます。 
 (4) With verbs of 
existence 
本は教室にあります。 
 (5) For an indirect object 弟に本を読みます。 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
74 
Particles (continued): 
が (1) Subject marker 私が行きます。 
 (2) Conjunction りんごは食べますが、バナナは食べません。 
しか Only 百円しかありません。 
から (1) With time パーティーは三時からです。 
 (2) With place イギリスから来ました。 
まで (1) With time 学校は四時までです。 
 (2) With place 東京まで行きます。 
わ Sentence ending これはとてもおいしいわ。 
ね Sentence ending 今日はいい天気ですね。 
よ Sentence ending そろそろ行きますよ。 
 
Number, quantity, dates 
Numbers and counting 
Numbers 1 – 100,000,000 
つ series of numbers 
Counters: 枚、本、冊、匹、台、人、番、才、目、円、回、階、杯 
Dates and time 
Telling the date (including 年) 
Giving the date 
Days of the week 
時間 for length of time 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
75 
Japanese (Higher tier) 
All grammar and structures listed for Foundation tier, as well as: 
Copula:  
Plain form: だ、じゃない・ではない、だった、じゃなかった・ではなかった 
I Adjectives: 
As a sentence ending:   
polite form (e.g. 赤くないです、赤くありません、赤くなかったです) 
plain form (e.g. 赤い、赤かった、赤くない、赤くなかった) 
As an adverb (e.g. 安く – このくつは安く買いました。) (including くなる、くする) 
Na Adjectives: 
As a sentence ending:  
polite form (e.g. 静かではありません、静かじゃありません、静かではありませんでした、静かじゃ
ありませんでした) 
plain form (e.g. 静かだ、静かではない、静かじゃない、静かだった、静かではなかった、静かじゃ
なかった) 
As an adverb (e.g. 静かに – 静かにしてください。) (including になる、にする) 
Adverbs: 
Of (non) completion: もう、まだ 
Verbs: 
Plain form: 食べる・書く、食べない・書かない、食べた・書いた、食べなかった・書かなかった 
Endings derived from ますform:  
  たくないです、たくありません、たかったです、たくなかったです 
  はじめる、おわる、つづける 
  に for purpose (e.g. 映画を見に行きます。) 
  ながら 
Endings with ない form:   
ないでください (e.g. この部屋に入らないでください。)  
ないほうがいいです。(e.g. それは食べないほうがいいです。) 
Endings derived from た form:   
たり、たりします (e.g. 買い物をしたり、映画を見たりします。) 
た後で、(e.g. 勉強をした後で、あそびに行きます。) 
たことがあります (e.g. 日本へ行ったことがあります。) 
たほうがいいです。(e.g. すぐ帰ったほうがいいです。) 
Endings with dictionary form:   
前に、 (e.g. ご飯を食べる前に、手をあらいます。) 
つもり (e.g. 大学で日本語を勉強するつもりです。) 
よてい (e.g. 来年は日本に行くよていです。) 
ことができます (e.g. 私は泳ぐことができます。) 
ことが好きです (e.g. 料理をすることが好きです。) 
Questions:  
Question word plus も for ‘everyone’ etc. (e.g. どれもおいしいです。) 
Question word plus か for ‘something’ etc. (e.g. 何か飲みませんか。) 
Question word plus でも for ‘anything’ etc. (e.g. どこでも行きます。) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
76 
Conjunctions: 
Use of …し …し (e.g. 今日はしゅくだいも多いし、天気もわるいので、あそびに行きません。) 
Giving an opinion:  
Use of と思います。 
Particles:  
Some of these particles may be used as double particles. 
は For contrast 肉は食べますが、魚は食べません。 
も Both… and… りんごもバナナも好きです。 
で For a reason 病気で学校を休みました。 
を With certain verbs 公園をとおります。 
だけ Only 一つだけください。 
でも Suggested example お茶でも飲みませんか。 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
77 
Appendix 3: Vocabulary list 
The following vocabulary list is intended to assist teachers in planning their work. It provides 
the core generic vocabulary that all students will need to acquire. It is an essential 
vocabulary list that students should refer to and build on when preparing for the duration of 
their study for the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Japanese. 
However, students entered for the Foundation tier are required to understand and respond to 
common words and/or forms of words that are not on the vocabulary list. Similarly, students 
entered for the Higher tier are required to understand and respond to common words and/or 
forms of words that are not on the vocabulary list and which are less common than those 
used in relation to Foundation tier assessments. 
All the vocabulary the candidate should know is presented in the left-hand column in 
hiragana or katakana as appropriate. The middle column in kanji (where appropriate) is 
purely for the ease of the teacher's reference. It is not expected that the candidate know or 
even see these kanji. Please note that the 200 kanji the candidates are expected to know are 
listed separately in Appendix 4. 
Word lists 
Section 1: High-frequency language 
Common verbs 
Common adjectives 
Common adverbs 
Prepositions 
Colours 
Numbers 
Ordinal numbers 
Quantities and measures 
Some useful connecting words 
Time expressions 
Times of day 
Days of the week 
Months and seasons of the year 
Question words 
Other useful expressions 
Other high-frequency words 
Countries 
Continents 
Nationalities 
Administrative regions of Japan 
Areas/mountains/seas 
Useful acronyms 
Social conventions 
Language used in dialogue and messages 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
78 
Section 2: Topic-specific language 
Although words are listed under specific topic headings, the words are not exclusive to those 
particular headings. Many words also relate to other themes but may be listed in only one 
theme. Many common verbs are given in the verb list, with a few others included under a 
specific topic. 
Each topic has been highlighted in bold. 
All topics must be studied in the context of both the student’s home country and 
that of Japan and communities where Japanese is spoken. 
 
Theme 1: Identity and culture 
Who am I?: relationships; when I was younger; what my friends and family are like; what 
makes a good friend; interests; socialising with friends and family; role models 
Daily life: customs and everyday life; food and drink; shopping; social media and 
technology (use of, advantages and disadvantages) 
Cultural life: celebrations and festivals; reading; music; sport; film and television 
 
Theme 2: Local area, holiday and travel 
Holidays: preferences, experiences and destinations 
Travel and tourist transactions: travel and accommodation; asking for help and dealing 
with problems; directions; eating out; shopping 
Town, region and country: weather; places to see; things to do 
 
Theme 3: School 
What school is like: school types; school day; subjects; rules and pressures; celebrating 
success 
School activities: school trips; events and exchanges 
 
Theme 4: Future aspirations, study and work 
Using languages beyond the classroom: forming relationships; travel; employment 
Ambitions: further study; volunteering; training 
Work: jobs; careers and professions 
 
Theme 5: International and global dimension 
Bringing the world together: sports events; music events; campaigns and good causes 
Environmental issues: being ‘green’; access to natural resources 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
79 
 
Section 1: High-frequency language 
Common verbs 
Foundation tier 
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
あう 会う to meet 
あける 開ける to open 
あげる  to give 
あそぶ 遊ぶ to play, to socialize 
あつまる 集まる to assemble 
あつめる 集める to collect 
あらう 洗う to wash 
ある  to be, to exist 
あるく 歩く to walk 
いう 言う to say 
いく 行く to go 
いそぐ 急ぐ to hurry 
いる  to be, to exist 
いれる 入れる to put in 
うごく 動く to move 
うたう 歌う to sing 
うまれる 生まれる to be born 
うる 売る to sell 
えらぶ 選ぶ to choose 
おきる 起きる to wake up, to get up 
おくる 送る to send 
おこる 怒る to get angry 
おしえる 教える to teach, to tell 
おす 押す to push 
おとす 落とす to drop 
おどる 踊る to dance 
おぼえる 覚える to learn, to remember 
おもう 思う to think 
およぐ 泳ぐ to swim 
おりる 降りる to get off 
おわる 終わる to end 
かう 買う to buy 
かう 飼う to keep a pet 
かえす 返す to return something 
かえる 帰る to go home 
かかる かかる to take 
かく 描く to draw 
かく 書く to write 
（かぎを）かける （鍵を）かける to lock 
（でんわを）かける （電話を）かける to make a phone call 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
80 
 
Foundation tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
（めがねを）かける （眼鏡を）かける to wear glasses 
かす 貸す to lend 
かつ 勝つ to win 
かぶる  to wear (hats etc) 
かりる 借りる to borrow 
（のどが）かわく  to be thirsty 
かんがえる 考える to think 
がんばる 頑張る to do one's best, to endure 
きく 聞く、聴く to hear, to listen 
きこえる 聞こえる to be audible 
きめる 決める to decide 
きる 着る to wear 
くもる 曇る to be cloudy 
くる 来る to come 
こたえる 答える to answer 
こむ 混む to be crowded 
しぬ 死ぬ to die 
しめる 閉める to close 
しらせる 知らせる to notify 
しる 知る to know 
すう 吸う to smoke, to inhale 
（おなかが）すく （お腹が）すく to get hungry 
すてる 捨てる to throw out 
すむ 住む to live 
する  to do  
すわる 座る to sit 
だす 出す to put out, to hand in 
たすける 助ける to help 
たつ 立つ to stand up 
たてる 建てる to build 
たべる 食べる to eat 
ちがう 違う to be different, to be wrong 
つかう 使う to use 
つかれる 疲れる to get tired 
つく 着く to arrive 
つくる 作る to make 
（でんきを）つける （電気を）つける to switch on (a light) 
つたえる 伝える to pass on a message 
つづける 続ける to continue 
できる  to be able to 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
81 
 
Foundation tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
てつだう 手伝う to help 
でる 出る to go out 
とおる 通る to go through 
とまる 泊る to stay somewhere 
とまる 止まる to stop 
とる 取る to take 
とる 撮る to take a photograph 
なおす 直す to repair 
なく 泣く to cry 
なくす  to lose 
なげる 投げる to throw 
ならう 習う to learn 
なる 成る to become 
ぬぐ 脱ぐ to take off (clothes) 
ねる 寝る to sleep, to go to bed 
のぼる 登る、上る to climb 
のむ 飲む to drink 
のる 乗る to ride on a method of transport 
はいる 入る to enter 
はく  to wear (shoes, trousers etc) 
はじめる 始める to start 
はしる 走る to run 
はたらく 働く to work 
はなす 話す to talk 
はらう 払う to pay 
はれる 晴れる to be sunny 
ひく 弾く to play a musical instrument 
ひく 引く to subtract, to draw a line 
(かぜを）ひく （風邪を）ひく to catch a cold 
ふえる 増える to increase 
（あめが）ふる （雨が）降る to rain 
へる 減る to decrease 
まがる 曲がる to turn 
まける 負ける to lose 
まちがえる 間違える to make a mistake 
まつ 待つ to wait 
みえる 見える to be visible 
みがく 磨く to polish 
みせる 見せる to show 
みつける 見つける to find 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
82 
 
Foundation tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
みる 見る to see, to watch, to look 
もつ 持つ to hold, to carry 
もっていく 持って行く to take something 
もってくる 持って来る to bring something 
もどる 戻る to return  
もらう  to receive 
やすむ 休む to rest 
（あめが）やむ （雨が）やむ to stop (raining) 
やめる 辞める to quit 
よぶ 呼ぶ to call 
よむ 読む to read 
わかる 分かる to understand 
わすれる 忘れる to forget 
わらう 笑う to laugh 
Higher tier   
あがる 上がる to rise 
あく 開く to open 
あげる 上げる to raise 
（シャワーを）あびる （シャワーを）浴びる to have a shower 
いきる 生きる to live 
いじめる  to bully 
いる 要る to need 
（しけんに）うかる （試験に）受かる to pass (an exam) 
うける 受ける to receive, to take an exam 
うつ 打つ to hit 
おく 置く to place, to put 
おくれる 遅れる to be late 
おちる 落ちる to fall 
おもいだす 思い出す to recall 
かえる 変える、替える、換える to change 
かたづける 片づける to tidy up 
かむ  to chew 
かわる 変わる to change 
きまる 決まる to be decided 
きる 切る to cut 
きをつける 気を付ける to be careful 
くらべる 比べる to compare 
けす 消す to switch off 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
83 
 
Higher tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
こまる 困る to be in trouble, to be stuck 
ころぶ 転ぶ to fall over 
こわす 壊す to break 
こわれる 壊れる to be broken 
さがす 探す to search for 
さがる 下がる to fall 
さく 咲く to bloom 
さわる 触る to touch 
しまる 閉まる to close 
しめる  to wear (belt, etc.) 
しらべる 調べる to investigate 
しんじる 信じる to believe 
たずねる 尋ねる to ask 
たずねる 訪ねる to visit 
たたく 叩く to strike 
たのしむ 楽しむ to enjoy 
たのむ 頼む to request 
ついていく ついて行く to go (with someone) 
ついてくる ついて来る to come (with someone) 
つける 付ける to attach 
つづく 続く to continue 
つとめる 勤める to work 
つれていく 連れて行く to take (someone) 
つれてくる 連れて来る to bring (someone) 
でかける 出かける to go out 
とどける 届ける to deliver 
とぶ 飛ぶ、跳ぶ to fly, to jump 
とめる 止める to stop 
なおる 治る to get better 
なくなる 亡くなる to pass away 
なくなる 無くなる to lose something 
ならぶ 並ぶ to line up 
ならべる 並べる to line up 
にげる 逃げる to run away 
にる 似る to be similar to 
ぬすむ 盗む to steal 
のこす 残す to leave something remaining 
のりかえる 乗り換える to change (trains) 
はこぶ 運ぶ to carry, to transport 
はじまる 始まる to start 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
84 
 
Higher tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
はる 貼る to attach, to stick 
ひろう 拾う to pick up 
ふく 吹く to blow 
へらす 減らす to reduce 
まにあう 間に合う to be on time, be sufficient 
もうしこむ 申し込む to apply, to register 
やくにたつ 役に立つ to be useful 
やる  to do, to give 
ゆるす 許す、赦す to permit, to forgive 
よる  to drop by 
よろこぶ 喜ぶ to rejoice 
わかれる 別れる to separate 
わたる 渡る to cross 
   
I adjectives   
Foundation tier   
あかるい 明るい bright 
あたたかい 暖かい warm 
あたらしい 新しい new 
あつい 暑い hot (climate) 
あつい 熱い hot (to touch) 
あぶない 危ない dangerous 
いい  good 
いそがしい 忙しい busy 
いたい 痛い painful 
うるさい  noisy 
うれしい  happy, pleased 
おいしい 美味しい tasty 
おおい 多い many 
おおきい 大きい large, big 
おかしい  funny 
おそい 遅い slow, late 
おもしろい 面白い interesting 
かなしい 悲しい sad 
かわいい  cute 
きたない 汚い dirty 
きびしい 厳しい strict, tough 
くらい 暗い dark 
こわい 怖い scary 
さむい 寒い cold 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
85 
 
Foundation tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
すくない 少ない few 
すごい  fantastic 
すずしい 涼しい cool 
すばらしい 素晴らしい wonderful 
たかい 高い high, expensive 
ただしい 正しい correct 
たのしい 楽しい enjoyable 
ちいさい 小さい small 
ちかい 近い near 
つまらない  boring 
つめたい 冷たい cold (to touch) 
つよい 強い strong 
とおい 遠い far 
ながい 長い long 
はやい 早い early 
はやい 速い fast 
ふるい 古い old 
ほしい 欲しい desirable 
まずい  horrible to taste 
まるい 丸い round 
みじかい 短い short 
むしあつい 蒸し暑い hot and sticky 
むずかしい 難しい difficult 
めずらしい 珍しい unusual, rare 
やさしい 優しい kind 
やすい 安い cheap 
よい 良い good 
よわい 弱い weak 
わかい 若い young 
わるい 悪い bad 
Higher tier   
あつい 厚い thick 
あまい 甘い sweet 
うすい 薄い thin 
うつくしい 美しい beautiful 
うまい  tasty, good at 
えらい 偉い distinguished, great 
おとなしい  quiet 
おもい 重い heavy 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
86 
 
Higher tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
かたい 硬い hard 
かっこいい  stylish, good looking 
からい 辛い spicy 
かるい 軽い light (in weight) 
くるしい 苦しい trying, rough 
くわしい 詳しい detailed 
さびしい 寂しい lonely 
せまい 狭い narrow 
ねむい 眠い sleepy 
はずかしい 恥ずかしい embarrassing 
ひくい 低い low 
ひろい 広い wide, spacious 
ふとい 太い thick, wide 
ほそい 細い thin, narrow 
やさしい 易しい easy 
やわらかい 柔らかい soft 
   
Na adjectives   
Foundation tier   
いやな 嫌な dislikeable 
いろいろな 色々な various 
おいしそうな  looks tasty 
おおきな 大きな large, big 
きらいな 嫌いな dislilkeable 
きれいな 綺麗な beautiful, pretty, clean 
げんきな 元気な lively, energentic, healthy 
しずかな 静かな quiet 
じゅうぶんな 充分な sufficient 
じょうずな 上手な good at 
しんぱいな 心配な worrying 
すきな 好きな likeable 
すてきな 素敵な lovely 
だいすきな 大好きな that which I love 
たいへんな 大変な hard, troublesome 
だめな  no good 
ちいさな 小さな small 
とくいな 得意な good at 
にがてな 苦手な bad at 
にぎやかな  lively, noisy 
ハンサムな  handsome 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
87 
 
Foundation tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
ひまな 暇な having free time 
ふべんな 不便な inconvenient 
へたな 下手な bad at 
べんりな 便利な convenient 
まじめな 真面目な studious, hard working, serious 
むりな 無理な impossible, difficult 
ゆうめいな 有名な famous 
Higher tier   
あんぜんな 安全な safe 
おしゃべりな  chatter box 
かんたんな 簡単な simple 
きけんな 危険な dangerous 
けんこうてきな 健康的な healthy 
けんこうな 健康な healthy 
ごうかな 豪華な luxurious 
しあわせな 幸せな happy 
しつれいな 失礼な rude 
じゃまな 邪魔な in the way, hindering 
じゆうな 自由な free 
しょうじきな 正直な honest 
しんせつな 親切な kind 
だいじな 大事な precious 
たいせつな 大切な important, precious 
ていねいな 丁寧な polite 
てきとうな 適当な suitable 
とくべつな 特別な special 
ねっしんな 熱心な passionate 
ひつような 必要な necessary 
ふくざつな 複雑な complicated 
ふけんこうな 不健康な unhealthy 
ふしぎな 不思議な mysterious 
へんな 変な strange 
みごとな 見事な excellent 
むだな 無駄な wasteful 
らくな 楽な easy 
りそうてきな 理想的な ideal 
れきしてきな 歴史的な historic 
   
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
88 
 
Words that can be used with する  
Foundation tier   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
うんてん 運転 drive 
うんどう 運動 exercise 
キャンセル  cancel 
コピー  photocopy 
しっぱい 失敗 failure 
しょうかい 紹介 introduce 
せいこう 成功 success 
せつめい 説明 explain 
せんたく 洗濯 washing 
ちゅうもん 注文 order 
べんきょう 勉強 study 
へんじ 返事 reply 
やくそく 約束 promise 
そうじ 掃除 to clean 
Higher tier   
あんしん 安心 (to be) relieved 
あんない 案内 guide 
しゅっぱつ 出発 departure 
じゅんび 準備 preparation 
しょうたい 招待 invitation 
しんぱい 心配 worry 
せいかつ 生活 to live 
せっとく 説得 to convince 
せわ 世話 to look after, to care for 
たいいん 退院 to come out of hospital 
ちゅうい 注意 caution, warn, be careful 
とうちゃく 到着 arrival 
にゅういん 入院 to go into hospital 
びっくり  to be surprised 
れんらく 連絡 to notify 
ほぞんする 保存 to save 
   
Common adverbs   
Foundation tier   
あまり  not much 
いっしょうけんめい 一生懸命 to the best of one's ability 
いっしょに 一緒に together 
いつも  always 
すぐ（に）  immediately 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
89 
 
Foundation tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
すこし 少し a little 
ずっと  continuously 
ぜんぜん 全然 not at all 
だいたい  more or less 
たくさん  a lot of  
たとえば 例えば for example 
だんだん  gradually 
ちょうど  exactly 
ちょっと  a little 
ときどき 時々 sometimes 
とくに 特に especially 
とても  very 
はじめて 初めて for the first time 
ほとんど  mostly 
ほんとうに 本当に truly 
また  again 
まだ  not yet 
まっすぐ  straight 
もう  already 
もうすぐ  soon 
もちろん  of course 
もっと  more 
ゆっくり  slowly 
よく  often, well 
Higher tier   
いっぱい  lots of 
かなり  quite 
ぜひ 是非 by all means 
たぶん 多分 probably 
たまに  occasionally 
   
Prepositions   
Foundation tier   
あいだ 間 in between 
うえ 上 on, above 
うしろ 後ろ behind 
** がわ **側 ** side 
した 下 below, beneath 
そと 外 outside 
そば  nearby 
ちかく 近く near 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
90 
 
Foundation tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
とおく 遠く far away 
となり 隣 next to 
なか 中 in, inside 
はんたい 反対 opposite 
まえ 前 in front of 
まわり 周り around 
まんなか 真ん中 right in the middle 
むかい 向かい facing 
よこ 横 next to 
   
Colours   
Foundation tier   
いろ 色 colours 
あお （い） 青（い） blue 
あか （い） 赤（い） red 
オレンジ  orange 
きいろ（い） 黄色（い） yellow 
きん 金 gold 
ぎん 銀 silver 
グレー  grey 
くろ（い） 黒（い） black 
しろ（い） 白（い） white 
ちゃいろ（い） 茶色（い） brown 
はいいろ 灰色 grey 
ピンク  pink 
みどり 緑 green 
むらさき 紫 purple 
   
Numbers   
Foundation tier   
ゼロ  zero 
れい 零 zero 
いち 一 one 
に 二 two 
さん 三 three 
し 四 four 
よん 四 four 
ご 五 five 
ろく 六 six 
なな 七 seven 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
91 
 
Foundation tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
しち 七 seven 
はち 八 eight 
きゅう 九 nine 
じゅう 十 ten 
じゅういち、じゅうに… 十一、十二 … eleven, twelve… 
にじゅういち、にじゅうに… 二十一、二十二 ... twenty-one, twenty-two… 
ひゃく 百 one hundred 
せん 千 one thousand 
まん 万 ten thousand 
いちおく 一億 a hundred million 
ひとつ 一つ one 
ふたつ 二つ two 
みっつ 三つ three 
よっつ 四つ four 
いつつ 五つ five 
むっつ 六つ six 
ななつ 七つ seven 
やっつ 八つ eight 
ここのつ 九つ nine 
とお 十 ten 
ひとつめ、ふたつめ… 一つ目、二つ目… first, second… 
いちばん、にばん… 一番、二番… first, second… 
いちばんめ、にばんめ… 一番目、二番目… first, second… 
マイナス  minus 
プラス  plus 
Higher tier   
(さん)ぶんの(いち) ... (三)分の(一) one third… 
(に)てん(なな) (二)・(七) two point seven 
かず 数 number 
ずつ  each 
   
Quantities and measures  
Foundation tier   
えん 円 yen 
ドル  dollars 
ポンド  pound sterling 
ユーロ  Euro 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
92 
 
Foundation tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
かい 回 
counter for number of times, 
floors 
かい 階  
かん 缶 a can 
こ 個 general counter 
さい 才、歳 years old 
さつ 冊 counter for books 
だい 台 counter for machines, vehicles 
てん 点 marks, points 
にん 人 counter for people 
はい 杯 cup fulls 
はく 泊 counter for number of nights 
ひき・ぴき 匹 counter for small animals 
びん 瓶 a bottle 
ほん 本 
counter for long, thin, 
cylindrical things 
まい 枚 counter for flat things 
ひとり 一人 one person 
ふたり 二人 two people 
ばんごう 番号 number 
はんぶん 半分 half 
ぐらい  about (quantities) 
ごろ  about (times) 
キロ  kilometre, kilogramme 
グラム  gramme 
センチ  centimetre 
メートル  metre 
おなじ 同じ the same 
Higher tier   
せいき 世紀 century 
など  etc. 
ばい 倍 twice, ** times 
   
Connectives   
Foundation tier   
あとで 後で later 
さいご（に） 最後（に） lastly 
さいしょ（に） 最初（に） firstly 
そして  and 
それから  and then 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
93 
 
Foundation tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
それに  moreover 
だから  therefore 
つぎ（に） 次（に） next 
でも  but 
まず  firstly 
Higher tier   
しかし  however 
もし  if 
   
Time expressions   
Foundation tier   
ごぜん 午前 am 
ごご 午後 pm 
きょう 今日 today 
あした 明日 tomorrow 
あさって  the day after tomorrow 
きのう 昨日 yesterday 
おととい  the day before yesterday 
まいにち 毎日 every day 
こんしゅう 今週 this week 
せんしゅう 先週 last week 
らいしゅう 来週 next week 
さらいしゅう 再来週 the week after next 
まいしゅう 毎週 every week 
こんげつ 今月 this month 
らいげつ 来月 next month 
さらいげつ 再来月 the month after next 
せんげつ 先月 last month 
まいつき 毎月 every month 
ことし 今年 this year 
らいねん 来年 next year 
さらいねん 再来年 the year after next 
おととし  the year before last 
きょねん 去年 last year 
まいとし 毎年 every year 
**にち **日 ** days 
**しゅうかん **週間 ** weeks 
**ねん **年 ** years 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
94 
 
Foundation tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
いま 今 now 
**じ**ふん **時**分 ** minutes past ** 
**じはん **時半 half past ** 
びょう 秒 seconds 
ごぜんちゅう 午前中 during the morning 
じかん 時間 time 
** じかん **時間 length of time 
いちねんじゅう 一年中 all year round 
あさ 朝 morning 
ばん 晩 evening 
まいあさ 毎朝 every morning 
まいばん 毎晩 every evening 
よる 夜 night 
こんばん 今晩 this evening 
ひ 日 day 
むかし 昔 in the past 
Higher tier   
（**と）どうじに （**と）同時に at the same time as ** 
（**の）あと（で/に） （**の）後（で/に） after (**) 
（**の）まえに （**の）前に before (**) 
**かげつ **か月 ** months 
いちにちじゅう 一日中 all day long 
けさ 今朝 this morning 
こんど 今度 this time / next time 
さいきん 最近 recently 
しばらく  for a while 
ひる 昼 noon 
へいせい 平成 the Heisei era 
まよなか 真夜中 midnight 
ゆうがた 夕方 evening 
   
Days of the week   
Foundation tier   
げつようび 月曜日 Monday 
かようび 火曜日 Tuesday 
すいようび 水曜日 Wednesday 
もくようび 木曜日 Thursday 
きんようび 金曜日 Friday 
どようび 土曜日 Saturday 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
95 
 
Foundation tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
にちようび 日曜日 Sunday 
しゅうまつ 週末 weekend 
きゅうじつ 休日 holiday  
しゅくじつ 祝日 festival day 
   
Months and seasons of the year   
Foundation tier   
いちがつ 一月 January 
にがつ 二月 February 
さんがつ 三月 March 
しがつ 四月 April 
ごがつ 五月 May 
ろくがつ 六月 June 
しちがつ 七月 July 
はちがつ 八月 August 
くがつ 九月 September 
じゅうがつ 十月 October 
じゅういちがつ 十一月 November 
じゅうにがつ 十二月 December 
きせつ 季節 season 
はる 春 spring 
つゆ 梅雨 rainy season 
なつ 夏 summer 
あき 秋 autumn 
ふゆ 冬 winter 
   
Question words   
Foundation tier   
いくら  how much (money) 
いつ  when 
だれ  who 
どう  how 
どうして  why 
どうやって  how 
どこ  where 
どの  which  
どのくらい  how much (quantity) 
どれ  which one 
どんな  what kind of  
なに 何 what 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
96 
 
Foundation tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
なにいろ 何色 what colour 
なん with a measure word 何 with a measure word  
なんがつ 何月 which month 
なんじ 何時 what time 
なんにち 何日 what date 
なんようび 何曜日 what day of the week 
Higher tier   
いかが  how (about) 
なぜ  why 
   
Other useful expressions  
Foundation tier   
**くん **君 used after a boy's name 
**さん  Mr./Mrs./Ms.  
** さま **様 Mr./Mrs./Ms.  
**でございます  This is / It is ** 
あの（う）  well… 
ありがとう（ございます） thank you (very much) 
いいですね(え)  that's nice 
いいですよ  that's fine 
いただきます  bon apetite  
いらっしゃいませ  welcome 
いってきます 行ってきます I'm off 
いってらっしゃい  see you later / take care 
ただいま  I'm home 
おかえりなさい お帰りなさい welcome home 
おかげさまで  thanks for asking 
おげんきですか お元気ですか how are you? 
おだいじに お大事に take care (to an ill person) 
おねがいします お願いします please  
おはよう（ございます）  good morning 
おやすみなさい お休みなさい good night 
かしこまりました  certainly 
がんばって（ください） 頑張って（ください） Do your best 
ごちそうさま（でした）  thanks for a lovely meal 
ごめんなさい  I'm sorry 
こんにちは  hello 
こんばんは  good evening 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
97 
 
Foundation tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
さようなら  goodbye 
ざんねんです（が） 残念です（が） It's a pity, but.. 
じゃ  well then, in that case 
じゃ、また  see you again 
すみません  sorry, excuse me, thanks 
ぜんぶ（で） 全部（で） in total 
だいじょうぶ（です） 大丈夫（です） I'm/It's okay 
ちょっと…  it’s a bit… 
つごうがわるいです 都合が悪いです It's not convenient 
どうぞ  said when giving things 
どうも  thanks 
はい  yes 
いいえ  no 
ええ  yes (familiar) 
うん  yes (familiar) 
ううん  no (familiar) 
はじめまして 初めまして how do you do 
ほかに？ 他に？ anything else? 
もういちどおねがいします もう一度お願いします again, please 
もしもし  hello on the phone 
ようこそ  welcome 
よろしく（おねがいします） よろしく（お願いします） please be good to me 
Higher tier   
けっこうです 結構です it's okay 
こちらこそ  
it's me who should be saying 
that 
しつれいします 失礼します excuse me 
しつれいですが 失礼ですが excuse me, but… 
では、また  see you again 
どういたしまして  you're welcome 
わたしのいけんでは 私の意見では in my opinion 
   
Countries and continents  
Foundation tier 
アイルランド  Ireland 
アメリカ  America 
イギリス  England/UK 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
98 
 
Foundation tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
イタリア  Italy 
イングランド  England 
インド  India 
ウェールズ  Wales 
オーストラリア  Australia 
カナダ  Canada 
かんこく 韓国 Korea 
スコットランド  Scotland 
スペイン  Spain 
ちゅうごく 中国 China 
ドイツ  Germany 
にほん 日本 Japan 
フランス  France 
ロシア  Russia 
アジア  Asia 
アフリカ  Africa 
ヨーロッパ  Europe 
   
Higher tier   
えいこく 英国 England/UK 
べいこく 米国 USA 
   
Nationalities   
Foundation tier   
アメリカじん アメリカ人 American 
イギリスじん イギリス人 English 
イタリアじん イタリア人 Italian 
インドじん インド人 Indian 
オーストラリアじん オーストラリア人 Australian 
カナダじん カナダ人 Canadian 
かんこくじん 韓国人 Korean 
スペインじん スペイン人 Spanish 
ちゅうごくじん 中国人 Chinese 
ドイツじん ドイツ人 German 
にほんじん 日本人 Japanese 
フランスじん フランス人 French 
ロシアじん ロシア人 Russian 
   
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
99 
 
Places   
Foundation tier   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
ほっかいどう 北海道 Hokkaido 
ほんしゅう 本州 Honshu 
きゅうしゅう 九州 Kyushu 
しこく 四国 Shikoku 
けん 県 prefecture 
し 市 city 
むら 村 village 
とうきょう 東京 Tokyo 
おおさか 大阪 Osaka 
おきなわ 沖縄 Okinawa 
きょうと 京都 Kyoto 
さっぽろ 札幌 Sapporo 
なら 奈良 Nara 
ひろしま 広島 Hiroshima 
ふじさん 富士山 Mt. Fuji 
ロンドン  London 
パリ  Paris 
ニューヨーク  New York 
   
Areas/mountains/seas  
Foundation tier   
うみ 海 sea 
おんせん 温泉 hot spring 
かわ 川 river 
しま 島 island 
たんぼ 田んぼ rice field 
とし 都市 large city 
はやし 林 woods 
もり 森 forest 
やま 山 mountain 
けしき  scenery 
きた 北 north 
にし 西 west 
ひがし 東 east 
みなみ 南 south 
Higher tier   
アルプス  Alps 
おか 丘 hill 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
100 
 
Higher tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
しゅう 州 state 
しゅと 首都 capital city 
じんこう 人口 population 
ちいき 地域 region 
ちほう 地方 region, district 
   
Language used in dialogues and messages  
Foundation tier   
けいたいでんわ 携帯電話 mobile phone 
じゅうしょ 住所 address 
でんしメール 電子メール email  
でんわ 電話 telephone  
でんわばんごう 電話番号 telephone number 
めいし 名刺 name card / business card 
メール  email/text 
メールアドレス  email address 
メッセージ  message 
ゆうびんばんごう 郵便番号 postcode 
   
Section 2 – Topic-specific vocabulary  
Identity and culture - food and drink  
Foundation tier   
たべもの 食べ物 food 
のみもの 飲み物 drink(s) 
アイスクリーム  ice cream 
うどん  noodles 
おかし お菓子 Japanese sweets 
おにぎり  rice balls 
おべんとう お弁当 packed lunch / bento 
オレンジ  orange 
カレーライス  curry (rice) 
ぎゅうにく 牛肉 beef 
ぎゅうにゅう 牛乳 milk 
くだもの 果物 fruit 
ケーキ  cake 
こうちゃ 紅茶 tea 
コーヒー  coffee 
コーラ  coke 
こおり  ice  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
101 
 
Foundation tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
ココア  cocoa 
ごはん ご飯 rice 
（お）こめ （お）米 (uncooked) rice 
さかな 魚 fish 
（お）さけ （お）酒 sake 
さしみ 刺身 sashimi 
サラダ  salad 
サンドイッチ  sandwich 
ジュース  juice 
しょうゆ  soy sauce 
スープ  soup 
すきやき 好き焼き sukiyaki 
（お）すし （お）寿司 sushi 
ステーキ  steak 
ソーセージ  sausage 
そば  noodles 
たまご 卵 egg 
チーズ  cheese 
チキン  chicken 
チップス  crisps 
ポテトチップス  crisps 
(お)ちゃ (お)茶 green tea 
チョコレート  chocolate 
デザート  dessert 
てんぷら 天ぷら tempura 
トースト  toast 
とりにく 鶏肉 chicken 
にく 肉 meat 
パスタ  pasta 
バナナ  banana 
ハム  ham 
パン  bread 
ハンバーガー  hamburger 
ビーフ  beef 
ビール  beer 
ピザ  pizza 
ビュッフェ  buffet 
フライドポテト  chips 
みかん  satsuma/tangerine 
みず 水 water 
みそしる 味噌汁 miso soup 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
102 
 
Foundation tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
ミルク  milk 
やさい 野菜 vegetable(s) 
ヨーグルト  yogurt 
ラーメン  (egg) noodles 
りんご  apple 
レモン  lemon 
ワイン  wine 
ベジタリアン  vegetarian 
メニュー  menu 
あさごはん 朝ごはん breakfast 
ひるごはん 昼ごはん lunch 
ばんごはん 晩ごはん dinner 
がいしょく 外食 eating out 
はし 箸 chopsticks 
ナイフ  knife 
フォーク  fork 
スプーン  spoon  
Higher tier   
あぶら 油 oil 
アボカド  avocado 
いちご  strawberry 
おこのみやき お好み焼き okonomiyaki 
おゆ お湯 hot water 
きゅうり  cucumber 
こしょう  pepper 
サーモン  salmon 
さとう 砂糖 sugar 
シーフード  sea food 
しお 塩 salt 
じゃがいも じゃが芋 potato(es) 
ジャム  jam 
スナック  snack 
たまねぎ 玉ねぎ onion 
ていしょく 定食 set meal 
トマト  tomato 
なし 梨 pear 
なま（の） 生（の） raw 
にゅうせいひん 乳製品 milk products 
にんじん 人参 carrot(s) 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
103 
 
Higher tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
パイナップル  pineapple 
バター  butter 
ぶたにく 豚肉 pork 
ぶどう 葡萄 grapes 
ミックス  mixed 
めいぶつ 名物 speciality 
もも 桃 peach 
やきとり 焼き鳥 grilled chicken skewers 
ゆうきしょくひん 有機食品 organic 
あじ 味 taste 
しょくじ 食事 meal 
ちゅうしょく 昼食 lunch 
ちょうしょく 朝食 breakfast 
ゆうしょく 夕食 dinner 
コップ  cup 
（お）さら （お）皿 plate 
なべ 鍋 (cooking) pot 
フライパン  frying pan 
おかいけい お会計 the bill 
おかんじょう お勘定 the bill 
サービス  service 
セルフサービス  room service 
さいしょくしゅぎ 菜食主義 vegetarian 
   
Clothing   
Foundation tier   
T シャツ  T-shirt 
かさ 傘 umbrella 
かばん 鞄 bag 
きもの 着物 kimono/clothes 
くつ 靴 shoe(s) 
くつした 靴下 sock(s) 
コート  coat 
サイズ  size 
ジーンズ  jeans 
シャツ  shirt 
スーツ  suit 
スカート  skirt 
ズボン  trousers 
セーター  jumper 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
104 
 
Foundation tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
とけい 時計 watch, clock 
ネクタイ  tie 
パジャマ  pyjamas 
バッグ  bag 
ハンカチ  handkerchief 
はんズボン 半ズボン shorts 
ハンドバッグ  handbag 
ファッション  fashion 
ブーツ  boot(s) 
ベルト  belt 
ぼうし 帽子 hat  
ポケット  pocket 
みずぎ 水着 swimming costume/trunks 
ようふく 洋服 (western) clothes 
Higher tier   
アクセサリー  accessories 
イヤリング  ear ring(s) 
ウール  wool 
うでどけい 腕時計 watch 
うわぎ 上着 jacket, coat 
カーディガン  cardigan 
こうすい 香水 perfume 
したぎ 下着 underwear 
しちゃくしつ 試着室 changing room(s) 
ジャケット  jacket 
スカーフ  scarf 
スタイル  style 
スニーカー  trainer(s) 
スリッパ  slipper(s) 
てぶくろ 手袋 glove(s) 
ネックレス  necklace 
ほうせき 宝石 jewellry 
メイク  make up 
ゆかた 浴衣 yukata 
わふく 和服 Japanese clothes 
ワンピース  dress 
   
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
105 
 
Family and relationships 
Foundation tier   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
かぞく 家族 family 
ちち 父 father 
はは 母 mother 
あに 兄 elder brother 
あね 姉 elder sister 
おとうと 弟 younger brother 
いもうと 妹 younger sister 
きょうだい 兄弟 siblings 
おとうさん お父さん father 
おかあさん お母さん mother 
おにいさん お兄さん elder brother 
おねえさん お姉さん elder sister 
おとうとさん 弟さん younger brother 
いもうとさん 妹さん younger sister 
おばあさん お婆さん grandmother 
おじいさん お爺さん grandfather 
あかちゃん 赤ちゃん baby 
しんせき 親戚 relatives 
ともだち 友達 friend(s) 
ペンフレンド  penfriend 
ガールフレンド  girlfriend 
ボーイフレンド  boyfriend 
かれし 彼氏 boyfriend 
ひと 人 person 
おとこのひと 男の人 man 
おんなのひと 女の人 woman 
おとこのこ 男の子 boy 
おんなのこ 女の子 girl 
おとしより お年寄り elderly person 
しょうねん 少年 (a) youth 
しょうじょ 少女 a girl 
みんな  everyone 
みなさん  everyone (addressing them) 
Higher tier   
あかんぼう 赤ん坊 baby 
いとこ  cousin 
おこさん お子さん child(ren) 
おくさん 奥さん wife 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
106 
 
Higher tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
（ご）しゅじん （ご）主人 husband 
おっと 夫 husband 
つま 妻 wife 
おじ  uncle 
おじさん  uncle 
おば  aunt 
おばさん  aunt 
かた 方 person (honorific) 
しまい 姉妹 sisters 
そふ 祖父 grandfather 
そぼ 祖母 grandmother 
ちょうじょ 長女 eldest daughter 
ちょうなん 長男 eldest son 
ひとりっこ 一人っ子 only child 
ふたご 双子 twin(s) 
まご 孫 grand child(ren) 
むすこ 息子 son 
むすめ 娘 daughter 
りょうしん 両親 parent(s) 
わかもの 若者 young person 
じぶん 自分 self 
   
Personal pronouns   
Foundation tier   
わたし 私 I 
わたくし 私 I (formal) 
わたしたち 私たち we 
ぼく 僕 I (male, familiar) 
あなた  you (singular) 
あなたたち  you (plural) 
かれ 彼 he 
かのじょ 彼女 she/girlfriend 
かれら 彼ら they 
   
Describing people   
Foundation tier   
あたまがいい 頭がいい clever 
おかねもち お金持ち rich 
おとな 大人 adult 
こども 子供 child 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
107 
 
Foundation tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
がいこくじん 外国人 foreigner 
けっこん 結婚 marriage 
せ 背 height 
たんじょうび 誕生日 birthday 
とし 年 age 
なまえ 名前 given name 
にんき 人気 popular 
ねんれい 年齢 age 
ブロンド  blond 
みょうじ 苗字 surname 
めがね 眼鏡 glasses 
Higher tier   
いじめ  bullying 
かんけい 関係 relationship 
ぎりの 義理の ** in law 
きんぱつ 金髪 blond 
けんか  fight, quarrel 
じしん 自身 self, myself, himself, herself 
せいかく 性格 character 
どくしん 独身 single 
なかがいい 仲がいい friends with 
ゆうめいじん 有名人 celebrity 
ユーモア  humour 
りかい 理解 understanding 
りこん 離婚 divorce(d) 
   
Pets and animals   
Foundation tier   
どうぶつ 動物 animal 
ペット  pet(s) 
いぬ 犬 dog 
うさぎ 兎 rabbit 
うし 牛 cow 
うま 馬 horse 
かめ 亀 turtle, tortoise 
きんぎょ 金魚 gold fish 
くま 熊 bear 
しか 鹿 deer 
ぞう 像 elephant 
とら 虎 tiger 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
108 
 
Foundation tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
とり 鳥 bird 
ねこ 猫 cat 
ねずみ  mouse 
ハムスター  hamster 
モルモット  guinea pig 
ライオン  lion 
   
Parts of the body and illnesses  
Foundation tier   
あし 足 feet, legs 
あたま 頭 head 
うで 腕 arm 
おなか お腹 tummy 
かお 顔 face 
かた 肩 shoulder(s) 
かみのけ 髪の毛 hair 
からだ 体 body 
くち 口 mouth 
くちびる 唇 lip(s) 
くび 首 neck 
こし 腰 hip(s) 
せなか 背中 back 
て 手 hand(s) 
のど 喉 throat 
は 歯 tooth, teeth 
はな 鼻 nose 
ひざ 膝 knee(s) 
みみ 耳 ear 
め 目 eye(s) 
ゆび 指 fingers 
びょうき 病気 ill, illness 
かぜ 風邪 a cold 
けが  wound 
せき 咳 cough 
ねつ 熱 temperature 
こえ 声 voice 
きぶん 気分 mood, feeling 
きもち 気持ち feeling 
じこ 事故 accident 
ストレス  stress 
   
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
109 
 
Rooms and items in a house  
Foundation tier   
アパート  flat, apartment 
いえ 家 house 
うち  home 
マンション  flat, apartment 
にわ 庭 garden 
いま 居間 lounge 
おてあらい お手洗い toilet 
かいだん 階段 stairs 
しゃこ 車庫 garage 
しんしつ 寝室 bedroom 
だいどころ 台所 kitchen 
ドア  door 
トイレ  toilet 
ふろば 風呂場 bath room 
へや 部屋 room 
（お）ふろ （お）風呂 bath 
エアコン  air conditioning 
かぐ 家具 furniture 
かべ 壁 wall(s) 
カレンダー  calendar 
ソファ  sofa 
たな 棚 shelf 
だんぼう 暖房 heating, radiator 
つくえ 机 desk 
テーブル  table 
どうぐ 道具 tool(s) 
ふとん  futon 
ベッド  bed 
ほんだな 本棚 book shelf 
まど 窓 window 
れいぞうこ 冷蔵庫 refrigerator 
**かいだて **階建て ** storey 
   
Sport   
Foundation tier   
からて 空手 karate 
ゴルフ  golf 
サッカー  football 
さんぽ 散歩 going for a walk 
じゅうどう 柔道 judo 
すいえい 水泳 swimming 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
110 
 
Foundation tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
スキー  ski(ing) 
スケート  skating 
スポーツ  sports 
すもう 相撲 sumo 
ダンス  dance 
チーム  team 
テニス  tennis 
ハイキング  hiking 
バスケットボール  basketball 
バドミントン  badminton 
ボール  ball 
ホッケー  hockey 
マウンテンバイク  mountain bik(ing) 
やきゅう 野球 baseball 
ヨット  yacht 
ラグビー  rugby 
Higher tier   
カヌー  canoe 
かんきゃく 観客 audinece, specator(s) 
クライミング  climing 
ゴール  goal 
サーフィン  surfing 
サイクリング  cycling 
じょうば 乗馬 riding 
すいじょうスキー 水上スキー water skiing 
スケートボード  skate board 
セーリング  sailing 
せんしゅ 選手 (sports) player 
たいそう 体操 gymnastics 
たっきゅう 卓球 table tennis 
とざん 登山 climbing 
バレー  ballet 
バレーボール  volleyball 
ボクシング  boxing 
ようぐ 用具 equipment 
   
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
111 
 
Social media and technology  
Foundation tier   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
CD  CD 
DVD  DVD 
インターネット  internet 
ウィルス  virus 
ウェブサイト  website 
オンライン  online 
クリック  click  
コンピューター  computer 
コンピューターゲーム  computer game 
スクリーン  screen 
ソーシャルネットワーク  social network 
ダウンロード  download 
ディスク  disk 
デジタル  digital 
パスワード  password 
パソコン  personal computer 
プリンター  printer 
ブログ  blog 
ホームページ  home page 
マウス  mouse 
Higher tier   
アップロード  upload 
さくじょ 削除 to delete 
ソフト  software 
タイプ  to type 
チャットルーム  chat room 
でんしゲーム 電子ゲーム electronic games 
   
Music   
Foundation tier   
うた 歌 song 
オーケストラ  orchestra 
おんがく 音楽 music 
かしゅ 歌手 singer 
がっき 楽器 musical instrument 
ギター  guitar 
クラシック  classical 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
112 
 
Foundation tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
クラリネット  clarinet 
コンサート  concert 
ドラム  drum(s) 
バンド  band 
ピアノ  piano 
ポップス  popular music 
Higher tier   
がっしょう 合唱 chorus, choir 
ジャズ  jazz 
トランペット  trumpet 
バイオリン  violin 
ふえ 笛 (Japanese) flute 
フルート  flute 
ロック  rock music 
   
Celebrations and festivals  
Foundation tier   
(お）いわい （お）祝い celebration 
イベント  event 
まつり 祭り festival 
おしょうがつ お正月 New Year 
おぼん お盆 the 'bon' festival 
クリスマス  Christmas 
けっこんしき 結婚式 wedding 
ゴールデンウィーク  Golden Week 
しんねん 新年 new year 
はつもうで 初詣 new year shrine visit 
はなみ 花見 flower arranging 
   
Hobbies and interests    
Foundation tier   
アニメ  animation 
いけばな 生け花 flower arranging 
えいが 映画 film 
おもちゃ  toy 
かいもの 買い物 shopping 
かつどう 活動 activity 
カメラ  camera 
カラオケ  karaoke 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
113 
 
Foundation tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji   
きょうみ 興味 interest 
クラブ  club 
ゲーム  game 
げき 劇 a play 
（お）こづかい （お）小遣い pocket money 
ざっし 雑誌 magazine 
しゃしん 写真 photograph, photography 
じゆうじかん 自由時間 free time 
しゅみ 趣味 hobby 
ショー  show 
シリーズ  series 
たのしみ 楽しみ pleasure,  enjoyment 
つり 釣り fishing 
ディスコ  disco 
テレビ  TV 
どくしょ 読書 reading 
ドラマ  drama 
ナイトクラブ  night club 
ニュース  news 
パーティー  party 
ばんぐみ 番組 programme 
ビデオ  video 
ぶんか 文化 culture 
ほん 本 book 
まんが 漫画 manga, cartoon 
ユースクラブ  youth club 
リモコン  remote control 
りょうり 料理 cooking 
レジャー  leisure 
Higher tier   
えんげき 演劇 drama 
かじ 家事 housework 
がめん 画面 screen 
さどう 茶道 tea ceremony 
しせつ 施設 facility 
しゅうかん 習慣 custom 
でんとう 伝統 tradition 
にちじょうせいかつ 日常生活 every day life 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
114 
 
Local area, holiday and travel: methods of transport 
Foundation tier   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
こうつうしゅだん 交通手段 method of transport 
のりもの 乗り物 method of transport 
あるいて 歩いて on foot 
オートバイ  motorbike 
くるま 車 car 
じてんしゃ 自転車 bicycle 
じどうしゃ 自動車 car 
しんかんせん 新幹線 bullet train 
タクシー  taxi 
ちかてつ  underground, tube 
でんしゃ 電車 tram/train 
トラック  lorry 
バス  bus 
ひこうき 飛行機 aeroplane 
フェリー  ferry 
ふね 船 ship, boat 
フライト  flight 
**びん **便 flight ** 
ヘリコプター  helicopter 
ボート  boat 
レンタカー  hire car 
スピード  speed 
   
Places in town/places to visit  
Foundation tier   
いなか 田舎 countryside 
インフォメーション  information 
うりば 売り場 sales counter 
えいがかん 映画館 cinema 
えき 駅 station 
エスカレーター  escalator 
エレベーター  lift 
がいこく 外国 abroad, foreign country 
かいしゃ 会社 company 
ガソリンスタンド  petrol station 
カフェ  café 
かんこうあんないじょ 観光案内所 tourist information office 
キオスク  kiosk 
きっぷうりば 切符売り場 ticket office 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
115 
 
Foundation tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
キャンプ  camp 
キャンプじょう キャンプ場 camping ground 
きょうかい 教会 church 
ぎんこう 銀行 bank 
きんじょ 近所 neighbourhood 
くうこう 空港 airport 
くすりや 薬屋 pharmacy, chemist 
くに 国 country 
けいさつ 警察 police 
けいさつしょ 警察署 police station 
げきじょう 劇場 theatre 
コインロッカー  locker 
こうえん 公園 park 
こうじょう 工場 factory 
こうばん 交番 police box 
コンビニ  convenience store 
じむしょ 事務所 office 
しょくどう 食堂 canteen 
ショッピングセンター  shopping centre 
（お）しろ （お）城 castle 
じんじゃ 神社 shrine 
しんぶんや 新聞屋 newsagent 
スーパー  supermarket 
スポーツセンター  sports centre 
たいしかん 大使館 embassy 
タクシーのりば タクシー乗り場 taxi rank 
たてもの 建物 building 
たばこや たばこ屋 tobacco shop 
ちゅうしゃじょう 駐車（場） car park 
テニスコート  tennis court 
デパート  department store 
（お）てら （お）寺 temple 
どうぶつえん 動物園 zoo 
としょかん 図書館 library 
にくや 肉屋 butcher 
のうじょう 農場 farm 
バー  bar 
はくぶつかん 博物館 museum 
バスのりば バス乗り場 bus stop 
パブ  pub 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
116 
 
Foundation tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
パンや パン屋 baker 
ビーチ  beach 
びじゅつかん 美術館 art gallery 
びょういん 病院 hospital 
ビル  high rise building 
プール  swimming pool 
ヘアサロン  hair salon 
ポスト  post box 
まち 町、街 town 
みせ 店 shop 
もん 門 gate 
ゆうびんきょく 郵便局 post office 
レストラン  restaurant 
ロッカー  locker 
**や **屋 ** shop 
Higher tier   
いちば 市場 market 
うけつけ 受付 reception 
かいがい 海外 abroad 
かいがん 海岸 coast 
かいじょう 会場 location 
かんこうめいしょ 観光名所 famous tourist spot 
こっきょう 国境 border 
じどうはんばいき 自動販売機 vending machine 
しやくしょ 市役所 city/town hall 
せんめんじょ 洗面所 wash room 
タワー  tower 
とかい 都会 large city 
とこや 床屋 barber 
ところ 所 place 
バスてい バス停 bus stop 
まちあいしつ 待合室 waiting room 
みずうみ 湖 lake 
みなと 港 port 
   
Finding the way   
Foundation tier   
いりぐち 入口 entrance 
かど  corner 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
117 
 
Foundation tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
こうさてん 交差点 crossroads, junction 
こうつう 交通 traffic  
しんごう 信号 traffic light(s) 
ちゅうしん 中心 centre 
でぐち 出口 exit 
はし 橋 bridge 
ばしょ 場所 place 
ひだり 左 left 
みぎ 右 right 
みち 道 road 
Higher tier   
いきさき 行先 destination 
おうだんほどう 横断歩道 pedestrial crossing 
こうそくどうろ 高速道路 motorway 
どうろ 道路 road 
ほうこう 方向 directions 
ラッシュアワー  rush hour 
ロータリー  roundabout 
   
Accommodation   
Foundation tier   
おきゃくさん お客さん customer, guest 
かぎ 鍵 key, lock 
シーツ  sheet(s) 
シャワー  shower 
せっけん 石鹸 soap 
タオル  towel 
チェックアウト  check out 
チェックイン  check in 
パスポート  passport 
ホテル  hotel 
ユースホステル  youth hostel 
ようしつ 洋室 Western style room 
ようしょく 洋食 Western meal 
よやく 予約 reservation 
りょかん 旅館 Japanese inn 
わしつ 和室 Japanese style room 
わしょく 和食 Japanese room 
   
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
118 
 
Buying a train ticket   
Foundation tier   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
おうふく 往復 return 
かたみち 片道 one-way 
きっぷ 切符 ticket 
グリーンしゃ グリーン車 1st class 
していせき 指定席 reserved seat 
じゆうせき 自由席 unreserved seat 
りょうきん 料金 fare 
** ばんせん **番線 platform number 
**せん **線 the ** line 
ホーム  platform 
**ゆき **行き bound for ** 
   
Services   
Foundation tier   
え 絵 picture 
えはがき 絵葉書 picture postcard 
おおきさ 大きさ size 
おかね お金 money 
おつり お釣り change 
おみやげ お土産 souvenir 
カード  card 
ガイド  (tour) guide 
ガイドブック  guidebook 
ガソリン  petrol 
かたち 形 shape 
かんこう 観光 tourism 
かんこうきゃく 観光客 tourist  
きって 切手 stamps 
きゃく 客 customer, guest 
くすり 薬 medicine, tablets 
クレジットカード  credit card 
さいふ 財布 purse 
サイン  (to) sign 
しんぶん 新聞 newspaper 
スーツケース  suitcase 
ただ  free 
ちか 地下 basement, underground 
チケット  ticket 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
119 
 
Foundation tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
ちず 地図 map 
ツアー  tour 
てがみ 手紙 a letter 
でんち 電池 battery 
テント  tent 
にもつ 荷物 baggage, luggage 
ねだん 値段 price 
はがき  postcard 
はこ 箱 box 
はなび 花火 fireworks 
はブラシ 歯ブラシ tooth brush 
パンフレット  pamphlet 
ビザ  visa 
プレゼント  present 
ボールペン  ball point pen 
ほかの 他の other 
ポスター  poster 
ラジオ  radio 
りょうしゅうしょ 領収書 receipt 
りょこう 旅行 travelling 
レジ  till 
レシート  receipt 
レンタル  rental 
わすれもの 忘れもの lost property 
Higher tier   
うんてんめんきょ 運転免許 driving licence 
きかい 機械 machine 
こうかん 交換 exchange 
こうきょうこうつうきかん 公共交通機関 public transport 
さんぎょう 産業 industry 
じもと（の） 地元（の） local 
しゅくはく 宿泊 accommodation 
たいけん 体験 personal/physical experience 
てんらんかい 展覧会 exhibition 
にゅうじょうりょう 入場料 entrance fee 
にんぎょう 人形 doll 
はみがきこ 歯磨き粉 toothpaste 
ふうとう 封筒 envelope 
   
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
120 
 
Weather and climate   
Foundation tier   
Hiragana/Katakana   
てんき 天気 weather 
てんきよほう 天気予報 weather forecast 
あめ 雨 rain 
かぜ 風 wind 
くも 雲 cloud 
くもり 曇り cloudy 
たいふう 台風 typhoon 
はれ 晴れ sunny 
ゆき 雪 snow 
**ど **度 ** degrees 
き 木 tree 
くうき 空気 air 
さくら 桜 cherry blossom 
そら 空 sky 
つき 月 moon 
はな 花 flower 
ほし 星 star 
Higher tier   
あらし 嵐 storm 
かみなり 雷 thunder 
きおん 気温 temperature 
きこう 気候 climate 
きり 霧 fog 
しつど 湿度 humidity 
たいよう 太陽 sun 
のち  later 
   
School subjects  
Foundation tier   
かもく 科目 subject 
えいご 英語 English 
がいこくご 外国語 foreign language 
かがく 科学 science 
**ご **語 ** language 
こくご 国語 Japanese 
しゃかい 社会 social studies 
しゅうじ 習字 calligraphy/brush writing 
すうがく 数学 mathematics 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
121 
 
Foundation tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
たいいく 体育 physical education 
ちり 地理 geography 
にほんご 日本語 Japanese 
びじゅつ 美術 art 
ぶんがく 文学 literature 
ホームルーム  form time, form room 
れきし 歴史 history 
Higher tier   
かがく 化学 chemistry 
かていか 家庭科 home economics 
ぎじゅつ 技術 technology 
けいざい 経済 economics 
しゅうきょう 宗教 religion, religious studies 
しょどう 書道 calligraphy/brush writing 
せいぶつ（がく） 生物（学） biology 
せんたく（かもく） 選択（科目） optional subjects 
どうとく 道徳 moral education 
ぶつり（がく） 物理（学） physics 
   
The school day and school year  
Foundation tier   
えんそく 遠足 excursion 
きゅうしょく 給食 (set) school lunch 
けんがく 見学 study trip 
しあい 試合 (sports) match 
しゅうがくりょこう 修学旅行 school trip 
じゅぎょう 授業 lesson(s) 
そつぎょう 卒業 graduation 
にゅうがく 入学 entering a school 
テスト  test 
ひるやすみ 昼休み lunch break 
ほうかご 放課後 after school 
ホームステイ  home stay 
やすみ 休み holiday 
やすみじかん 休み時間 break 
レッスン  lesson(s) 
   
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
122 
 
Higher tier   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
かいぎ 会議 meeting 
きまつ 期末 end of term 
きゅうけい 休憩 rest 
けんしゅう 研修 training 
しけん 試験 examination 
そつぎょうしき 卒業式 school graduation ceremony 
にゅうがくしき 入学式 school entrance ceremony 
ちゅうかん 中間 mid-(term) 
りゅうがく 留学 studying abroad 
   
School buildings and things in a classroom  
Foundation tier   
いす 椅子 chair 
えんぴつ 鉛筆 pencil 
かみ 紙 paper 
きょうかしょ 教科書 text book 
きょうしつ 教室 classroom 
グラウンド  sports ground 
けしゴム 消しゴム rubber, eraser 
ごみばこ ごみ箱 rubbish bin 
じしょ 辞書 dictionary 
セロテープ  selotape 
たいいくかん 体育館 sports hall, gym 
ノート  notebook 
のり  glue 
はさみ  scissors 
プリント  handout 
ペン  pen 
レポート  report 
ろうか 廊下 corridor 
Higher tier   
うんどうじょう 運動場 sports ground 
こうてい 校庭 school yard 
こくばん 黒板 blackboard 
しょくいんしつ 職員室 staff room 
ふでばこ 筆箱 pencil case 
りょう 寮 dormitory 
   
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
123 
 
Types of schools and students  
Foundation tier   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
がっこう 学校 school 
しょうがっこう 小学校 primary school 
ちゅうがっこう 中学校 
middle school, junior high 
school 
こうこう 高校 (senior) high school 
だいがく 大学 universtiy 
しょうがくせい 小学生 primary school pupil 
ちゅうがくせい 中学生 secondary school pupil 
こうこうせい 高校生 high school pupil 
がくせい 学生 student 
だいがくせい 大学生 universtiy student 
せいと 生徒 pupil(s) 
がくねん 学年 school year 
**ねんせい **年生 ** grader 
Higher tier   
こうりつ 公立 public 
しりつ 私立 private 
ようちえん 幼稚園 nursery 
りゅうがくせい 留学生 overseas student 
   
Other school vocabulary  
Foundation tier   
はじめ 始め、初め start 
おわり 終わり end 
ひらがな  hiragana 
かたかな  katakana 
かんじ 漢字 kanji 
ローマじ ローマ字 romaji 
がっき 学期 (school) term 
**くみ **組 class ** 
クラス  class 
グループ  group 
こうちょう（せんせい） 校長（先生） head teacher 
こたえ 答 answer 
ことば 言葉 word 
さくぶん 作文 essay 
じ 字 letter(s) 
**じかんめ **時間目 period ** 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
124 
 
Foundation tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
じかんわり 時間割 timetable 
しつもん 質問 question 
じゅく 塾 cram school 
しゅくだい 宿題 homework 
せいせき 成績 grade(s) 
せいふく 制服 uniform 
**ぶ **部 ** club/department 
ページ  page 
れい 例 example 
れんしゅう 練習 practice 
なつやすみ 夏休み summer holiday 
はるやすみ 春休み spring holiday 
ふゆやすみ 冬休み winter holiday 
** について  about ** 
Higher tier   
いけん 意見 opinion 
いみ 意味 meaning 
おと 音 sound 
おもいで 思い出 memory 
かいわ 会話 conversation 
きまり  rule 
きょういく 教育 education 
けいけん 経験 experience 
けっか 結果 result(s) 
けっせき 欠席 absent 
けんきゅう 研究 research 
ごうかく 合格 pass 
こと 事 (abstract) thing 
もの 物 (physical) thing 
じっけん 実験 experiment 
じゆうけんきゅう 自由研究 project work 
しゅっせき 出席 present 
しょうせつ 小説 novel 
しょるい 書類 documents 
にっき 日記 diary 
はなし 話 talk 
ふくしゅう 復習 revision 
よしゅう 予習 preparing for class 
プレッシャー  pressure 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
125 
 
Future aspirations, study and work  
Foundation tier   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
アーティスト  artist 
いしゃ 医者 doctor 
ウェーター  waiter 
ウェートレス  waitress 
うんてんしゅ 運転手 driver 
エンジニア  engineer 
おんがくか 音楽家 musician 
かいしゃいん 会社員 company employee 
かんごし 看護師 nurse 
ぎんこういん 銀行員 banker 
けいかん 警官 police officer 
さっか 作家 writer 
シェフ  chef 
ジャーナリスト  journalist 
しゃちょう 社長 company president 
しゅふ 主婦 housewife 
スチュワーデス  stewardess 
スチュワード  steward 
せんせい 先生 teacher 
つうやく 通訳 interpreter 
デザイナー  designer 
てんいん 店員 shop assistant 
はいしゃ 歯医者 dentist 
はいゆう 俳優 actor, actress 
パイロット  pilot 
キャビンアテンダント  flight attendant 
プログラマー  (computer) programmer 
べんごし 弁護士 lawyer 
ほんやくか 翻訳家 translator 
マネージャー  manager 
むしょく 無職 unemployed 
アルバイト  part time job 
インタビュー  interview 
きゅうりょう 給料 salary 
けいかく 計画 plan 
じこしょうかい 自己紹介 self introduction 
しごと 仕事 job 
しょうらい 将来 future 
しょくばたいけん 職場体験 work experience 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
126 
 
Foundation tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
トレーニング  training 
パートタイム  part time 
フルタイム  full time 
プロ  professional 
ボーナス  bonus 
ボランティア  volunteer 
ゆめ 夢 dream 
よてい 予定 plan 
りゆう 理由 reason 
Higher tier   
かいけいし 会計士 accountant 
がか 画家 painter 
きょうし 教師 teacher 
けんちくか 建築家 architect 
こうむいん 公務員 civil servant 
いがく 医学 medicine 
てつがく 哲学 philosophy 
ほうがく 法学 law 
いんしょう 印象 impression 
きかい 機会 opportunity 
げんご 言語 language(s) 
こうこく 広告 advert 
しかく 資格 qualification 
じしん 自信 self confidence 
しつぎょう 失業 unemployment 
せんもん 専門 specialism 
めんせつ 面接 interview 
もくてき 目的 aim 
   
International and global dimension  
Foundation tier   
エネルギー  energy 
オリンピック  Olympics 
かざん 火山 volcano 
かんきょう 環境 environment 
けってん 欠点 disadvantage(s) 
こうがい 公害 pollution 
こくさい 国際 international 
こくさいてき（な） 国際的（な） international 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
127 
 
Foundation tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
ごみ  rubbish 
さんせい 賛成 agree 
じしん 地震 earthquake 
しぜん 自然 nature 
じゆう 自由 freedom 
せいじ 政治 politics 
せかい 世界 world 
せきじゅうじ 赤十字 Red Cross 
せんそう 戦争 war 
ちきゅう 地球 earth 
チャリティー  charity 
テロ（リズム）  terrorism 
でんき 電気 electricity 
どろぼう 泥棒 thief 
におい 匂い smell 
はんたい 反対 disagree 
フェアトレード  fair trade 
へいわ 平和 peace 
ほご 保護 protection 
もんだい 問題 problem 
リサイクル  recycle 
りてん 利点 advantage(s) 
ワールドカップ  world cup 
Higher tier   
イスラムきょう イスラム教 Islam 
いみん 移民 immigrant, emigrant 
おせん 汚染 pollution 
かく 核 nuclear 
かじ 火事 (a) fire 
ぎょうじ 行事 event 
キリストきょう キリスト教 Christianity 
グローバル  global 
こうずい 洪水 flood 
さいがい 災害 natural disaster 
さいばん 裁判 trial 
サミット  summit 
しげん 資源 natural resources 
じんけん 人権 human rights 
しんとう 神道 Shitoism 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
128 
 
Higher tier (cont)   
Hiragana/Katakana Kanji  
せきたん 石炭 coal 
せきゆ 石油 oil 
せつやく 節約 to save 
せんきょ 選挙 election 
たぶんか（の） 多文化（の） multi cultural 
ちきゅうおんだんか 地球温暖化 global warming 
ちりょう 治療 treatment 
なんみん 難民 refugee 
ひんこん 貧困 porverty 
ぶっきょう 仏教 Buddhism 
ほうほう 方法 method 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
129 
Appendix 4: Kanji list 
Foundation  
Strokes Characters 
1 一 
2 二、七、八、九、十、人、入 
3 三、千、万、下、口、才、山、川、子、女、大、
小、上、土 
4 五、六、円、日、月、火、水、木、牛、犬、元、
今、手、中、天、分、友 
5 四、外、右、左、市、出、生、田、白、本、目 
6 百、気、行、字、耳、自、先、肉、年 
7 何、見、言、私、村、町、男、来 
8 金、学、国 
9 県、食 
10 家、校、高、時 
Higher 
Strokes Characters 
4 化、午、公、少、心、切、父、文 
5 古、写、冬、半、母、北、兄 
6 安、会、休、好、西、寺、州、多、地、同、毎、
有、名、式 
7 花、近、社、車、住、図、赤、体、売、作、弟 
8 雨、英、画、京、空、事、所、青、知、長、店、
東、物、和、使、夜、泳、姉、妹 
9 映、音、海、前、後、思、持、室、春、秋、神、
待、庭、風、昼、南、屋、茶 
10 院、夏、帰、紙、書、真、病、勉、旅、料 
11 教、強、魚、黒、週、雪、族、都、動、部、理、
祭、終 
12 飲、晩、間、場、番、朝、道、買、飯 
13 園、漢、楽、新、鉄、電、働、話 
14 駅、銀、語、読、聞 
16 館 
18 曜 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
130 
Appendix 5: The context for the 
development of this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] and our 
ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
● reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with those 
taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
● consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including subject 
associations, academics and advisors, teachers and students to ensure this qualification is 
suitable for a UK context 
● reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in their 
documents GCSE (9 to 1) Subject Level Guidance and GCSE Subject Level Conditions and 
Requirements for Modern Foreign Languages, published in April 2016. 
 
 
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification Principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
● demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning and 
measuring higher-order skills 
● rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and valid 
assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in end users of the knowledge, skills 
and competencies of certified students 
● inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students develop at 
different rates and have different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
● empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills, see Appendix 6.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
131 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
May 2014 
“The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important change to the 
education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications will assist them in 
helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an ‘Expert 
Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or because of 
our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the world as diverse as 
Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification development 
process that has included: 
● extensive international comparability of subject content against the highest-performing 
jurisdictions in the world 
● benchmarking assessments against UK and overseas providers to ensure that they are at 
the right level of demand 
● establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-specific 
expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
● subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future oriented. The 
design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, meaning learner outcomes 
have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a learner’s 
success in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident that we have 
supported the development of qualifications that are outstanding for their coherence, 
thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as representing world-class best 
practice.”    
  
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Lee Sing Kong  
Director, National Institute of Education, 
Singapore 
  
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
  
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
 
All titles correct as at May 2014 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
132 
Appendix 6: Transferable skills 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently flagged the 
need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable them to respond with 
confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines skills, or 
competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that can be learned and 
that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform an activity or task and can be 
built upon and extended through learning.’
[1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected and 
evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this process, we 
identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the most evidence-based and 
robust skills framework. We adapted the framework slightly to include the Program for 
International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT Literacy and Collaborative Problem Solving 
(CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves:[2] 
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve general 
cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and communicate. [3]  
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, oral communication, written communication, assertive 
communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, service 
orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared understanding, 
taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team organisation. 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work stress, 
adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, and physical 
adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual teams, 
work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and able to acquire 
new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher education, 
as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the teaching and learning of 
this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning materials, developed with 
stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
 
[1]  OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012) 
[2]  Koenig J A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop (National 
Academies Press, 2011) 
[3]  PISA – The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy (2011) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Japanese – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
133 
Appendix 7: Codes 
 
Type of code Use of code Code 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for performance 
tables is assigned a discount code 
indicating the subject area to which it 
belongs. 
Discount codes are published by the DfE.  
Please see the GOV.UK 
website* 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an 
Ofqual Regulated Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) code. 
The RQF code is known as a Qualification 
Number (QN). This is the code that 
features in the DfE Section 96 and on the 
LARA as being eligible for 16–18 and 19+ 
funding, and is to be used for all 
qualification funding purposes. The QN will 
appear on students’ final certification 
documentation. 
The QN for this 
qualification is: 
603/1105/8 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to 
enter students for a qualification. Centres 
will need to use the entry codes only when 
claiming students’ qualifications. 
GCSE – 1JA0 
 
Paper codes These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be 
entered for individual papers. 
Paper 1: 1JA0/01 
Paper 2: 1JA0/02 
Paper 3: 1JA0/03 
Paper 4: 1JA0/04 
 
*www.gov.uk/government/publications/2018-performance-tables-discount-codes 
 
 
 
TM290922 9781446956441_GCSE2017_L12_JAPANESE_ISSUE5.DOC.1–140/0 

 
 
About Pearson 
We are the world’s leading learning company operating in countries all around the world. We 
provide content, assessment and digital services to schools, colleges and universities, as well 
as professional and vocational education to learners to help increase their skills and lifelong 
employability prospects. We believe that wherever learning flourishes so do people.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This specification is Issue 5. We will inform centres of any changes to this issue. The latest 
issue can be found on the Pearson website: qualifications.pearson.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References to third party materials made in this specification are made in good faith. Pearson 
does not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may 
be subject to change, or any opinions expressed therein. (Materials may include textbooks, 
journals, magazines and other publications and websites.) 
 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
 
ISBN 978 1 446 95644 1 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2022 
 
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office:  80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121