   
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in 
Spanish (2024) 
Specification 
First teaching September 2024 
First certification from 2026 
Issue 2 

 
 
About Pearson 
We are the world’s leading learning company operating in countries all around the world. 
We provide content, assessment and digital services to learners, educational institutions, 
employers, governments and other partners globally. We are committed to helping equip 
learners with the skills they need to enhance their employability prospects and to 
succeed in the changing world of work. We believe that wherever learning flourishes so 
do people. 
 
References to third party materials made in this specification are made in good faith. Pearson 
does not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may be 
subject to change, or any opinions expressed therein. (Materials may include textbooks, 
journals, magazines and other publications and websites.) 
 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
Original image by Slanapotam/  www.shutterstock.com 
 
Publication code: GQ000027 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2025 
 
 
Summary of Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in 
Spanish (2024) Specification Issue 2 changes 
 
Issue 2 changes  
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this 
current issue  
 
Page 
number  
Appendix 1: Vocabulary 
In response to changes made to the Department for Education’s subject 
content, a paragraph has been added to explain that a vocabulary item is 
no longer required to be listed as multiple entries for different parts of 
speech where the English meaning is the same. For example, pasado is no 
longer required to be listed twice, once as an adjective and once as a 
noun; it can be listed once and used as either part of speech. 
 
Minor amendments have been made to the vocabulary list to reflect the 
way vocabulary items are now counted. Duplicate entries of words that 
exist as multiple parts of speech have been removed and replaced with 
new words. 
 
 
 
Additional translations have been added to a small number of words in the 
vocabulary list. 
 
Changes made to the number of pronouns and the number of translations 
of pronouns to be known at Foundation tier. 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
64, 66, 70, 
80, 96, 
101, 104, 
109-111, 
113, 115, 
128 
 
64, 68, 90, 
92, 129 
 
55, 57-59 
Appendix 2: Grammar 
Amendments made to the grammar requirements to reflect changes to the 
Department for Education’s subject content. 
• Clarification of the rules for formation of plural nouns. 
• Expansion of requirements for reflexive pronouns at Foundation 
tier. 
• Clarification of the requirements for periphrastic time expressions 
at Higher tier. 
• Amendment to requirements for present continuous. 
• Clarification of the requirements for agreement in number of 
adjectives. 
• Movement of antes de + infinitive and después de + infinitive from 
Higher tier to Foundation tier. 
• Clarification of how we will use derivational morphology rules in our 
papers. 
 
Correction to list of irregular verbs to be known in the imperative. 
 
 
 
144 
147, 149 
 
149 
 
152 
157 
 
159 
 
160 
 
 
156 
 
If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, contact us via our 
website at: https://qualifications.pearson.com/en/subjects/languages.html. 
 
 
  
 
 
Contents 
1 Introduction 1 
Why choose Pearson Edexcel GCSE Spanish? 1 
Qualification at a glance 2 
Our qualification approach 7 
2 Subject content and assessment information 13 
Subject aims 13 
Paper 1: Speaking in Spanish 14 
Paper 2: Listening and understanding in Spanish 24 
Paper 3: Reading and understanding in Spanish 27 
Paper 4: Writing in Spanish 30 
Assessment Objectives 34 
3 Administration and general information 35 
Entries 35 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special consideration and 
malpractice 35 
Student recruitment and progression 39 
4 Appendices 41 
Appendix 1: Vocabulary 42 
Reading assessments 43 
Speaking and writing assessments 43 
Organisation of the vocabulary 44 
Basic vocabulary 46 
Cultural and geographical words 52 
Short phrases 53 
Articles and pronouns 55 
Conjunctions 59 
Prepositions 62 
Adverbs 64 
 
 
Adjectives 69 
Nouns 83 
Verbs 116 
Irregular inflected verb forms: Higher and Foundation 131 
Irregular inflected verb forms: Higher ONLY 138 
Appendix 2: Grammar 144 
Nouns, pronouns and determiners 144 
Verbs 148 
Verbs: Tenses 151 
Adjectives and adjectival phrases 157 
Adverbs and adverbial phrases 158 
Prepositions 158 
Derivational morphology 160 
Sound-symbol correspondences (SSCs) 161 
Appendix 3: Names of people used in assessments 165 
Appendix 4: Transferable skills 167 
The need for transferable skills 167 
Appendix 5: Codes 169 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
1 
1 Introduction 
Why choose Pearson Edexcel GCSE Spanish?  
We have listened to feedback from all parts of the language community, including 
hundreds of teachers and students. We know that when you are teaching a language, you 
want your students’ eyes to be opened to other cultures and for them to learn how to 
communicate about subjects that interest them. Like you, we are passionate about 
growing a love of languages. Our GCSE Spanish qualification is focused on the important 
ways that languages foster communication, broaden perspectives, introduce new 
cultures and develop students into global citizens.    
More than words – our qualification promotes culture, communication and connection. 
From the design of our speaking tasks, where communication is privileged, through to the 
use of images to provide cultural context, we want students to understand that words are 
a springboard to discovering much more. 
Language learning for today’s world – we have carefully selected our vocabulary and 
assessment content to reflect and represent diverse student experiences, so that all 
students feel included and will be able to speak and write about the things that interest 
them most.  
Compassionate assessments in a clear and familiar structure – our assessments 
are accessible and transparent, rooted in testing what students know and ensuring they 
can attempt the whole assessment confidently, with no surprises. We are committed to 
maintaining a sense of continuity with the separate assessment of the four skills, and a 
consistent assessment structure.   
Preparing for the future – we know how much you value additional assessment 
material, and we are committed to providing additional content, including secure mock 
material. We will provide digital solutions to ease the administrative burden, and 
opportunities to be involved in innovative pilots for onscreen assessment pathways.  
Reliable and extensive support from switch to delivery – our Switch Consultants 
will provide one to one support to make switching to our new qualification pain free. 
Once you are with us, our dedicated Subject Advisor is here to help with any of your 
queries and we will provide regular training opportunities for all our teachers.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
2 
Qualification at a glance 
The qualification consists of: 
• three externally-examined papers assessing separately listening, reading and writing 
• one speaking assessment set by Pearson and conducted by a teacher.  
All assessments are marked by Pearson. 
All papers will sample the vocabulary and grammatical structures included in Appendix 1: 
Vocabulary and Appendix 2: Grammar. The focus for the content of questions and tasks 
will be drawn from the listed thematic contexts (see Thematic contexts section on pages 
7–9).  
Each paper is available at Foundation or Higher tier. Students must be entered for a 
single tier across all papers.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
3 
Paper 1: Speaking in Spanish (*Paper code: 1SP1/1F and 1H)  
Internally conducted and externally assessed:  
Foundation tier: 7-9 minutes plus 15 minutes’ preparation time; 50 marks 
Higher tier: 10-12 minutes plus 15 minutes’ preparation time; 50 marks 
25% of the qualification 
Students are assessed on their ability to speak using clear and comprehensible language 
for a range of audiences and purposes, in different contexts, which are relevant to their 
current and future needs and interests. There are three consecutive tasks: 
Task 1: Read aloud (12 marks) 
Read aloud a short text and undertake a short, unprepared interaction relating to the 
text. In the read aloud task itself students will be assessed on their pronunciation and in 
the short interaction that follows students will be assessed on their communication. The 
task card will be allocated by Pearson. 
Task 2: Role play (10 marks) 
Undertake a transactional role play, in a setting taken from the defined list on  
pages 16–18. The task card will be allocated by Pearson. 
Task 3: Picture task (12 marks) with conversation (16 marks) 
Students select their thematic context for Task 3 in advance of the assessment. Students 
select one option from a choice of two of the six thematic contexts. The two options will 
be randomly generated by Pearson. The task card will be allocated by Pearson. 
Describe a picture stimulus, related to the selected thematic context. Students have a 
choice of two pictures on the stimulus card. Answer two compulsory questions related to 
the subject matter of the picture, then move on to a short unprepared conversation 
developed from the same thematic context.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
4 
Paper 2: Listening and understanding in Spanish  
(*Paper code: 1SP1/2F and 2H)  
Written examination:  
Foundation tier: 45 minutes, including 5 minutes’ reading time, 50 marks  
Higher tier: 60 minutes, including 5 minutes’ reading time, 50 marks  
25% of the qualification 
Students are assessed on their understanding of standard spoken Spanish by one or 
more speakers, across a range of formal and informal contexts, and in familiar and 
unfamiliar settings.  
Section A: Listening (40 marks) 
Students respond to multiple-choice, multiple-response and short-answer open response 
questions.  
All questions are set in English and students produce all responses in English. 
Section B: Dictation (10 marks) 
Students are assessed on their ability to transcribe spoken Spanish into written Spanish. 
They will be rewarded for their accuracy of spelling based on their knowledge and 
understanding of the sound symbol correspondences (SSCs) listed in the specification in 
Appendix 2: Grammar.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
5 
Paper 3: Reading and understanding in Spanish  
(*Paper code: 1SP1/3F and 3H)  
Written examination:  
Foundation tier: 45 minutes, 50 marks 
Higher tier: 60 minutes, 50 marks 
25% of the qualification 
Students are assessed on their understanding of written Spanish across a range of 
formal and informal contexts, and in familiar and unfamiliar settings.  
Section A: Reading and Understanding (40 marks) 
Students respond to multiple-choice, multiple-response and short-answer open response 
questions based on these texts. 
All questions are set in English and students produce all responses in English. 
Section B: Translation into English (10 marks) 
Students translate a passage from Spanish into English, with instructions in English.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
6 
Paper 4: Writing in Spanish (*Paper code: 1SP1/4F and 4H)  
Written examination:  
Foundation tier: 1 hour 15 minutes; 50 marks. 
Higher tier: 1 hour 20 minutes; 50 marks. 
25% of the qualification 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate effectively through writing in 
Spanish for different purposes and audiences. Students are required to produce 
responses of varying lengths and types to express ideas and opinions in Spanish. The 
instructions to students are in English.  
Foundation Tier 
• Question 1: picture-based task (8 marks) 
• Question 2: one of two open-response questions, set in formal context (14 marks)  
• Question 3: one of two open-response questions, set in informal context (18 marks) 
• Question 4: translation into Spanish (10 marks) 
Higher Tier 
• Question 1: one of two open-response questions, set in informal context (18 marks) 
• Question 2: one of two open-response questions, set in formal context (22 marks) 
• Question 3: translation into Spanish (10 marks) 
A recommended word count is specified for each open-response question.  
*See Appendix 5: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to this 
qualification. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
7 
Our qualification approach 
Language is more than words. 
Combining clear, concise and straightforward assessments with engaging, meaningful 
and relatable content, our new Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish is 
fit for the future, equipping students for life and careers in a global setting. 
Thematic contexts 
The vocabulary in this qualification enables students to communicate across a range of 
engaging and relatable thematic contexts, which are relevant to their current and future 
needs. 
We asked students and teachers about the subjects that were meaningful and interesting 
to them, and selected the following six broad thematic contexts to provide a focus for the 
teaching and learning of the vocabulary and grammar listed: 
• My personal world 
• Lifestyle and wellbeing 
• My neighbourhood 
• Media and technology 
• Studying and my future 
• Travel and tourism 
All the vocabulary listed in Appendix 1 could be used fluidly across these thematic 
contexts.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
8 
Within our thematic contexts, students could use the specified vocabulary and grammar 
(Appendices 1 and 2) to listen to, read, speak and write about the following subjects:  
 
family friends relationships equality 
physical wellbeing mental wellbeing food and drink sports 
places in town shopping transport  the natural world  
environmental 
issues 
social media and 
gaming  
future opportunities 
(e.g. work, travel)  
school 
music TV and film accommodation  tourist attractions 
 
This list of subjects is not exhaustive and is intended to support planning of teaching and 
learning.   
Teachers could explore these subjects throughout the course and across different thematic 
contexts. For example, ‘transport’ could be considered when exploring the thematic context 
of ‘Travel and Tourism’ or ‘My Neighbourhood’; ‘food and drink’ could be considered when 
exploring ‘My personal world’, ‘Lifestyle and wellbeing’ or ‘Travel and tourism’.  
Teachers could also choose to organise their teaching of the vocabulary content into 
alternative thematic contexts or no thematic contexts at all to meet their students’ 
interests flexibly. Providing the full vocabulary and grammar content in Appendices 1 and 2 
is taught at each tier, your students will be able to access all our assessments. 
Thematic contexts in assessments 
Our use of thematic contexts in assessments provides:  
• meaningful and engaging content and scenarios for the question papers 
• reassurance to students on the focus of the texts they will encounter in their 
assessments   
• coverage of a range of vocabulary in assessments to ensure variety within each paper, 
across each paper in an exam series, and over time.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
9 
Paper 1, Speaking in Spanish 
• Each of the six read aloud cards, per tier, will reflect one of the thematic contexts. 
• Each of the six role play cards, per tier, will reflect one of the transactional settings. 
• Each of the eighteen picture cards will reflect one of the thematic contexts. 
• Students will choose the thematic context for their picture task in advance of the 
assessment, from a choice of two, randomly generated by Pearson. The short 
conversation following the picture description will begin within the same pre-selected 
thematic context. 
• Students are free to use vocabulary from anywhere across the specified vocabulary 
list in their spoken responses. 
• Students may also use vocabulary from outside the vocabulary list in their spoken 
responses. 
Paper 2, Listening and Understanding in Spanish 
• The contexts of the listening texts will be taken from any of the thematic contexts. 
• Content of the listening texts will sample vocabulary across the qualification content. 
Paper 3, Reading and Understanding in Spanish 
• The contexts of the reading texts will be taken from any of the thematic contexts. 
• Content of the reading texts will sample vocabulary across the qualification content. 
Paper 4, Writing in Spanish 
• Every exam series each of the writing tasks, per tier, will reflect one of the thematic 
contexts.  
• Students are free to use vocabulary from anywhere across the specified vocabulary 
list in their written responses. 
• Students may also use vocabulary from outside the vocabulary list in their written 
responses. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
10 
Cultural Content and Inclusivity 
Built on a foundation of inclusivity, accessibility and transparency we have created a 
student-centred qualification that caters to the needs of all students, regardless of their 
background, ability or reason for studying a language.   
Use of cultural settings  
Language study gives opportunities to broaden students’ cultural awareness and 
introduces them to new experiences. However, sometimes presumptions about shared 
cultural capital can prevent students from accessing the content. 
Paper 1, Speaking assessments will: 
• use relatable contexts that are likely to be within the range of students’ own 
experiences 
• use a finite range of settings for role plays (see Paper 1 Speaking in Spanish, Content), 
so that all students can be equally prepared for these scenarios. 
Paper 2, Listening assessments will:  
• use settings that are both familiar and unfamiliar, for wider cultural engagement 
• provide any necessary information to support students’ understanding of culturally 
unfamiliar settings in English, in rubrics. 
Paper 3, Reading assessments will: 
• use settings that are both familiar and unfamiliar, for wider cultural engagement 
• include contextualising images to support students’ understanding of culturally 
unfamiliar settings 
• provide glossing for the names of towns, cities or countries that are not part of the 
vocabulary list. 
Paper 4, Writing assessments will: 
• set open-response questions in contexts that are realistic and familiar 
• set tasks that draw on students’ own thoughts and experiences to answer set bullet 
points   
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
11 
• avoid tasks that place a burden on student imagination to create responses 
• avoid tasks that rely on student knowledge of international travel or settings. 
Use of names in assessments 
Learning about the lives of people from across the target language speaking world is a 
way of bringing languages to life. However, sometimes the names of people can be 
unfamiliar and confusing for students in assessments.  
Our assessments will: 
• include only names from a defined list (see Appendix 3)  
• allow students to become familiar with target language names in advance  
• provide culturally relevant content. 
Our assessments will not:  
• include unfamiliar and potentially confusing names 
• require students to learn names 
• assess students on their knowledge of names. 
Use of gendered language 
Learning a new language allows students to talk about themselves and their lives, as well 
as learning about the lives and experiences of others. However, for trans and non-binary 
students, the use of gendered language can present specific challenges.  
Our assessments will: 
• include the vocabulary for ‘trans’ and ‘non-binary’ on our vocabulary list (see Appendix 
1: Vocabulary) 
• recognise students’ use of non-binary or gender-neutral pronouns when describing 
themselves or others in the speaking and writing papers 
• recognise students’ use of new adjectival endings according to their preferred way of 
identifying, or the use of gender-neutral pronouns with feminine or masculine 
agreement 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
12 
• recognise students’ use of gender-neutral nouns, whether indicated by adding 
punctuation, asterisks or using alternative spellings 
• equally credit students’ use of masculine, feminine or non-binary adjective 
agreements where used correctly and consistently 
• equally credit students’ use of non-binary pronouns where used correctly and 
consistently  
• be marked anonymously, without any examiner awareness of students’ gender.  
Support  
If you would like to find out more about an LGBTQ+ inclusive MFL curriculum, Stonewall 
provides further support in their ‘Creating an LGBTQ+ Inclusive Secondary Curriculum’ 
resource. You can also find more support, along with specific examples of gender neutral 
language use in French, German and Spanish in our ‘Gender, diversity and inclusion in 
languages qualifications’ video.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
13 
2 Subject content and assessment 
information 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish allows students to develop 
their ability to communicate in Spanish in both speech and writing. They will study 
language within a variety of thematic contexts relevant to their age and interests and will 
develop a greater awareness of the culture of Spanish-speaking communities and 
countries.  
Students will need to develop and use their knowledge and understanding of Spanish 
vocabulary and grammar progressively through their course of study. A list of words that 
students are expected to use and understand is included in Appendix 1: Vocabulary list. 
This list of words is comprehensive and makes no assumptions about vocabulary 
previously taught. Grammar requirements are contained in the grammar list in  
Appendix 2: Grammar list. 
Subject aims 
The aims of this qualification are to:   
• provide a coherent, satisfying and worthwhile course of study. 
• develop confidence in, and a positive attitude towards, Spanish and to recognise the 
importance of languages. 
• provide a strong linguistic and cultural foundation for students who go on to study 
languages at a higher level post-16. 
• develop students’ ability and ambition to communicate independently in speech and 
writing with speakers of the language for authentic purposes. 
• develop students’ ability to communicate independently about subjects that are 
meaningful and interesting to them 
• build students’ confidence and broaden their horizons, enabling them to step beyond 
familiar cultural boundaries, develop new ways of seeing the world, and better 
understand relationships between the foreign language and the English language.  
• enable students to become familiar with aspects of the contexts and cultures of the 
countries and communities where the language is spoken.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
14 
Paper 1: Speaking in Spanish 
Content 
Speaking tasks will feature content that is relatable and accessible to all students. 
Students will be assessed on their ability to: 
• speak using clear and comprehensible language, for a range of audiences and 
purposes, and in formal and informal contexts, which are relevant to their current and 
future needs and interests. 
Students will need to: 
• apply the principles by which spelling represents sounds in standard or widely used 
forms of Spanish 
• use clear and comprehensible pronunciation when speaking Spanish, demonstrating 
an understanding of sound symbol correspondences 
• understand and respond to written language in speech by answering questions 
related to what they have read or seen 
• recall and use language in different situations and be able to move between Spanish 
and English    
• convey and elicit information by asking and answering questions 
• use language to describe a visual stimulus, including specific required details 
• give opinions 
• develop conversation and discussion 
• produce extended sequences of speech 
• use a range of vocabulary and grammatical structures (from the prescribed lists) 
accurately, including some more complex forms appropriate to the level of study, with 
reference to past, present and future events. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
15 
Assessment information 
Task 1 – Read aloud (12 marks) 
• Students will: 
• read aloud a short passage (8 marks) and  
• answer two straightforward questions (4 marks) to elicit brief opinions based on 
the overall content of the passage, in a short interaction.  
The read aloud task assesses clear and comprehensible pronunciation integrated 
with an understanding of sound symbol correspondences.   
• The short interaction that follows assesses communication only. 
Each assessment series, Pearson will provide six read aloud stimulus cards. Each card will 
take its focus from one of the six thematic contexts listed in the specification and will only 
use words selected from the full vocabulary list for each tier.  
When responding to the two questions after the read aloud, students can draw upon any 
relevant vocabulary from the full vocabulary list, or beyond the list. The questions will be 
in the present tense at both tiers and will elicit likes / dislikes / opinions. 
Assessment information: 
For each read aloud, there is a student card and a teacher card: 
Student card 
The student card includes: 
• instructions and a scenario in English,  
• followed by a short text in Spanish, which the student will read aloud: 
o Foundation tier: 35-40 words in 5 sentences  
o Higher tier: 50-55 words in 4 sentences  
The two straightforward questions for the short interaction do not appear on the student 
card, as they must be unprepared.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
16 
Teacher card 
The teacher card includes: 
• instructions on how to conduct the task,  
• a copy of the text to be read by the student, and  
• two straightforward questions, which form the short unprepared interaction to follow 
the read aloud of the text.   
Task 2 – Role play (10 marks) 
In the role play, students will be required to give and receive information, answering 
and asking questions. The students’ interactions could include any of the following:  
• make transactions (buying tickets, ordering food etc)   
• make plans, appointments or reservations   
• explain or give reasons   
• describe 
• express likes / dislikes / preferences / opinions   
• ask for advice   
• make a complaint or report a problem   
• ask / talk about activities. 
Role plays will be transactional in nature and will always be in one of the following 
settings:  
• Café / restaurant  
• Shop / market / shopping centre  
• Hotel  
• Train station  
• Tourist information office  
• Cinema / theatre / concert hall  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
17 
• Campsite 
• Leisure centre  
• Doctor's surgery / hospital 
• In town 
The role play assesses communication only and has been designed so that students 
can respond to the prompts using vocabulary drawn from the vocabulary list. 
Each assessment series, Pearson will provide six role play stimulus cards, which will use 
six different settings from the above list.  
The role plays are all set in a formal context. Students are not required to use the formal 
register.  
Assessment information: 
• For each role play, there is a student card and teacher card: 
Student card 
The student card includes the role play setting taken from the list above, and instructions 
and prompts in English.  
Foundation tier:  
• The student card includes five bullet points, eliciting five utterances.  
• Students need to ask one question. 
• Students are required to speak only in the present tense or a familiar conditional 
tense where it is more natural to do so, e.g. ‘me gustaría.’ 
Higher tier: 
• The student cards include five bullet points, eliciting five utterances.  
• Students need to ask two questions.  
• Students are required to speak in the present tense or a familiar conditional tense 
where it is more natural to do so, e.g. ‘me gustaría.’ 
• Students respond to one question asked using a future timeframe. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
18 
Teacher card  
The teacher cards contain instructions on how to conduct the role play and the exact 
questions to ask.  
Each role play opens with an introduction from the teacher who then asks the first 
question. 
Task 3 – Picture task (28 marks) 
• Students will be required to: 
• describe one picture from a choice of two (8 marks) 
• answer two unprepared questions related to the selected picture (4 marks) 
• participate in a conversation extending from the broader thematic context (16 
marks). 
Picture description (12 marks): 
• On the picture task card there will be two colour pictures and students will choose 
one of the colour pictures. They will be required to produce an extended 
description, focussing on the following compulsory details of the picture: 
• people 
• location 
• activity. 
The teacher is provided with prompts to encourage students to address the compulsory 
bullet points. Students are not limited to describing these details and may develop their 
description as far as they are able in the recommended time.  
The picture description has been designed so that students can respond to the stimulus 
using vocabulary drawn from the full vocabulary list.  
Once the student has concluded the description, the teacher will ask two compulsory 
questions relating to the subject matter of the picture. Both questions will be 
about the student’s own experiences / likes / dislikes / opinions.  At Higher tier, the 
second question will be in the past tense. The questions do not appear on the student 
card as they must be unprepared.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
19 
Broader conversation (16 marks): 
The teacher should continue a broader conversation extending from the thematic 
context selected for this task. A compulsory starting subject for the conversation is given 
on the teacher card, along with example questions in the present, past and future tenses.  
During the conversation, the teacher should ask a range of questions appropriate to the 
thematic context and the interests and experiences of the student, which enables 
students to: 
• produce extended sequences of speech 
• develop the conversation    
• give and justify own thoughts and opinions 
• refer to past, present and future events 
• demonstrate the full range of their ability. 
Teacher-examiners should endeavour to sustain a free-flowing conversation, in which 
they respond to what the candidate is saying. In the broader conversation, students can 
draw upon any relevant vocabulary from the full vocabulary list, or beyond the list.  
Teacher-examiners should be mindful of the time requirement for the conversation 
element of this task and encourage candidates to produce sufficient responses to fill the 
recommended time. 
Assessment information 
• The description and conversation elements of the picture task assess communication 
and clarity (in response to the picture stimulus or teacher questions), and linguistic 
and grammatical accuracy.  
• The two unprepared questions following the picture description assess 
communication only. 
• Each assessment series, Pearson will provide eighteen different sets of picture task 
stimulus cards for each tier, with each card relating to one of the six thematic 
contexts. There will be two pictures on each stimulus card.  
• Two weeks in advance of the speaking assessment, students will select the thematic 
context for the picture task and conversation. They will select one thematic context 
from a choice of two, randomly generated by Pearson. This will inform the stimulus 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
20 
card they receive for the picture task, and the read aloud and role play task cards will 
be randomly allocated accordingly by Pearson. 
• For each picture task set, there is a student card and teacher card: 
Student card  
The student card includes: 
• two colour pictures from which students must choose one to describe. 
• three compulsory bullet points in English to guide the description: the people, 
the location, the activity.  
• guidance on the task. 
Teacher card 
The teacher card includes: 
• instructions on how to conduct this task.  
• copies of the pictures with bullet point prompts as on the student card. 
• intervention prompts to encourage the student to develop their picture description.  
• two compulsory follow-on questions per picture, related to the subject matter of the 
picture 
o Foundation tier: the questions will both be in the present tense;  
o Higher tier: question 1 will be in present tense and question 2 will be in the past 
tense. 
• guidance for the broader conversation, including a mandated starting subject for the 
conversation, and three suggested questions in different tenses / timeframes. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
21 
General assessment information 
First assessment: May/June 2026.  
• Students complete the three tasks as detailed and in the order set out above.  
• Assessment rubrics and information for students will be in English. The tasks must be 
completed in Spanish. 
• Prior to the assessment, Pearson will provide instructions on the process for allocating 
stimulus cards. The allocation of cards for the read aloud, role play and picture task 
will be generated by the student’s choice of thematic context for the picture task. 
The thematic context will be selected from a choice of two randomly generated by 
Pearson and offered to the student two weeks before the assessment.  The allocation 
of cards is designed to ensure that the assessment experienced by each student 
samples a range of vocabulary from the specified vocabulary list in  
Appendix 1: Vocabulary.  
• Assessments are conducted by centres within a five-week assessment period in April 
and May in any single year. Dates for the assessment period will be confirmed in the 
UK Information Manual at the start of each academic year. The assessment period will 
not always be continuous or be the same period each year, for example it will need to 
accommodate the Easter break which changes each year. 
• The assessment materials provided by Pearson for all tasks may be accessed by the 
teacher no more than three working days before the assessment period. This is to 
enable the teacher to prepare for the assessment. The assessment materials in the 
pack must not be removed from the centre premises and should be securely stored in 
order to maintain confidentiality throughout the assessment period.  
• Assessments are conducted by teachers. Complete, unedited recordings of all 
assessments must be submitted to Pearson via the online Learner Work Transfer 
(LWT) portal for external marking. 
• Assessment timings are different for Foundation and Higher tiers to reflect the 
increased demand of the tasks. Students will be assessed on the quality of the 
responses they can produce within the maximum allocated time of 9 minutes for 
foundation and 12 minutes for higher. Teachers are expected to give students the 
opportunity to respond fully to all tasks. 
• All assessments are marked against assessment criteria, which can be found in the 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) 
document.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
22 
• Centres must have procedures in place to verify and confirm the identity of all 
students at the time of the assessment. Pearson will provide the format for this 
verification, which will be submitted digitally to Pearson. 
Foundation tier assessment time and marks 
The total assessment for the three tasks is 7 to 9 minutes plus 15 minutes’ 
preparation time. 
The assessment is worth 50 marks.   
The assessment consists of three tasks which must be conducted in the following order: 
• Task 1 – one read aloud with short interaction to follow, recommended to last 
between 1.5 to 2 minutes for 12 marks  
• Task 2 – one role play, recommended to last 1 to 1.5 minutes for 10 marks 
• Task 3 – one picture task, recommended to last 4.5 to 5.5 minutes in total   
o the picture description with the two compulsory questions is recommended to last 
1.5 to 2 minutes for 12 marks, and  
o the broader conversation is recommended to last 3 to 3.5 minutes for 16 marks.  
o The total number of marks for Task 3 is 28 marks. 
Higher tier assessment time and marks 
The total assessment for the three tasks is 10 to 12 minutes plus 15 minutes’ 
preparation time. 
The assessment is worth 50 marks.   
The assessment consists of three tasks which must be conducted in the following order: 
• Task 1 – one read aloud with short interaction to follow, recommended to last 
between 2 and 2.5 minutes for 12 marks  
• Task 2 – one role play, recommended to last 1 to 1.5 minutes for 10 marks 
• Task 3 – one picture task, recommended to last 7 to 8 minutes in total 
o the picture description with the two compulsory questions is recommended to last 
2 to 2.5 minutes for 12 marks, 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
23 
o the broader conversation is recommended to last 5 to 5.5 minutes for 16 marks.  
o The total number of marks for Task 3 is 28 marks. 
Preparation time 
Students are allocated 15 minutes’ preparation time, under supervised conditions, 
immediately prior to the assessment.  
The purpose of the 15 minutes preparation time is to consider the text for the read aloud 
and the allocated stimuli for the role play and picture task.  
The final 1 minute of the preparation time should take place in the examination 
room, where students will be given the opportunity to practise the read aloud 
task out loud. It is not compulsory for the student to read the full task out loud during 
this minute. Students may use this time to practise selected words / phrases / sentences 
or the entire text out loud or undertake any other appropriate preparation. The 1-minute 
preparation will not be assessed but must form part of the continuous recording of the 
assessment submitted to Pearson. The purpose of recording the preparation time is to 
ensure that no guidance or correction is provided to the student during this time.  
During the 15 minute preparation time, students are permitted to make notes on an A4 
sheet of paper. In addition, they can directly annotate the text for the read aloud in order 
to aid pronunciation during the task. 
During the assessment, students can refer to notes and annotations. The notes should 
be for reference only. Stimulus material for each task should be handed to the teacher at 
the end of the task (i.e. directly after the read aloud passage, but before the short 
interaction; directly after the roleplay; at the end of the picture description). At the end of 
the examination, students must also return their notes to the teacher.  
Any notes made during the preparation time must be kept securely by the centre until 
the end of October in the year the assessment is completed, after which time they should 
be securely destroyed.  
Students cannot have access to a dictionary, or any other resource, during the 
preparation time. 
Sample assessment materials  
A sample paper and mark scheme for this can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
24 
Paper 2: Listening and understanding in Spanish  
Content 
Students are assessed on their understanding of standard spoken Spanish in formal and 
informal contexts, and familiar and unfamiliar settings.  
Students need to: 
• identify and respond to key points, details and opinions 
• recognise the relationship between past, present and future events 
• undertake a short dictation in the target language, applying the principles by which 
spelling represents sounds in standard or widely used forms of Spanish. 
This paper draws on the specified vocabulary (Appendix 1) and grammar (Appendix 2) and 
the focus of the passages will be taken from the thematic contexts listed in the 
specification (see Thematic Contexts).  
Recordings have been created to reflect the following authentic listening scenarios: 
• newsflashes, newsclips, weather forecasts, public announcements, advertisements, 
monologues, conversations, podcasts, extracts of talks or presentations and short 
reports. 
Students are presented with short and medium-length recorded scenarios involving one 
or more speakers.  
Recordings will be spoken using standard Spanish at no faster than a moderate pace. 
To avoid students confusing unfamiliar names of people with necessary vocabulary, we 
will only use names from the prescribed list in Appendix 3.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
25 
Assessment information 
• First assessment is in May/June 2026.  
• The assessment is out of 50 marks. 
Section A: Listening Comprehension (40 marks) 
All questions in this section are set in English, using the following question types: multiple 
choice, multiple response and short open response questions.  
Students write their responses in English.   
Section B: Dictation (10 marks) 
The instructions for this task are given in English. Students will listen to a passage of 
spoken Spanish and write their responses in Spanish. 
• Students are allocated five minutes to read through the paper before the first extract 
of the recording starts. This gives students an opportunity to familiarise themselves 
with the length and the layout of the paper and to read the questions before hearing 
the first extract.  
• Each extract is played three times, with appropriate pauses between individual 
sentences, after each extract, and before the next question or part question. This will 
allow students sufficient time to process information, write down their responses and 
read the next question or part question.  
• Students must answer all questions.  
• In Section A, there are four crossover questions between the Foundation Tier and the 
Higher Tier papers. 
• Recordings are released as audio files via our Secure Download Service (SDS) prior to 
the examination.  
• Dictionaries may not be used in the examination. 
Foundation tier  
• The duration of the assessment is 45 minutes, including 5 minutes of reading 
time. 
• The total word count of texts used in the paper ranges between 450 and 500 words.  
• The question paper targets grades 1-5 and contains twelve questions in total. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
26 
Higher tier  
• The duration of the assessment is 60 minutes, including 5 minutes of reading 
time. 
• The total word count of texts used in the paper ranges between 700 and 850 words. 
• The question papers targets grades 4 –9 and contains ten questions in total. 
Sample assessment materials  
A sample paper and mark scheme for this can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
27 
Paper 3: Reading and understanding in Spanish 
Content 
Students are assessed on their understanding of written Spanish across a range of 
genres and in both formal and informal contexts.  
Students need to:  
• identify and respond to key points, details and opinions  
• recognise the relationship between past, present and future events  
• infer meanings of two single words per tier (1 mark per word) that are not listed in 
Appendix 1: Vocabulary 
• demonstrate an ability to transfer meaning accurately into English by translating from 
written Spanish into English. 
This paper draws on the specified vocabulary (Appendix 1) and grammar (Appendix 2) and 
the focus of the passages will be taken from the thematic contexts listed in the 
specification (see Thematic Contexts).  
Texts have been created to reflect the following authentic reading scenarios:  
• blogs, internet forums, advertisements, tourist brochures, newspaper or magazine 
articles, emails, extracts from a diary or school project.  
Texts for individual questions within the assessment vary in length, including both short 
and longer written passages.  
Scenarios in the texts are set either at home or, more frequently, in a Spanish-speaking 
country, allowing students to develop appropriate cultural awareness and understanding. 
When specific cultural features are mentioned, we will include an image to ensure all 
students can have equal understanding of the cultural feature. 
To avoid students confusing unfamiliar names of people with necessary vocabulary, we 
will only use names from the prescribed list in Appendix 3. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
28 
Assessment information 
• First assessment: May/June 2026.  
• The assessment is out of 50 marks. 
Section A: Reading comprehension (40 marks) 
All questions in this section are set in English, using the following question types: multiple 
choice, multiple response and short open response questions.  
• Students write their responses in English for any open response questions. 
Section B: Translation (10 marks) 
The instructions for this task are given in English. Students will translate from Spanish into 
English. 
• Students must answer all questions from each of the two sections. 
• In Section A, there are three crossover questions between the Foundation Tier and 
the Higher Tier papers. 
• Dictionaries may not be used in the examination. 
Foundation tier  
• The assessment time is 45 minutes. 
• Section A, Reading Comprehension has nine questions set in English.  
• Section B, Translation contains five sentences to translate from Spanish into English.  
• The question paper targets grades 1-5. 
Higher tier  
• The assessment time is 60 minutes. 
• Section A, Reading Comprehension has eight questions set in English 
• Section B, Translation of one passage from Spanish into English. 
• The question paper targets grades 4-9. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
29 
Sample assessment materials  
A sample paper and mark scheme for this can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
30 
Paper 4: Writing in Spanish  
Content 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate effectively and with accuracy 
through writing in Spanish for a variety of purposes, in both formal and informal contexts, 
and for a range of audiences.  
Students need to:  
• write short texts, using language accurately to describe in response to simple and 
familiar stimuli 
• produce clear and coherent texts of extended length to express ideas and opinions 
appropriately for different purposes and in different situations.  
• make accurate use of a variety of vocabulary and grammatical structures (from the 
prescribed lists), including some more complex forms, to describe, narrate and 
explain with reference to past, present and future events 
• move confidently between reading instructions in English and writing in Spanish 
• translate sentences and short texts from English into Spanish to convey key messages 
accurately and to apply grammatical knowledge of language in context. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
31 
Assessment information 
• First assessment: May/June 2026.  
• The assessment is out of 50 marks. 
Foundation tier assessment: 
• The assessment time is 1 hour and 15 minutes.  
The paper consists of four questions: 
• three open-response questions 
• one translation from English into Spanish.  
Students must answer all four questions. Questions 2 and 3 provide a choice of two 
options.  
• Question 1 (8 marks) Picture-based task: 
o Students are asked to write four short sentences to describe a photo. 
o Assesses students on their ability to describe.  
• Question 2 (14 marks) Open-response, formal context: 
o Two options from which students must select one.  
o Assesses students on their ability to give an opinion, present facts and use present 
and future timeframes. 
o Recommended word count: 40-50 words 
• Question 3 (18 marks) Open-response, informal context:  
o Two options from which students must select one.  
o Assesses students on their ability to express and justify opinions, narrate, and 
express future plans, using a combination of present, past and future timeframes.  
o Recommended word count: 80-90 words 
o This question is common to the Higher tier Question 1.  
• Question 4 (10 marks) Translation: 
o Students are required to translate five sentences from English to Spanish. 
o The sentences are ordered by increasing level of difficulty. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
32 
Higher tier assessment: 
• The assessment time is 1 hour and 20 minutes.  
• The paper consists of three questions: 
• two open-response questions 
• one translation from English into Spanish. 
Students must answer all three questions. Questions 1 and 2 provide a choice of two 
options. 
• Question 1 (18 marks) Open-response, informal context: 
o Two options from which students must select one.  
o Assesses students on their ability to express and justify opinions, narrate and 
express future plans, using a combination of present, past and future timeframes. 
o Recommended word count: 80-90 words. 
o This question is common to the Foundation tier Question 3. 
• Question 2 (22 marks) Open-response, formal context: 
o Two options from which students must select one.  
o Assesses students on their ability to express pros and cons, explain and narrate, 
using a combination of present, past and future timeframes. 
o Recommended word count: 130-150 words. 
• Question 3 (10 marks) Translation: 
o Students are required to translate a short paragraph from English into 
Spanish.  
o The individual sentences are ordered by increasing level of difficulty. 
Each question is linked to one of the thematic contexts listed in the specification. 
Students can draw upon any relevant vocabulary from the full vocabulary list to complete 
their task.   
• The assessment tasks feature general content that is familiar and accessible to a wide 
range of students, allowing students flexibility in their response.  
• Students are required to produce responses of varying lengths and purposes in 
Spanish, in response to prompts in both informal and formal contexts. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
33 
• Recommended word counts are specified for each question, with the exception of 
Question 1 on the Foundation paper, which requires four short sentences, and the 
translation tasks. Students are rewarded for any relevant content and will not be 
penalised for writing more or fewer words than recommended. The length of each 
response required increases across the paper. 
• Students are expected to address each bullet point in the open questions and 
develop their responses. The complexity of language elicited increases across the 
paper, with varied use of timeframes and language expected. 
• Students will be assessed on both Communication and content, and Linguistic 
knowledge and accuracy in the open-response questions and translation, but only 
Communication and content in Question 1 of the Foundation tier paper. 
• All assessments are marked against assessment criteria, set out in the Pearson 
Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) 
document.  
• The instructions to students are all in English.  
• The use of dictionaries is not permitted. 
Sample assessment materials  
A sample paper and mark scheme for this can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
34 
Assessment Objectives 
 
Students must: % in GCSE 
AO1 Understand and respond to spoken language in speaking and 
in writing 
35% 
AO2 Understand and respond to written language in speaking and 
in writing 
45% 
AO3 Demonstrate knowledge and accurate application of the 
grammar and vocabulary prescribed in the specification 
20% 
Total 100% 
 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
Component AO1 % AO2 % AO3 % Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives 
1: Speaking 15% 2% 8% 25% 
2: Listening and understanding 20% 0% 5% 25% 
3: Reading and understanding 0% 25% 0% 25% 
4: Writing 0% 18% 7% 25% 
Total for GCSE 35% 45% 20% 100% 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
35 
3 Administration and general 
information 
Entries 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for this qualification can be found 
in our UK Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations officers and is 
available on our website: qualifications.pearson.com 
Discount code and performance tables 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more than one GCSE, or other 
Level 2 qualifications with the same discount code, will have only the grade for their 'first 
entry' counted for the purpose of the school and college performance tables (please see 
Appendix 5: Codes). For further information about what constitutes 'first entry' and full 
details of how this policy is applied, please refer to the DfE website: 
www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-education 
Students should be advised that if they take two GCSEs with the same discount code, the 
schools and colleges to which they wish to progress are likely to take the view that this 
achievement is equivalent to only one GCSE. The same view may be taken if students take 
two GCSEs or other Level 2 qualifications that have different discount codes but which 
have significant overlap of content. Before embarking on their programmes, students or 
their advisers who have any doubts about their subject combinations should check with 
the institution to which they wish to progress.  
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special 
consideration and malpractice 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality policy requires all students to 
have equal opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our 
qualifications to be awarded in a way that is fair to every student. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
36 
We are committed to making sure that: 
• students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the Equality Act 2010) are 
not, when they are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in 
comparison to students who do not share that characteristic 
• all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification 
and that this achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their 
peers. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be available in English. All student work must be in 
English except where students are specifically required to speak or write in Spanish as 
part of the speaking and writing assessments.  
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with special 
educational needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to:  
• access the assessment 
• show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the assessment.  
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an 
individual student with a disability, without affecting the integrity of the assessment. 
Access arrangements are the principal way in which awarding bodies comply with the 
duty under the Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students will 
then know what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for assessment.  
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable 
adjustments where a person with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in 
undertaking an assessment. The awarding organisation is required to take reasonable 
steps to overcome that disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be unique to that individual and 
therefore might not be in the list of available access arrangements. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
37 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of 
factors, including: 
• the needs of the student with the disability 
• the effectiveness of the adjustment 
• the cost of the adjustment; and 
• the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other 
students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding 
organisation, or affects timeframes or the security or integrity of the assessment. This is 
because the adjustment is not ‘reasonable’. 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student's mark or grade to 
reflect temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the examination/ 
assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a material effect on a 
student’s ability to take an assessment or demonstrate their level of attainment in an 
assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to apply for access 
arrangements and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special 
consideration, please refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk. 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that compromises or seeks to 
compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
38 
Candidate malpractice in non-examined assessments discovered before the candidate 
has signed the declaration of authentication form does not need to be reported to 
Pearson. 
Candidate malpractice found in non-examined assessments after the declaration of 
authenticity has been signed, and in examinations must be reported to Pearson on a JCQ 
Form M1 (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form should be 
emailed to candidatemalpractice@pearson.com. Please provide as much information and 
supporting documentation as possible. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate 
sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report candidate malpractice constitutes staff or centre malpractice.  
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and maladministration 
of our qualifications. As with candidate malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is any act 
that compromises or seeks to compromise the process of assessment or undermines the 
integrity of the qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported 
immediately, before any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson on a  
JCQ Form M2(a) (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form, 
supporting documentation and as much information as possible should be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate 
sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the 
document General and Vocational Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments Policies and Procedures, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
39 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to comply with the 
requirements of Ofqual's General Conditions of Recognition. 
This GCSE qualification will be graded and certificated on a nine-grade scale from  
9 to 1 using the total subject mark where 9 is the highest grade. Individual papers are not 
graded. For Foundation tier, grades 1–5 are available and for Higher tier, grades 4–9 are 
available, however if the mark achieved is a smaller number of marks below the 4/3 grade 
boundary, then a grade 3 may be awarded.  
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum judged by Pearson to be of 
sufficient standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U result. 
The first certification opportunity for this qualification will be 2026. 
Student recruitment and progression 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that: 
• they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard 
• they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression 
• equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this qualification. Because no 
vocabulary is specified for KS2 or KS3, the Vocabulary List proposed for GCSE must be 
comprehensive and should make no assumptions about vocabulary previously taught. 
Progression 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish offers a suitable progression 
route as just as at Key Stages 2 and 3, these qualifications focus on the development of 
all four language skills, listening, speaking, reading and writing. Grammar and the 
mastering of linguistic features are key elements as is continually improving the accuracy 
of pronunciation. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
40 
The grammar and vocabulary lists illustrate the level required for this qualification. The 
broader range of thematic contexts promotes a clear progression in grammar and 
vocabulary from Key Stage 3 and will increase linguistic and cognitive demand.  
Students will understand and respond to spoken and written language from a variety of 
authentic sources and will be able to write at varying length, for different purposes and 
audiences, using the variety of grammatical structures that they have learnt. 
This qualification offers a suitable progression route to GCE AS and GCE A Level in 
Spanish language. The integration of productive and receptive skills across the 
assessment objectives, replicates the approach that is used in the A level qualifications. At 
A level there is an additional assessment objective that focusses on cultural knowledge. In 
our GCSE we actively reference cultural aspects as relevant to the age group, allowing 
progression on to this aspect of the A level qualification. 
In addition, the study of one language at GCSE can facilitate and help promote the 
learning of other languages. The qualification may also add to an individual’s employability 
profile. Students will be able to apply their knowledge, skills and understanding to 
authentic, real-life contexts. They will develop transferable skills that support higher 
education study and the transition to employment, together with an understanding and 
appreciation of Spanish speaking countries and their cultures.  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
41 
4 Appendices 
 
Appendix 1: Vocabulary 42 
Appendix 2: Grammar 144 
Appendix 3: Names of people used in assessments 165 
Appendix 4: Transferable skills 167 
Appendix 5: Codes 169 
 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
42 
Appendix 1: Vocabulary  
The following vocabulary list is the full vocabulary content that will be assessed by this 
qualification, in both receptive and productive tasks.  
We have created a vocabulary list in collaboration with teachers and students which 
allows them to engage with subjects that they have told us are meaningful and 
interesting, as well as providing a strong linguistic and cultural foundation. The 
vocabulary list includes many of the basic and familiar words which you will already 
cover across key stage 3, as well as adding new and up-to-date content to reflect the 
diversity of our students and their diverse range of interests such as social equality, 
gaming, social media and the environment.  
The vocabulary list comprises 1200 words to be used at both Foundation and Higher 
tier and an additional 500 words to be used at Higher tier only.  
Our considerations when selecting the 500 words for Higher tier included: 
• linguistic complexity (e.g. decepcionante, comportamiento) 
• conceptual complexity (e.g. proporcionar, concepto) 
• the grammatical requirements of the course at each tier (e.g. acabar (de) is required 
for Higher tier-only grammatical constructions) 
• enrichment of Higher tier students' vocabulary, by providing synonyms or near-
synonyms of words in the Foundation tier list. Where we have done this, we have 
placed at Foundation tier the word most likely to be familiar to students from 
previous study (e.g. Foundation barato vs Higher económico) or that is more similar to 
a common English term (e.g. Foundation lengua vs Higher idioma). 
There are also 20 additional cultural or geographical words and 30 short phrases.  
At least 85% of the vocabulary, at each tier, is expected to be taken from the top 2000 
most frequent words according to the corpus published by Routledge0F
1. 
 
 
 
1 Davies, M., & Davies, K. (2018). A frequency dictionary of Spanish: Core vocabulary for learners (2nd ed.). 
London: Routledge 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
43 
Reading assessments 
In our reading assessments, any vocabulary that is not listed below will be glossed and 
this will be no more than 2% of words in any text.  
Additionally, up to 2% of words in any text can be cognates1F
1 which are not included in 
the vocabulary list below.   
Speaking and writing assessments 
In our speaking and writing assessments, we have designed the tasks so that they elicit 
vocabulary from the list below and full marks can be gained if students respond with 
vocabulary taken exclusively from the vocabulary listed. However, teachers and students 
should not feel limited to this vocabulary list and if they wish to supplement the list with 
additional vocabulary during teaching and learning, the use of any additional vocabulary 
in productive tasks will be equally rewarded. 
  
 
 
 
1 Cognates are words in which the substantial majority of letters are the same in English and the assessed 
language; they have the same meaning in both languages and any difference in spelling should not 
impede understanding for students entered for GCSE MFL (French, German, Spanish) qualifications. 
Examples of cognates in Spanish include ‘bádminton’, ’emoción’ and ‘biología’.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
44 
Organisation of the vocabulary 
We have presented the vocabulary list in the way that will be the most useful and 
supportive to teachers to access the content and organise it for teaching needs.   
We also provide the list in an interactive, editable format on our website. 
We begin with a section on the basic vocabulary that you may expect to have already 
covered with students during KS3, if they have studied the language prior to this GCSE 
qualification. This section includes:  
• greetings 
• numbers 
• days of the week 
• months of the year 
• seasons 
• times of the day  
• colours. 
We then list the words we have selected for our allowance of: 
• cultural and geographical words and  
• short phrases.  
The remainder of our vocabulary is then organised by grammatical function:  
• articles and pronouns 
• conjunctions 
• prepositions 
• adverbs 
• adjectives 
• nouns 
• verbs.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
45 
This vocabulary is organised in alphabetical order by English. Note that the 
categorisation of words by part of speech is purely for organisational purposes; if a word 
exists in multiple parts of speech with the same meaning(s), we may use it in any of 
those parts of speech in our exam papers. For example, pasado is listed as an adjective 
with the meanings ‘last’ and ‘past’; we may therefore also use pasado as a noun with the 
meaning ‘past’. 
Some words have multiple English meanings listed; in these cases, students are 
required to know all of these meanings. 
There are a small number of words for which more than one spelling is in common use, 
including words where an accent has become optional, e.g. sólo/solo (with the meaning 
‘only’). We have marked these words with a ^ in the vocabulary list. Although we have 
only used one spelling in the vocabulary list, we will accept both spelling options for 
these words in assessments. 
University of York MultiLingProfiler 
During the development of our Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs), we have been grateful to University of York for 
providing us with access to their MultiLingProfiler tool2F
1 to assist us with ensuring all our 
texts comply with the requirement set out in this Appendix 1: Vocabulary and 
Appendix 2: Grammar. 
  
 
 
 
1 Finlayson, N., Marsden, E., & Anthony, L. (2022). MultilingProfiler (Version 3) [Computer software]. University of York. 
https://www.multilingprofiler.net/ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
46 
Basic vocabulary 
Foundation and Higher 
Basic vocabulary: Foundation and Higher 
English  Spanish 
hello, hi hola 
goodbye adiós 
please por favor 
thank you, thanks  gracias 
OK (I agree), OK? vale 
Mr, sir señor  
Mrs, lady, madam señora  
no, not no 
(I am) sorry perdón 
----------------------------- ----------------------------- 
zero cero 
one uno  
two dos 
three tres 
four cuatro 
five cinco 
six seis 
seven siete 
eight ocho 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
47 
Basic vocabulary: Foundation and Higher 
English  Spanish 
nine nueve 
ten diez 
eleven once 
twelve doce 
thirteen trece 
fourteen catorce 
fifteen quince 
sixteen dieciséis 
seventeen diecisiete 
eighteen dieciocho 
nineteen diecinueve 
twenty veinte 
twenty-one veintiuno 
thirty treinta 
forty cuarenta 
fifty cincuenta 
sixty sesenta 
seventy setenta 
eighty ochenta 
ninety noventa 
one hundred cien(to) 
one thousand mil 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
48 
Basic vocabulary: Foundation and Higher 
English  Spanish 
million millón (m) 
first (m) (pre-noun)  primer 
first primero 
second segundo 
third (m) tercero 
third (m) (pre-noun) tercer 
fourth  cuarto 
fifth quinto 
last, latest último 
----------------------------- ----------------------------- 
Monday lunes (m) 
Tuesday martes (m) 
Wednesday miércoles (m) 
Thursday jueves (m) 
Friday viernes (m) 
Saturday sábado (m) 
Sunday domingo (m) 
January enero 
February febrero 
March marzo 
April abril 
May mayo 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
49 
Basic vocabulary: Foundation and Higher 
English  Spanish 
June junio 
July julio 
August agosto 
September septiembre^ 
October octubre 
November noviembre 
December diciembre 
winter invierno (m) 
spring primavera (f) 
summer verano (m) 
autumn otoño (m) 
weekend fin de semana (m) 
week semana (f) 
month mes (m) 
year año (m) 
afternoon, evening tarde (f) 
day, daytime día (m) 
yesterday ayer 
today  hoy 
tomorrow mañana 
noon, midday mediodía (m) 
end, ending, final final (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
50 
Basic vocabulary: Foundation and Higher 
English  Spanish 
morning mañana (f) 
afternoon, evening tarde (f) 
night, evening noche (f) 
half past y media (f) 
hour, time (specific) hora (f) 
minute minuto (m) 
second (time measurement) segundo (m) 
start, beginning comienzo (m) 
time (once, twice…) vez (f)  
moment momento (m) 
----------------------------- ----------------------------- 
black negro 
blue azul 
brown marrón 
colour color (m) 
green verde 
grey, gloomy gris 
orange  naranja 
pink rosa 
red rojo 
white blanco 
yellow amarillo 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
51 
Higher ONLY 
Basic vocabulary: Higher ONLY 
English Spanish 
century siglo (m) 
start, beginning principio (m) 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
52 
Cultural and geographical words 
Foundation and Higher 
Cultural and geographical words: Foundation and Higher 
English  Spanish 
Africa África (f) 
Asia Asia (f) 
Europe Europa (f) 
Latin America América Latina (f), Latinoamérica (f) 
Bolivia Bolivia (f) 
Ecuador Ecuador (m) 
Spain España (f) 
United Kingdom Reino Unido (m) 
Venezuela Venezuela (f) 
Balearic Islands Islas Baleares (fpl) 
Canary Islands Islas Canarias (fpl) 
Barcelona Barcelona (f) 
Buenos Aires Buenos Aires (m) 
Madrid Madrid (m) 
Medellín Medellín (m) 
Carnival Carnaval (m) 
Day of the Dead El Día de los Muertos (m) 
The Fallas festival Las Fallas (de Valencia) (fpl) 
New Year's Eve Nochevieja (f) 
Tomatina festival La Tomatina (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
53 
Short phrases 
Foundation and Higher 
Short phrases: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
enjoy your meal! ¡buen provecho! 
good morning!; good afternoon, 
evening/night! 
¡Buenos días!; ¡Buenas tardes/noches! 
see you later / soon! ¡hasta luego / pronto! 
What's wrong?, what's happened?, what's 
up? 
¿Qué (te) pasa? 
How are you? ¿Qué tal (estás/está)? 
next to al lado (de) 
single ticket billete de ida (m) 
return ticket billete de ida y vuelta (m) 
you are welcome, not at all de nada 
from time to time de vez en cuando 
at the moment en este momento 
you must (general), one must hay que 
(to) go shopping ir de compras 
(to) go on holiday I going on holiday ir(se) de vacaciones 
I don’t mind me da igual 
(I, you, she, he, it, you (sing formal)) would 
like (informal)  
me/te/le gustaría 
role model modelo de conducta 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
54 
Short phrases: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
(to) get good / bad grades sacar buenas / malas notas 
you need (to) (general), one needs (to) se necesita 
you can (general), one can se puede 
as…as tan…como 
(to) look forward to I looking forward to, 
(to) be keen to I being keen to 
tener ganas de 
Higher ONLY 
Short phrases: Higher only  
English Spanish 
to have been + -ing + for + time desde hace (+ present tense) 
it's necessary (to) hace falta (+ infinitive) 
I feel like + -ing /noun  me apetece + inf. /noun  
on one hand por un lado  
on the other hand  por otro lado  
I am good/bad at (Spanish)  se me da bien/mal (el español)  
it's worth it (to)  vale la pena (+ infinitive)  
no longer, no more  ya no  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
55 
Articles and pronouns 
Foundation and Higher 
Articles and pronouns: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
(to) them (m, f), (to) you (formal) (indirect 
obj) 
les 
a/an (f) una 
a/an (m) un 
a/an, any (m) alguno 
a/an, any (m, before a noun) algún 
all, the whole (+ noun) todo 
everybody todo el mundo (m) 
everyone, all of them todos 
everything, all todo 
he (subj) él 
her, it (f) (obj) la 
him (m) (obj) | (to) him, (to) her, (to) it, (to) 
you (formal) (indirect obj) 
le 
him, it (m) (obj) lo 
himself, herself, itself, oneself, yourself 
(formal)| themselves | yourselves 
(formal) (reflex) | (to) each other (recip) 
se 
how much(?), how many(?) (¿)cuánto(s)(?), (¿)cuánta(s)(?) 
I (subj) yo 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
56 
Articles and pronouns: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
me (obj) | (to) me (indirect obj) | myself 
(reflex) 
me 
no, not…any (m) ninguno 
no, not…any (m, before a noun) ningún 
nobody, no one, anybody (after negative 
verb), anyone (after negative verb) 
nadie, (no) nadie 
no-one, none, (a single) one (after 
negative verb), anyone (after negative 
verb) 
ninguno, (no) ninguno 
nothing, anything (after negative verb) nada, (no) nada 
one, some (of them) (for plural noun) alguno 
our nuestro, nuestra, nuestros, nuestras 
she (subj) ella 
some (fpl) unas 
some (mpl) unos 
someone alguien 
something algo 
that (nt) eso 
the (f) la 
the (fpl) las 
the (m) el 
the (mpl) los 
them (f) (obj) las 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
57 
Articles and pronouns: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
them (m) (obj) los 
they (f) (subj)  ellas 
they (m, mixed gender) (subj) ellos 
this (n) esto 
us (obj) | (to) us (indirect obj) | (to) 
ourselves (reflex) | (to) each other (recip) 
nos 
we (f) (subj) nosotras 
we (m, mixed gender) (subj) nosotros 
what(?) (¿)qué(?) 
which(?), what(?) (m,f)(pl) (¿)cuál(es)(?) 
who, that, which (subj) que 
who(?) (m,f)(pl) (¿)quién(es)(?) 
you (pl informal) (obj) | (to) you (pl 
informal) (indirect obj) | (to) yourselves 
(reflex) | (to) each other (recip) 
os 
you (f) (pl informal) (subj) vosotras 
you (m, mixed gender) (pl informal) (subj) vosotros 
you (pl formal) (subj) ustedes 
you (sing formal) (subj) usted 
you (sing informal) (obj) | (to) you (sing 
informal) (indirect obj) | yourself (sing 
informal) (reflex) 
te 
you (sing informal) (subj)  tú 
your (pl, informal) vuestro, vuestra, vuestros, vuestras 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
58 
Higher ONLY 
Articles and pronouns: Higher ONLY 
English Spanish 
(to) me (emph) (a) mí 
(to) you (sing informal) (emph) (a) ti 
he (subj) | (to) him, it (m) (emph) él | (a) él 
his, hers, its, yours (formal possessor), 
their  (m, f, mpl, fpl) 
el suyo, la suya, los suyos, las suyas 
mine (m, f, mpl, fpl) el mío, la mía, los míos, las mías 
ours el nuestro, la nuestra, los nuestros, las 
nuestras 
she (subj) |(to) her, it (f) (emph) ella | (a) ella 
that (m, f)  aquel, aquella 
that (thing) aquello 
that, which, who (m, f, mpl, fpl) (subj) el cual, la cual, los cuales, las cuales 
that/those, which, who (m, f, mpl, fpl) (subj) el que, la que, los que, las que 
the (adjective, e.g. good) thing lo (+ adjective, e.g. bueno) 
the worst el peor, la peor, los peores, las peores 
the youngest el menor, la menor, los menores, las 
menores 
they (f) (subj) | (to) them (f) (emph) ellas | (a) ellas 
they (m, mixed gender) (subj) |(to) them 
(m, mixed gender) (emph) 
ellos | (a) ellos 
those (m, f) aquellos, aquellas 
we (f) (subj) | (to) us (emph) nosotras | (a) nosotras 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
59 
Articles and pronouns: Higher ONLY 
English Spanish 
we (m, mixed gender) (subj) | (to) us 
(emph) 
nosotros | (a) nosotros 
what, that which (subj) lo que 
who, whom quien 
with me conmigo 
with you (sing informal) contigo 
you (f) (pl informal) (subj) | (to) you (f) (pl 
informal) (emph) 
vosotras | (a) vosotras 
you (m, mixed gender) (pl informal) (subj) 
| (to) you (m, mixed gender) (pl informal) 
(emph) 
vosotros | (a) vosotros 
you (pl formal) (subj) | (a) you (pl formal) 
(emph) 
ustedes | (a) ustedes 
you (sing formal) (subj) | (to) you (sing 
formal) (emph) 
usted | (a) usted 
yours (pl informal possessor) el vuestro, la vuestra, los vuestros, las 
vuestras 
yours (sing informal possessor) 
(m, f, mpl, fpl)  
el tuyo, la tuya, los tuyos, las tuyas 
 
 
 
Conjunctions 
Foundation and Higher 
Conjunctions: Foundation and Higher 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
60 
English Spanish 
and, past (when giving the time) y, e 
because porque 
but pero 
if, whether si 
like, as como 
or o, u 
since ya que 
so, well, well then pues 
than que 
when cuando 
where  donde 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
61 
Higher ONLY 
Conjunctions: Higher ONLY 
English Spanish 
although aunque 
given (that) dado (que) 
however, nevertheless no obstante 
however, nevertheless sin embargo 
nor, or (after negative verb) 
neither...nor… 
(no) ni…(ni)… 
but, rather sino 
so that, in order to para que 
that (subj) que 
therefore por lo tanto 
while, whereas mientras  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
62 
Prepositions 
Foundation and Higher 
Prepositions: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
(to) the (m, sing) al 
above encima (de) 
against (en) contra 
between, among entre 
by, for, through, in, at, per por 
during durante 
except, minus menos 
for; in order to (+ verb) para; para (+ infinitive) 
from, since desde 
in, on, at en 
of the (m, sing) del 
of, from de 
on, on top of, about sobre 
to, at, away, on a 
under, underneath bajo 
underneath, below, under debajo (de) 
until, up to hasta 
with con 
without, without (+ -ing) sin, sin (+ infinitive) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
63 
Higher ONLY 
Prepositions: Higher ONLY 
English Spanish 
according to según 
around, because of por 
despite, in spite of a pesar de 
due to debido a 
except for, but salvo 
through, across través, a través de 
toward, towards hacia 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
64 
Adverbs 
Foundation and Higher 
Adverbs: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
abroad al / en el extranjero 
absolutely absolutamente 
after, afterwards; after (+ -ing) después; después de (+infinitive) 
already ya 
also también 
always, forever siempre 
badly mal 
before, beforehand; before (+ -ing) antes; antes de (+ infinitive) 
behind, at the back detrás (de) 
close, near cerca (de) 
completely completamente 
directly, straight away directamente 
downstairs, down, below abajo 
early temprano 
exactly exactamente 
far (away, off) lejos (de) 
finally 
(in) front (of) 
finalmente 
delante (de) 
generally generalmente 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
65 
Adverbs: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
here aquí 
here acá 
how cómo 
immediately inmediatamente 
late tarde 
later, afterwards luego 
less; less (… than) menos; menos (…que) 
like this, like that así 
mainly, especially especialmente 
more; adj + -er (...than), more (…than) más; más (…que) 
never nunca, (no) nunca 
normally normalmente 
not much, little (un) poco 
now ahora 
of course claro 
often a menudo 
online en línea 
only solamente 
only, just sólo^ 
out, outside, away; outside of, away from fuera; fuera de 
outdoors al aire libre 
perfectly perfectamente 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
66 
Adverbs: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
probably, likely probablemente 
quickly rápidamente 
rather, quite, enough bastante 
really realmente 
recently recientemente  
simply simplemente 
sometimes a veces 
soon, early pronto 
still; not … yet todavía; no… todavía, todavía no…. 
surely, certainly seguramente 
then, so entonces 
there ahí 
there allá 
there, over there allí 
totally, completely totalmente 
truly verdaderamente 
unfortunately desafortunadamente  
upstairs, up there arriba 
very muy 
well, good bien 
when cuándo 
where dónde 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
67 
Adverbs: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
why por qué 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
68 
Higher ONLY 
Adverbs: Higher ONLY 
English Spanish 
actually, in fact de hecho 
almost, nearly casi 
also, besides, as well además 
approximately aproximadamente 
around, approximately alrededor (de) 
currently, at present actualmente 
everywhere por todas partes 
evidently, obviously evidentemente 
firstly primero 
including, even incluso 
indeed, of course por supuesto 
inside; within, inside dentro; dentro de 
neither, nor, either (after negative verb) (no) tampoco 
never jamás 
perhaps, maybe quizá, quizás 
so much tanto  
still, yet aún 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
69 
Adjectives 
This is the complete list of adjectives included in our vocabulary list, in their base form 
(usually masculine singular). Students should be able to agree in gender and number all 
of the adjectives in this list that follow one of the patterns laid out in the ‘Adjectives’ 
section of Appendix 2: Grammar. For any adjectives that do not follow one of those 
patterns, after the base form we have listed all the other forms students are expected  
to learn. 
Foundation and Higher 
Adjectives: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
a few, not much, not many poco 
active activo 
allergic  alérgico 
alone solo 
angry enfadado 
Argentinian argentino 
bad malo 
bad (m) (pre-noun) mal 
beautiful bello 
beautiful, nice bonito 
better mejor 
big, great (m, f) (pre-noun) gran 
big, large (m, f) (post-noun) grande 
bisexual bisexual 
blonde, light (skin) rubio 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
70 
Adjectives: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
blue azul 
bored, boring aburrido 
British británico 
calm, tranquil, relaxed tranquilo 
central central 
cheap barato 
chestnut brown castaño 
Chilean chileno 
classic, classical clásico 
clean limpio 
close, closely-related, nearby cercano 
closed  cerrado 
Colombian colombiano 
comfortable cómodo 
common común  
complete, full completo 
constant constante 
cool guay 
Cuban cubano 
cultural cultural 
dangerous peligroso 
dead muerto 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
71 
Adjectives: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
different diferente 
different distinto 
difficult difícil 
direct, straight directo 
dirty sucio 
diverse diverso 
double doble 
each, every cada 
easy fácil 
educational educativo 
elder, eldest, larger, main  mayor  
electric eléctrico 
empty vacío 
English  inglés 
enormous, vast enorme 
equal, same as igual 
essential esencial 
European europeo 
exact exacto 
excellent excelente 
exciting, touching, moving emocionante 
expensive caro 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
72 
Adjectives: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
extraordinary  extraordinario 
fair, just justo 
false falso 
familiar, of the family, family-sized familiar 
fast, quick rápido 
favourite favorito 
fifth quinto 
foreign extranjero 
former, antique, old antiguo 
free gratuito 
free, vacant libre 
funny, amusing divertido 
gay gay 
general general 
good bueno 
good (before masculine singular noun) buen 
half medio 
happy feliz 
happy, content contento 
hard, harsh duro 
hardworking trabajador 
hardworking trabajadora 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
73 
Adjectives: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
healthy, wholesome sano 
his, her, its, one's, your (formal), their su 
historic histórico 
hot caliente 
ill, sick enfermo 
important importante 
impossible imposible 
included, inclusive of incluido 
incredible, unbelievable increíble 
independent independiente 
interesting interesante 
international internacional 
last, past pasado 
Latin latino 
lesbian lesbiana 
less, fewer; less (…than), fewer (…than) menos; menos (…que) 
light  ligero 
lively, cheerful, happy alegre 
local local 
long largo 
lost perdido 
main principal 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
74 
Adjectives: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
marvellous, wonderful maravilloso 
maximum máximo 
mental mental 
Mexican mexicano, mejicano 
minimum mínimo 
modern moderno 
much, many, a lot (of) mucho 
musical musical 
my mi 
national nacional 
natural natural 
necessary necesario 
negative negativo 
new nuevo 
next próximo 
next, following siguiente 
nice, kind, friendly simpático 
nice, pleasant agradable 
non-binary no binario 
normal, usual, regular normal 
old, aged viejo 
open  abierto 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
75 
Adjectives: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
orange  naranja 
original original 
other, another otro 
own propio 
perfect perfecto 
personal personal 
Peruvian peruano 
physical físico 
poor pobre 
popular popular 
positive positivo 
possible posible 
private privado 
public público 
pure, clean puro 
real, royal real 
real, true verdadero 
recent reciente 
red-haired, ginger pelirrojo 
relaxing relajante 
religious religioso 
responsible responsable 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
76 
Adjectives: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
sad, unhappy triste 
same mismo 
school escolar 
serious  serio 
several  varios 
short (height), low bajo 
short, brief corto 
simple, straightforward  simple 
single (room, bed), individual individual  
sitting, seated sentado 
slow lento 
small, little, young pequeño 
social social 
Spanish  español 
(Castilian) Spanish castellano 
Spanish-speaking hispanohablante 
special especial 
sports deportivo 
straight heterosexual 
strict estricto 
strong fuerte 
sure, safe, secure seguro 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
77 
Adjectives: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
tall, high, loud alto 
tasty, rich rico 
terrible terrible  
that (f) esa 
that (m) ese 
these (m) (f) estos, estas 
third (m) tercero 
third (m) (pre-noun) tercer 
this (f) esta 
this (m) este 
those (m) (f) esos, esas 
tired, tiring cansado 
together juntos 
too much, too many demasiado 
traditional tradicional 
transgender transgénero 
typical típico 
unhealthy malsano 
unique, only  único 
useful útil 
useless inútil 
usual habitual  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
78 
Adjectives: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
vegan vegano 
vegetarian vegetariano 
well-known, famous  famoso 
worse 
young 
peor 
joven 
younger, youngest menor 
your (sing, informal) tu 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
79 
Higher ONLY 
Adjectives: Higher ONLY 
English Spanish 
annoying irritante 
appropriate, adequate adecuado 
artistic artístico 
authentic auténtico 
balanced equilibrado 
beautiful hermoso 
beautiful lindo 
beautiful precioso 
both ambos 
brief, short breve 
capable, able capaz 
cheap, economic económico 
civil civil  
clear, light (in colour) claro 
climate climático 
complex, complicated complejo 
conscious, aware consciente 
contrary, opposite contrario 
current actual 
daily diario 
dark oscuro 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
80 
Adjectives: Higher ONLY 
English Spanish 
dark (hair), tanned (skin) moreno 
deep, profound profundo 
disappointing decepcionante 
distant lejano 
dry seco 
electronic electrónico 
enough suficiente 
entire, whole, complete entero 
essential fundamental 
fatty, oily, greasy graso 
fresh, cool, chilly fresco 
full, filled lleno 
global, world mundial 
heavy, boring, annoying pesado 
his, hers (m, f, mpl, fpl) | yours (formal) (m, 
f, mpl, fpl) | theirs (m, f, mpl, fpl) 
suyo, suya, suyos, suyas 
human humano 
inmense, huge, great inmenso 
known, well-known conocido 
large, wide, loose amplio 
legal legal 
loyal, faithful fiel 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
81 
Adjectives: Higher ONLY 
English Spanish 
medium-sized mediano  
mine (m, f, mpl, fpl) mío, mía, míos, mías 
multicultural multicultural 
nervous, anxious  nervioso 
numerous numeroso 
obvious evidente 
optimistic optimista 
our nuestro, nuestra, nuestros, nuestras 
practical, convenient  práctico 
previous, preceding anterior 
professional profesional 
proud  orgulloso 
ready, clever listo 
renewable renovable 
serious, grave grave  
similar similar 
soft, gentle, mild suave 
sour agrio 
superior, higher, upper superior 
sustainable sostenible 
sweet dulce 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
82 
Adjectives: Higher ONLY 
English Spanish 
the best (m, f, mpl, fpl) el mejor, la mejor, los mejores, las 
mejores 
the oldest el mayor, la mayor, los mayores, las 
mayores 
tight  ajustado 
twin gemelo 
universal universal 
university universitario 
unknown desconocido 
urban urbano 
virtual virtual 
wet, humid húmedo 
work, working, labour laboral 
yearly, annual anual 
yours (sing informal) (m, f, mpl, fpl)  tuyo, tuya, tuyos, tuyas 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
83 
Nouns 
Foundation and Higher 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
accident accidente (m) 
action acción (f) 
activity actividad (f) 
actor (m) actor (m) 
actress, actor (f) actriz (f) 
address, direction dirección (f) 
adult adulto (m), adulta (f) 
adults, the elderly los mayores (mpl) 
adventure aventura (f) 
affection, love cariño (m) 
afternoon nap, siesta siesta (f) 
afternoon snack merienda (f) 
age edad (f) 
agreement; in agreement acuerdo (m); de acuerdo 
air aire (m) 
airport aeropuerto (m) 
animal animal (m) 
application, app  aplicación (f) 
appointment, date cita (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
84 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
area, zone zona (f) 
arm brazo (m) 
art arte (m) 
artist artista (mf) 
association asociación (f) 
attention atención (f) 
attitude actitud (f) 
aunt tía (f) 
autumn otoño (m) 
baby bebé (mf) 
back (body part) espalda (f) 
background segundo plano (m) 
(shopping) bag bolsa (f) 
band banda (f) 
bank, bench  banco (m) 
bar bar (m) 
basketball baloncesto (m) 
bathroom, bath, swim baño (m) 
beach playa (f) 
bed cama (f) 
bicycle bicicleta (f) 
bill, account cuenta (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
85 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
birthday cumpleaños (m) 
blog blog (m) 
boat, ship barco (m) 
body cuerpo (m) 
book libro (m) 
boss, headteacher  director (m), directora (f) 
boss, manager jefe (mf) 
boss, manager jefa (f) 
bottle botella (f) 
boy chico (m) 
boyfriend novio (m) 
brand, mark marca (f) 
bread pan (m) 
break, interval, rest descanso (m) 
breakfast desayuno (m) 
bridge puente (m) 
brother, sibling hermano (m) 
building 
burger, hamburger 
edificio (m) 
hamburguesa (f) 
bus autobús (m), bus (m) 
cake pastel (m) 
camera cámara (f) 
camping, camp site camping (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
86 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
capital city capital (f) 
car coche (m) 
card, credit card tarjeta (f) 
career, university degree, race carrera (f) 
castle castillo (m) 
cat gato (m) 
cause causa (f) 
centre, downtown centro (m) 
chair silla (f) 
change, exchange (money) cambio (m) 
channel, canal canal (m) 
character  personaje (m) 
checkout, till, box caja (f) 
cheese queso (m) 
child, (young) boy niño (m) 
child, (young) girl niña (f) 
chips patatas fritas (fpl) 
chocolate chocolate (m) 
churros churros (mpl) 
cinema cine (m) 
city ciudad (f) 
classroom, class, lesson clase (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
87 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
climate clima (m) 
clothes ropa (f) 
cloud nube (f) 
club, society club (m) 
coast costa (f) 
coffee, café café (m) 
coin, currency moneda (f) 
cold frío (m) 
comment comentario (m 
communication comunicación (f) 
community comunidad (f) 
company, firm empresa (f) 
company, firm compañía (f) 
competition, contest competición (f) 
(laptop) computer ordenador (portátil) (m) 
concert concierto (m) 
condition condición (f) 
contact contacto (m) 
content contenido (m) 
continent continente (m) 
conversation conversación (f) 
corner esquina (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
88 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
country país (m) 
countryside, field campo (m) 
cousin primo (m), prima (f) 
crisis crisis (f) 
culture cultura (f) 
customer cliente (mf) 
cycling ciclismo (m) 
dad papá (m) 
dance baile (m) 
danger peligro (m) 
data  datos (mpl) 
date fecha (f) 
daughter, child hija (f) 
decision decisión (f) 
degree  grado (m) 
dessert postre (m) 
destination  destino (m) 
detail detalle (m) 
diet dieta (f) 
difference diferencia (f) 
difficulty, obstacle dificultad (f) 
dinner cena (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
89 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
disability; disabled discapacidad (f); con discapacidad 
distance distancia (f) 
doctor doctor (m), doctora (f) 
dog perro (m) 
dollar dólar (m) 
door puerta (f) 
drawing dibujo (m) 
dream, sleep sueño (m) 
dress vestido (m) 
drink, beverage bebida (f) 
drug droga (f) 
ear, hearing oído (m) 
earth, land, ground tierra (f) 
East este (m) 
education  educación (f) 
effect efecto (m) 
egg huevo (m) 
email correo electrónico (m) 
end, ending; final final (m); final (f) 
energy energía (f) 
entrance, admission ticket  entrada (f) 
environment  medio ambiente (m)^  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
90 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
equality igualdad (f) 
Euro euro (m) 
event evento (m) 
exam examen (m) 
example ejemplo (m) 
exercise ejercicio (m) 
exhibition, display exposición (f)  
experience experiencia (f) 
eyes ojos (mpl) 
face cara (f) 
fair, festival feria (f) 
family familia (f) 
fan (of) aficionado (a/de) (m), aficionada (a/de) (f) 
fashion; fashionable moda (f); a la moda, de moda 
father, parent padre (m) 
favour; please favor (m); por favor 
fear miedo (m) 
festival  festival (m) 
film película (f) 
finger dedo (m) 
fire fuego (m) 
fish pescado (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
91 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
flamenco (dance/music) flamenco (m) 
flat, apartment, floor piso (m)  
flight vuelo (m) 
flower flor (f) 
follower seguidor (m), seguidora (f) 
food, meal comida (f) 
foot; on foot, walking; standing pie (m); a pie; de pie 
football fútbol (m) 
foreground primer plano (m) 
friend amigo (m), amiga (f) 
fruit fruta (f) 
future futuro (m) 
game juego (m) 
games console videoconsola (f) 
garden jardín (m) 
gender, genre género (m) 
girl chica (f) 
girlfriend novia (f) 
glasses gafas (fpl) 
grandfather, grandparent abuelo (m) 
grandmother abuela (f) 
group, band grupo (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
92 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
hair pelo (m) 
half  mitad (f) 
hand mano (f) 
hat sombrero (m)  
head cabeza (f) 
health salud (f) 
heart corazón (m) 
heat, warmth, hot calor (m) 
help ayuda (f) 
history, story historia (f) 
holidays vacaciones (fpl) 
homework, duties deberes (mpl) 
horse caballo (m) 
hospital hospital (m) 
hotel hotel (m) 
house, home casa (f) 
hunger, famine hambre (f) 
husband marido (m)  
ice cream helado (m) 
idea idea (f) 
identity identidad (f) 
image, picture imagen (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
93 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
importance, significance importancia (f) 
independence independencia (f) 
influence influencia (f) 
information información (f) 
instrument instrumento (m) 
Internet Internet (m) 
Internet, web web (f) 
island isla (f) 
jacket chaqueta (f) 
jumper  jersey (m) 
key llave (f) 
kilometer kilómetro (m) 
kiss beso (m) 
kitchen, cuisine, cooking cocina (f) 
knee rodilla (f) 
lake lago (m) 
left izquierda (f) 
leg pierna (f) 
leisure activity, hobby pasatiempo (m) 
letter, lyrics letra (f) 
level nivel (m) 
library biblioteca (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
94 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
life vida (f) 
list lista (f) 
love amor (m) 
luck suerte (f) 
luggage equipaje (m) 
lunch almuerzo (m) 
magazine revista (f) 
main road  carretera (f) 
majority mayoría (f) 
man hombre (m) 
map mapa (m) 
market mercado (m) 
match (sports), (political) party partido (m) 
maths matemáticas (fpl) 
meat carne (f) 
media, means medios (mpl) 
medicine, medication medicina (f) 
member  miembro (m) 
menu, letter, (playing) card carta (f) 
message mensaje (m) 
metre, metro, underground metro (m) 
milk leche (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
95 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
mistake, error error (m) 
mobile phone móvil (m) 
model  modelo (mf) 
money dinero (m) 
monument monumento (m) 
mother madre (f) 
mountain montaña (f) 
mouth boca (f) 
mum mamá (f) 
museum museo (m) 
music música (f) 
name nombre (m) 
nature naturaleza (f)  
neighbour vecino (m), vecina (f) 
neighbourhood, district barrio (m) 
network, net red (f) 
news  noticias (fpl) 
newspaper periódico (m) 
noise ruido (m) 
North norte (m) 
nose nariz (f) 
notebook, workbook cuaderno (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
96 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
number, shoe size número (m) 
offer  oferta (f)  
office oficina (f) 
old person anciano (m), anciana (f) 
omelette, (Latin America) corn pancake  tortilla (f) 
opinion opinión (f) 
option, choice opción (f) 
paella paella (f) 
page página (f) 
painting cuadro (m) 
palace palacio (m)  
paper, role, part (movie, play) papel (m) 
park parque (m) 
part  parte (f) 
party, bank holiday, festival fiesta (f) 
passion pasión (f) 
passport pasaporte (m) 
pasta  pasta (f) 
pen bolígrafo (m) 
people gente (f) 
person persona (f) 
personality  personalidad (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
97 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
peso (currency)  peso (m)  
pharmacy, chemist's farmacia (f) 
photo foto (f) 
place, site sitio (m)   
plan plan (m) 
plane avión (m) 
planet planeta (m) 
plastic plástico (m) 
player jugador (m), jugadora (f) 
playground, courtyard patio (m) 
pleasure, amusement placer (m) 
pleasure, taste  gusto (m) 
pocket bolsillo (m) 
point, full stop, dot punto (m) 
police, police force, police officer policía (mf) 
pollution polución (f)  
pop pop (m), música pop (f) 
port, harbour puerto (m) 
possibility posibilidad (f) 
post office correos (m), oficina de correos (f) 
post, publication publicación (f) 
present presente (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
98 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
present, gift regalo (m)  
presentation, introduction presentación (f) 
president, chairperson presidente (m) 
president, chairperson presidenta (f) 
price precio (m) 
problem problema (m) 
project, plan proyecto (m) 
protection protección (f) 
province provincia (f) 
pupil, student alumno (m), alumna (f) 
quality  calidad (f) 
quantity, amount cantidad (f) 
question pregunta (f) 
rabbit conejo (m) 
racism racismo (m) 
radio radio (f) 
reading lectura (f) 
reality realidad (f) 
reason, right, correct razón (f) 
recycling reciclaje (m) 
region región (f)  
relationship, relation relación (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
99 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
religion religión (f) 
resources recursos (mpl) 
respect respeto (m) 
responsibility responsabilidad (f) 
restaurant restaurante (m) 
result, outcome resultado (m) 
return vuelta (f) 
rhythm ritmo (m) 
rice arroz (m) 
right derecho (m) 
right, right hand derecha (f) 
risk riesgo (m) 
rock (music) rock (m) 
room, bedroom habitación (f) 
room, hall sala (f) 
room, bedroom, quarter cuarto (m) 
route ruta (f) 
rule norma (f) 
ruler, rule, regulation regla (f) 
salary, wage salario (m) 
sale venta (f) 
sandwich bocadillo (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
100 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
school escuela (f) 
school, high school colegio (m) 
school, high school, institute  instituto (m) 
school year, course curso (m) 
science ciencia (f), ciencias (fpl) 
science fiction ciencia ficción (f) 
sea mar (m) 
season, station (train, bus…) estación (f) 
security, safety seguridad (f) 
series serie (f) 
service, toilet servicio (m) 
sexism sexismo (m) 
shame, sadness pena (f) 
shirt camisa (f) 
shoe zapato (m) 
shop, tent  tienda (f) 
shopping centre centro comercial (m) 
shopping, purchase compra(s) (f) 
shoulder hombro (m) 
show (e.g. theatre)  espectáculo (m) 
show (TV, radio), programme (activity, 
plan) 
programa (m)  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
101 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
silence silencio (m) 
singer cantante (mf) 
sister hermana (f) 
situation situación (f) 
size of clothing talla (f) 
size, dimension tamaño (m) 
skateboard monopatín (m) 
skateboarding monopatinaje (m) 
skirt falda (f) 
sky cielo (m) 
snow nieve (f) 
society sociedad (f) 
sock calcetín (m) 
solution solución (f) 
son, child hijo (m) 
song canción (f) 
south sur (m) 
souvenir, memory recuerdo (m) 
space espacio (m) 
sport deporte (m) 
square, place, vacancy plaza (f) 
stadium estadio (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
102 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
starter entrante (m) 
step- -astro, -astra, -astros, -astras 
stomach estómago (m) 
streaming streaming (m) 
street, road calle (f) 
student estudiante (mf) 
study estudio (m) 
style, elegance, manner estilo (m) 
subject asignatura (f) 
success éxito (m) 
sugar azúcar (m) 
summer verano (m) 
sun, sunny sol (m) 
supermarket supermercado (m) 
surprise sorpresa (f)  
swimming  natación (f) 
swimming pool piscina (f) 
table, board mesa (f) 
tablet tableta (f) 
tapas  tapas (fpl) 
tea té (m) 
teacher, professor profesor (m), profesora (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
103 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
team, equipment equipo (m) 
technology tecnología (f) 
(tele)phone teléfono (m) 
temperature temperatura (f) 
tennis tenis (m) 
terror, horror terror (m) 
text texto (m) 
theatre teatro (m) 
theme, topic tema (m) 
thing cosa (f) 
thirst sed (f) 
throat garganta (f) 
ticket (transport), note (money) billete (m) 
tie corbata (f) 
time, weather tiempo (m) 
tongue, language lengua (f) 
tooth diente (m) 
tourism turismo (m) 
tourist turista (mf) 
tradition tradición (f) 
train tren (m)  
trainers zapatillas de deporte (fpl) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
104 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
training, education formación (f) 
transport, transportation 
tree 
transporte (m) 
árbol (m) 
trip, journey, travel viaje (m) 
trousers pantalones (mpl) 
truth verdad (f) 
T-shirt camiseta (f) 
TV tele(visión) (f) 
type, kind, sort tipo (m) 
uncle  tío (m) 
uniform uniforme (m) 
union unión (f) 
university universidad (f) 
use uso (m) 
vegetable verdura (f) 
version versión (f) 
victim, casualty víctima (mf) 
video vídeo (m)^ 
view (over, of) vista (a) (f)  
village, town pueblo (m) 
violence violencia (f) 
virus virus (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
105 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
visit, guest at home visita (f) 
voice voz (f) 
volleyball vóleibol (m)^  
water agua (f) 
way manera (f) 
way, form, shape; fit, in shape forma (f); en forma 
West oeste (m) 
wheelchair silla de ruedas (f) 
wind, windy viento (m) 
window ventana (f) 
winter invierno (m) 
woman, wife mujer (f) 
wood, forest bosque (m) 
word palabra (f) 
work, job, school assignment trabajo (m) 
world mundo (m)  
writer escritor (m), escritora (f) 
young person joven (mf) 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
106 
Higher ONLY 
Nouns: Higher ONLY 
English Spanish 
a lot, pile montón (m) 
ability, capacity capacidad (f) 
access acceso (m) 
accommodation alojamiento (m) 
advance, progress avance (m) 
advantage, pro ventaja (f) 
advice consejo (m) 
agency agencia (f) 
agent, officer agente (mf) 
ally aliado (m), aliada (f) 
architecture arquitectura (f) 
arrival llegada (f) 
article artículo (m)  
aspect, appearance aspecto (m) 
athletics atletismo (m) 
atmosphere ambiente (m)  
background, bottom fondo (m) 
beauty belleza (f) 
behaviour comportamiento (m) 
being ser (m) 
benefit, profit beneficio (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
107 
Nouns: Higher ONLY 
English Spanish 
bird pájaro (m) 
birth  nacimiento (m) 
border, frontier frontera (f) 
business, store  negocio (m) 
campaign campaña (f) 
captain capitán (m) 
captain capitana (f) 
care, carefulness cuidado (m) 
cash efectivo (m) 
cause, because of causa (f), a causa de 
chain, channel cadena (f) 
characteristic, quality característica (f) 
citizen ciudadano (m), ciudadana (f) 
class test prueba (f) 
classmate, companion, colleague compañero (m), compañera (f) 
collection colección (f) 
comedy comedia (f) 
concept concepto (m) 
conclusion conclusión (f) 
confidence, trust confianza (f) 
conflict conflicto (m) 
consequence consecuencia (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
108 
Nouns: Higher ONLY 
English Spanish 
control, test control (m) 
crime, offense delito (m) 
cup copa (f) 
damage, harm daño (m) 
deadline, instalment plazo (m) 
debate debate (m) 
decade década (f) 
design diseño (m) 
desire, wish deseo (m) 
development, progress desarrollo (m) 
device, apparatus aparato (m) 
disadvantage, con desventaja (f) 
discrimination discriminación (f) 
discussion, argument discusión (f) 
doctor médico (m), médica (f) 
documentary documental (m) 
doubt duda (f) 
drama drama (m) 
emergency emergencia (f) 
entrepreneur, manager, employer empresario (m), empresaria (f) 
exchange intercambio (m) 
exit, departure salida (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
109 
Nouns: Higher ONLY 
English Spanish 
expert experto (m), experta (f) 
explanation explicación (f) 
expression expresión (f) 
facilities instalaciones (fpl) 
faith fe (f) 
fat grasa (f) 
feeling sentimiento (m) 
fever fiebre (f) 
fight lucha (f) 
figure figura (f) 
fire incendio (m) 
fish pez (m) 
flood inundación (f) 
food, nourishment alimento (m) 
fork tenedor (m) 
fountain  fuente (f) 
freedom libertad (f) 
frequency frecuencia (f) 
friendship amistad (f) 
generation generación (f) 
glass vaso (m) 
glass, pane vidrio (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
110 
Nouns: Higher ONLY 
English Spanish 
government gobierno (m) 
greeting, regards saludo (m) 
gym gimnasio (m) 
habit, custom, tradition costumbre (f)  
hair cabello (m) 
happiness felicidad (f) 
headphones, earbuds auriculares (mpl) 
headscarf pañuelo (m) 
height 
helmet 
altura (f) 
casco (m) 
home hogar (m) 
humour humor (m) 
impression impresión (f) 
industry, factory industria (f) 
inhabitant habitante (mf) 
injury, wound herida (f) 
intention intención (f) 
interest interés (m) 
interview  entrevista (f) 
job, employment empleo (m) 
joy, happiness alegría (f) 
justice, fairness justicia (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
111 
Nouns: Higher ONLY 
English Spanish 
knife cuchillo (m) 
knowledge conocimiento (m) 
lack (of), shortage falta (de) (f) 
landscape paisaje (m) 
language (specific language) idioma (m) 
law ley (f) 
lift ascensor (m) 
light luz (f) 
line, row fila (f) 
loss, waste pérdida (f) 
map plano (m) 
material material (m) 
meeting, reunion reunión (f) 
memory memoria (f) 
mind mente (f) 
minority minoría (f) 
novel novela (f) 
object objeto (m) 
objective, goal objetivo (m) 
occasion  ocasión (f) 
opportunity, chance oportunidad (f) 
orchestra, dance band orquesta (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
112 
Nouns: Higher ONLY 
English Spanish 
outfit conjunto (m) 
outing, trip excursión (f) 
owner, landlord dueño (m), dueña (f) 
pain, ache  dolor (m) 
pair, couple par (m) 
parade desfile (m) 
partner, couple pareja (f) 
password contraseña (f) 
path, way, route camino (m) 
payment pago (m) 
peace  paz (f) 
place lugar (m) 
plant, floor planta (f) 
plate, dish, course plato (m) 
play obra (f) 
police station comisaría (f) 
position, stall, stand, place puesto (m) 
power poder (m) 
practice práctica (f) 
pressure presión (f) 
pride orgullo (m) 
prize, reward premio (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
113 
Nouns: Higher ONLY 
English Spanish 
product producto (m) 
protest manifestación (f) 
public, audience público (m) 
queue, glue cola (f) 
rain lluvia (f) 
reader lector (m), lectora (f) 
representation representación (f) 
review, criticism crítica (f) 
river río (m) 
rubbish, litter, junk basura (f) 
salad ensalada (f) 
sales rebajas (fpl) 
salt sal (m) 
sand arena (f) 
scientist científico (m), científica (f)  
screen pantalla (f) 
search búsqueda (f) 
season (period of time, TV, series, food...) temporada (f) 
sense, direction sentido (m) 
session sesión (f) 
sheet, leaf hoja (f) 
sign signo (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
114 
Nouns: Higher ONLY 
English Spanish 
sign (road sign) señal (f) 
skin, fur, leather piel (f) 
smell olor (m) 
smile sonrisa (f) 
smoke humo (m) 
sound sonido (m) 
species, kind especie (f) 
spoon cuchara (f) 
stage  escenario (m) 
star estrella (f) 
state, condition estado (m) 
suburb, outskirts afueras (fpl) 
suit, costume traje (m) 
suitcase maleta (f) 
surrounding area, vicinity alrededores (mpl) 
survey encuesta (f) 
task, job, homework, chore tarea (f) 
teaching enseñanza (f) 
threat amenaza (f) 
timetable, schedule horario (m) 
title, qualification título (m) 
trade, business (shop) comercio (m) 
traffic tráfico (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
115 
Nouns: Higher ONLY 
English Spanish 
user usuario (m), usuaria (f) 
valley valle (m) 
variety variedad (f) 
vehicle vehículo (m) 
watch, clock reloj (m) 
youth juventud (f) 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
116 
Verbs 
Students are required to know the conjugated forms of these verbs following the 
regular patterns in the tenses outlined at each tier in the ‘Verbs’ section of Appendix 2: 
Grammar. They are also required to know some irregular inflected forms: where this is 
the case, we have marked the infinitive form with an asterisk (*) and then set out the 
required irregular inflected forms, per tier, in separate tables below. 
For infinitives, as well as for the present and imperfect tenses, students are expected to 
know both the English simple (e.g. infinitive to do; present I do; imperfect I did, I used to 
do) and English continuous (e.g. infinitive to be doing; present I am doing; imperfect I was 
doing) translations. We have only listed the English simple translations in the table below 
for simplicity. 
Foundation and Higher 
Verbs: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
to accept  aceptar 
to act, perfom  actuar 
to adopt adoptar 
to affect afectar 
to answer responder 
to argue, discuss discutir 
to arrive; to manage to llegar; llegar a + inf. 
to ask preguntar 
to ask for, order, request  pedir 
to be estar* 
to be ser* 
to be able to, can poder* 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
117 
Verbs: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
to be… years old tener … años 
to break romper(se)* 
to bring traer* 
to buy comprar 
to call, phone; to be called llamar; llamarse 
to cause causar 
to celebrate celebrar 
to change, exchange; to get changed cambiar; cambiarse 
to charge cargar 
to chat (online) chatear 
to choose escoger 
to clean limpiar 
to close, shut cerrar 
to come venir* 
to compare comparar 
to continue, carry on continuar 
to cook cocinar 
to cost costar 
to cross cruzar 
to cry llorar 
to cut (oneself) cortar(se)  
to dance bailar 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
118 
Verbs: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
to decide decidir 
to depend (on) depender (de) 
to describe describir 
to deserve merecer 
to do, make hacer* 
to drink beber 
to eat comer 
to enjoy disfrutar (de) 
to enjoy oneself divertirse  
to enter, go in entrar 
to fall caer(se) 
to fight luchar 
to find; to run into, be located, feel encontrar; encontrarse 
to finish, end terminar(se) 
to follow, continue seguir 
to forbid, ban prohibir 
to forget olvidar 
to gather, meet reunirse 
to get married casarse 
to get off (mode of transport), go down, 
to download, lower, reduce 
bajar 
to get on (mode of transport), go up, 
upload, turn up (music) 
subir 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
119 
Verbs: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
to get up levantarse 
to give back, return devolver 
to give dar* 
to go for a walk, ride pasear 
to go ir* 
to hate odiar 
to have (done something) haber* 
to have to, must deber 
to have; to have to, must tener; tener que* 
to hear oír* 
to help ayudar 
to hope, wait, expect esperar 
to hurt doler 
to improve mejorar 
to interest, be of interest interesar 
to invite invitar 
to know, meet, experience conocer 
to know (how to) saber* 
to last, take durar 
to laugh reír(se) 
to learn aprender 
to leave, allow; to stop + verb (-ing) dejar; dejar de + inf. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
120 
Verbs: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
to leave, depart, go out salir* 
to like, be pleasing to gustar 
to listen escuchar 
to live vivir 
to look, watch mirar 
to look for, search buscar 
to lose, waste, miss; to get lost perder; perderse 
to love amar 
to love encantar 
to matter importar 
to mean significar 
to meet up; to stay quedar; quedarse 
to move mover(se) 
to need necesitar 
to open abrir* 
to organise organizar 
to paint pintar 
to participate participar 
to pass aprobar 
to pay pagar 
to play (instrument), touch tocar 
to play jugar (a)* 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
121 
Verbs: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
to post (on the Internet), publish publicar 
to practise practicar 
to prefer preferir 
to prepare; to prepare oneself, get ready preparar; prepararse 
to pronounce pronunciar 
to protect proteger 
to put (on); to get, become (+ adjective) poner; ponerse* 
to rain llover 
to read leer* 
to receive, welcome recibir 
to recognise, admit reconocer 
to recommend recomendar 
to recycle reciclar 
to reduce reducir 
to remember, remind recordar 
to rent, hire alquilar 
to repeat repetir 
to reserve, book reservar 
to respect respetar 
to rest descansar 
to return volver* 
to ride montar 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
122 
Verbs: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
to run correr 
to save, rescue salvar 
to say, tell decir* 
to see, watch ver* 
to sell vender 
to send mandar 
to serve servir 
to share compartir 
to show mostrar 
to sing cantar 
to sit down sentar(se) 
to sleep; to fall asleep dormir; dormirse 
to smile sonreír 
to smoke fumar 
to snow nevar 
to speak hablar 
to spend (time), pass by, happen pasar  
to start, begin comenzar 
to stop; to stop + verb (-ing) parar(se); parar de (+ infinitive) 
to study estudiar 
to sunbathe tomar el sol 
to take, catch coger 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
123 
Verbs: Foundation and Higher 
English Spanish 
to take, have (drink, food) tomar 
to think (of/about) pensar (de) 
to think, believe creer 
to throw, pull tirar 
to travel viajar 
to try intentar 
to turn off, shut down, put out (e.g. a fire) apagar 
to understand comprender 
to use usar 
to visit visitar 
to wake up despertar(se) 
to walk caminar 
to want, love querer* 
to wash; to wash (oneself), have a wash lavar; lavarse 
to wear, carry, take, lead; to get on (with) llevar; llevarse (con) 
to wear, dress; to get dressed vestir; vestirse 
to win, earn ganar 
to work trabajar 
to work funcionar 
to write escribir* 
it is (+ weather noun or adjective); (two 
years) ago 
hace; hace (dos años) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
124 
Higher ONLY 
Verbs: Higher ONLY 
English Spanish 
to accompany, go with acompañar 
to achieve, succeed, manage lograr 
to acquire, obtain, get conseguir 
to allow permitir 
to announce, advertise anunciar 
to annoy molestar 
to answer contestar 
to apply for, request solicitar 
to appreciate apreciar  
to assist (customer), serve atender 
to attend asistir (a) 
to attract atraer  
to avoid evitar  
to bathe; to have a bath, swim bañar; bañarse 
to be based (on) basarse (en) 
to be born nacer 
to be missing, lack faltar 
to be quiet, keep quiet callarse 
to be wrong, make a mistake equivocarse 
to begin, start empezar 
to belong pertenecer  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
125 
Verbs: Higher ONLY 
English Spanish 
to build construir 
to burn (oneself) quemar(se) 
to charge (money) cobrar 
to chat, talk conversar 
to check comprobar  
to choose elegir  
to communicate comunicar(se) 
to complain quejarse 
to connect (online) conectarse (a Internet) 
to consider considerar  
to consist (of) consistir (en) 
to continue, carry on; to continue to, still 
be + -ing 
continuar; continuar + present participle 
to convince, persuade convencer 
to cost, be worth valer 
to count, tell; to count on contar; contar con 
to create crear 
to criticise criticar 
to cross atravesar 
to dare atreverse  
to defend defender 
to delay, take long tardar 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
126 
Verbs: Higher ONLY 
English Spanish 
to deliver, to submit entregar 
to destroy destruir 
to develop desarrollar 
to disappear desaparecer  
to discover descubrir* 
to encourage, cheer up animar 
to ensure asegurarse de 
to exist existir 
to experience experimentar 
to explain  explicar  
to express (oneself) expresar(se) 
to fall in love enamorarse 
to fight, argue pelearse 
to fill, fulfil llenar  
to finish; to have just + pp acabar; acabar de (+ infinitive) 
to fly volar 
to follow; to continue to, still be + -ing seguir; seguir + present participle 
to form; to train (as) formar; formarse (en, como) 
to give (as a present) regalar 
to go to bed acostarse 
to go; to leave ir; irse (de)* 
to grow up crecer 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
127 
Verbs: Higher ONLY 
English Spanish 
to hide esconder(se) 
to hug abrazar 
to identify (with) identificarse (con) 
to ignore, not know ignorar 
to imagine imaginar(se) 
to increase aumentar 
to inform informar 
to integrate integrar(se) 
to invent inventar 
to judge juzgar 
to jump; to break (rule), skip (class), jump 
(queue) 
saltar; saltarse 
to keep, store, save guardar 
to leave, go away marcharse 
to lend prestar  
to limit limitar  
to locate; to be located situar; situarse 
to look after, take care of ocuparse (de) 
to look after cuidar (de) 
to maintain, keep; to keep, stay mantener; mantenerse 
to meet, get together juntarse 
to mention mencionar 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
128 
Verbs: Higher ONLY 
English Spanish 
to miss echar de menos 
to notice notar 
to observe, watch observar 
to offer ofrecer 
to own, possess poseer 
to pick up, tidy up recoger 
to post (on the Internet), hang up colgar 
to present, introduce (someone); to 
introduce (oneself) 
presentar; presentarse 
to preserve, conserve conservar 
to produce producir  
to promise prometer 
to propose, suggest proponer 
to protest manifestarse 
to provide, supply proporcionar  
to pursue perseguir  
to put (into) meter (en) 
to reach alcanzar 
to record, film grabar 
to get (something) back; to recover, get 
better 
recuperar; recuperarse 
to reflect reflejar  
to refuse negar(se a) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
129 
Verbs: Higher ONLY 
English Spanish 
to regret, sense; to feel sentir; sentirse 
to relate; to relate to, interact (with) relacionar; relacionarse (con) 
to relax relajarse 
to rely on confiar en  
to remember acordarse (de) 
to repair, resolve  arreglar 
to replace, substitute sustituir 
to represent, play the role of  representar 
to return regresar 
to save (money, time, energy) ahorrar 
to seem; to look like parecer; parecerse a 
to send enviar 
to separate, sort; to split up separar; separarse 
to shout gritar 
to sightsee, go sightseeing hacer turismo 
to solve, resolve resolver  
to sound, ring sonar  
to spend (money) gastar 
to stay (accommodation) alojarse 
to steal, rob robar 
to suffer, be in pain sufrir 
to support apoyar 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
130 
Verbs: Higher ONLY 
English Spanish 
to surprise sorprender 
to survive sobrevivir 
to take advantage of, make the most of aprovechar 
to teach, show enseñar 
to thank agradecer 
to threaten amenazar 
to translate traducir  
to travel all over recorrer 
to treat; to be about; to try to + verb tratar; tratarse (de/sobre); tratar de + inf. 
to try, taste, try on probar 
to turn girar 
to understand entender 
to use utilizar 
to usually do soler 
to vote votar  
to walk andar 
to have been + -ing + for + time llevar + time period + present participle 
to wish desear 
to worry  preocupar(se) (de/por) 
----------------------------- ----------------------------- 
it’s/is still to be (+ pp) falta (+ inf.) 
it's enough to + verb basta + inf. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
131 
Irregular inflected verb forms: Higher and Foundation 
 
English Spanish  
to be estar 
(I) am estoy 
(you (sing informal)) are  estás 
(she, he, it, one) is | (you (sing formal)) 
are 
está 
(they) are | (you (pl formal)) are  están 
(I) was  estuve 
(I, she, he, it, one) was | (I, she, he, it, one) 
used to be | (you (sing formal)) were | 
(you (sing formal)) used to be  
estaba 
(you (sing informal)) were | (you (sing 
informal)) used to be  
estabas 
to be  ser 
(I) am  soy 
(you (sing informal)) are   eres 
(she, he, it, one) is | (you (sing formal)) 
are  
es 
(we) are   somos 
(you (pl informal)) are  sois 
(they) are | (you (pl formal)) are | it is (+ 
time) 
son 
(I) was  fui 
(you (sing informal)) were  fuiste 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
132 
English Spanish  
(she, he, it, one) was | (you (sing formal)) 
were   
fue 
(we) were  fuimos 
(you (pl informal)) were  fuisteis 
they were | (you (pl formal)) were  fueron 
(I, she, he, it, one) was | (I, she, he, it, one) 
used to be | (you (sing formal)) were | 
(you (sing formal)) used to be  
era 
(you (sing informal)) were | (you (sing 
informal)) used to be  
eras 
Be…! (sing informal) ¡Sé…! 
to be able to, can poder 
(I) was able to, could pude 
(I) will be able to | (I) am going to be able 
to 
podré 
(I) would be able to podría 
to break romper(se) 
broken roto 
to bring traer 
(I) brought traje 
to come venir 
(I) came vine 
Come! (sing informal) ¡Ven! 
to do, make hacer 
(I) do, make  hago 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
133 
English Spanish  
(I) did, made hice 
(she, he, it, one) did, made | (you (sing 
formal)) did, made 
hizo 
(I) will do, make | (I) am going to do, 
make 
haré 
(I) would do, make haría 
Do!, Make! (sing informal) ¡Haz! 
done, made hecho 
to give dar 
(I) give doy 
(I) gave di 
(you (sing informal)) gave diste 
(she, he, it, one) gave | (you (sing formal)) 
gave 
dio 
(we) gave dimos 
(you (pl informal)) gave disteis 
(they) gave | (you (pl formal)) gave dieron 
to go ir 
(I) go  voy 
(you (sing informal)) go  vas 
(she, he, it, one) goes |(you (sing formal)) 
go  
va 
(we) go  vamos 
(you (pl informal)) go  vais 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
134 
English Spanish  
(they) go | (you (pl formal)) go  van 
(I) went fui 
(you (sing informal)) went fuiste 
(she, he, it, one) went | (you (sing formal)) 
went 
fue 
(we) went fuimos 
(you (pl informal)) went fuisteis 
(they) went | (you (pl formal)) went fueron 
(I, she, he, it, one) used to go | (you (sing 
formal)) used to go 
iba 
(you (sing informal)) used to go ibas 
Go! (sing informal) ¡Ve! 
to have (done something) haber 
(I) have (+pp) he 
(you (sing informal)) have (+pp) has 
(she, he, it, one) has (+pp) | (you (sing 
formal)) have (+pp) 
ha 
(we) have (+pp) hemos 
(you (pl informal)) have (+pp) habéis 
(they) have (+pp) | (you (pl formal) have 
(+pp) 
han 
there is, there are 
there was | there were | there used to 
be 
hay 
había 
there will be | there is going to be habrá 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
135 
English Spanish  
there would be habría 
to have; to have to, must tener; tener que 
(I) have; (I) have to, must tengo; tengo que 
(you (sing informal)) have; (you (sing 
informal)) have to, must 
tienes; tienes que 
(she, he, it, one) has | (you (sing formal)) 
have; (she, he, it, one) has to, must | (you 
(sing formal)) have to, must  
tiene; tiene que 
(they) have | (you (pl formal)) have; (they) 
have to, must | (you (pl formal)) have to, 
must 
tienen; tienen que 
(I) had; (I) had to tuve; tuve que 
(I) had | (I) used to have | (she, he, it, 
one) had | (she, he, it, one) used to have 
| (you (sing formal)) had | (you (sing 
formal)) used to have; (I) had to | (I) used 
to have to | (she, he, it, one) had to | 
(she, he, it, one) used to have to | (you 
(sing formal)) had to | (you (sing formal)) 
used to have to  
tenía; tenía que 
(you (sing informal)) had | (you (sing 
informal)) used to have; (you (sing 
informal)) had to | (you (sing informal)) 
used to have to  
tenías; tenías que 
(I) will have | (I) am going to have; (I) will 
have to | (I) am going to have to 
tendré; tendré que 
(I) would have; (I) would have to tendría; tendría que 
Have! (sing informal) ¡Ten...! 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
136 
English Spanish  
to hear oír 
(I) hear  oigo 
(you (sing informal)) hear  oyes 
(she, he, it, one) hears | (you (sing 
formal)) hears 
oye 
to know (how to) saber 
(I) know (how to) sé 
to leave, depart, go out salir 
Leave! (sing informal); Go out! (sing 
informal) 
¡Sal! 
to open abrir 
opened abierto 
to play jugar (a) 
(I) play  juego (a) 
(you (sing informal)) play  juegas (a) 
(she, he, it, one) plays | (you (sing formal)) 
play | Play! (you (sing informal)) 
juega (a), ¡juega (a)!  
(they) play  juegan (a) 
to put; to put (on), get, become poner; ponerse 
(I) put; (I) put (on), got, became puse; me puse 
(I) will put | (I) am going to put; (I) will put 
(on), get, become | (I) am going to put 
(on), get, become 
pondré; me pondré 
(I) would put; (I) would put (on), get, 
become 
pondría; me pondría 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
137 
English Spanish  
Put! (sing informal); Put on! (sing 
informal) 
¡Pon!; ¡Ponte!  
put puesto 
to read leer 
reading leyendo 
to return volver 
returned vuelto 
to say, tell decir 
(I) say, tell  digo 
(I) said, told dije 
Say!, Tell! (sing informal) ¡Di! 
said, told dicho 
to see, watch ver 
(I) see, watch  veo 
(I, she, he, it, one) used to see, watch | 
(you (sing formal)) used to see, watch 
veía 
(you (sing informal)) used to see, watch veías 
seen, watched visto 
to want, love querer 
(I) wanted, loved quise 
(I) would like (formal)  quisiera 
to write escribir 
written escrito 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
138 
Irregular inflected verb forms: Higher ONLY 
 
English Spanish  
to be estar 
(I) have been  estoy 
(you (sing informal)) have been  estás 
(she, he, it, one) has been | (you (sing 
formal)) have been   
está 
(they) have been | (you (pl formal)) are | 
(you (pl formal)) have been  
están 
to be ser 
(I) have been  soy 
(you (sing informal)) have been  eres 
(she, he, it, one) has been | (you (sing 
formal)) have been  
es 
(we) have been  somos 
(you (pl informal)) have been  sois 
(they) have been | (you (pl formal)) have 
been 
son 
(I) am (subjunctive) | (she, he, it one) is 
(subjunctive) | (you (sing formal)) are 
(subjunctive) 
sea 
(you (sing informal)) are (subjunctive) seas 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
139 
English Spanish  
to come venir 
(I) will come | (I) am going to come vendré 
(I) would come vendría 
(I) come (subjunctive) | (she, he, it, one) 
comes (subjunctive) | (you (sing formal)) 
come (subjunctive) 
venga 
(you (sing informal)) come (subjunctive) vengas 
to discover descubrir 
discovered descubierto 
to do, make hacer 
(I) have been doing, making hago 
(I) do, make (subjunctive) | (she, he, it, 
one) does, makes (subjunctive) | (you 
(sing formal)) does, makes (subjunctive) 
haga 
(you (sing informal)) do, make 
(subjunctive) 
hagas 
to fall caer(se) 
(she, he, it, you (sing formal)) fell (se) cayó 
to give dar 
(I) have been giving doy 
to go; to leave ir; irse (de) 
(I) have been going; (I) leave | (I) have 
been leaving 
voy; me voy (de) 
(you (sing informal)) have been going; 
(you (sing informal)) leave | (you (sing 
informal)) have been leaving  
vas; te vas (de) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
140 
English Spanish  
(she, he, it, one) has been going | (you 
(sing formal)) have been going; (she, he, 
it, one) leaves| (you (sing formal)) leave | 
(she, he, it, one) has been leaving | (you 
(sing formal)) have been leaving 
va; se va (de) 
(we) have been going; (we) leave | (we) 
have been leaving 
vamos; nos vamos (de) 
(you (pl informal)) have been going; (you 
(pl informal)) leave | (you (pl informal)) 
have been leaving 
vais; os vais (de) 
(they) have been going | (you (pl formal)) 
have been going; (they) leave | (you (pl 
formal) leave | (they) have been leaving | 
(you (pl formal) have been leaving) 
van; se van (de) 
(I, she, he, it, one) used to leave | you 
(sing formal)) used to leave 
me iba (de), se iba (de) 
(you (sing informal)) used to leave te ibas (de) 
(I) go (subjunctive) | (she, he, it, one) goes 
(subjunctive) | (you (sing formal)) go 
(subjunctive); (I) leave (subjunctive) | (she, 
he, it, one) leaves (subjunctive) | (you 
(sing formal)) leave (subjunctive) 
vaya; me vaya (de), se vaya (de) 
(you (sing informal)) go (subjunctive); (you 
(sing informal)) leave (subjunctive) 
vayas; te vayas (de) 
Leave! (sing informal) ¡Vete (de)! 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
141 
English Spanish  
to have; to have to, must tener; tener que 
(I) have had | (I) have been having; (I) 
have had to | (I) have been having to 
tengo; tengo que  
(you (sing informal)) have had | (you (sing 
informal)) have been having; (you (sing 
informal)) have had to | (you (sing 
informal)) have been having to 
tienes; tienes que 
(she, he, it, one) has had | (she, he, it, 
one) has been having | (you (sing 
formal)) have had | (you (sing formal)) 
have been having; (she, he, it, one) has 
had to | (she, he, it, one) has been having 
to | (you (sing formal)) have had to | (you 
(sing formal)) have been having to 
tiene; tiene que 
(they) have had | (they) have been having 
| (you (pl formal)) have had | (you (pl 
formal)) have been having; (they) have 
had to | (they) have been having to | 
(you (pl formal)) have had to | (you (pl 
formal)) have been having to  
tienen; tienen que 
(I) have (subjunctive) | (she, he, it, one) 
has (subjunctive) | you (sing formal)) 
have (subjunctive); (I) have to, must 
(subjunctive) | (she, he, it, one) has to, 
must (subjunctive) | you (sing formal)) 
have to, must (subjunctive) 
tenga; tenga que 
(you (sing informal)) have (subjunctive); 
(you (sing informal)) have to, must 
(subjunctive)  
tengas; tengas que 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
142 
English Spanish  
to hear oír 
(I) have been hearing  
(you (sing informal)) have been hearing  
(she, he, it, one) has been hearing | (you 
(sing formal)) have been hearing 
oigo 
oyes 
oye 
to know (how to)  saber 
(I) will know (how to) | (I) am going to 
know (how to) 
sabré 
(I) would know (how to) sabría 
to leave, depart, go out  salir 
(I) will leave, go out | (I) am going to 
leave, go out 
saldré 
(I) would leave, go out saldría 
to play jugar (a) 
(I) have been playing  
(you (sing informal)) have been playing  
(she, he, it, one) has been playing | (you 
(sing formal)) have been playing 
juego (a) 
juegas (a) 
juega (a) 
to say, to tell decir 
(I) have been saying, telling 
(I) will say, tell | (I) am going to say, tell 
digo 
diré 
(I) would say, tell diría 
to see, watch ver 
(I) have been seeing, watching veo 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
143 
English Spanish  
to want, love querer 
(I) will want, love | (I) am going to want, 
love 
querré 
(I) would want, love querría 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
144 
Appendix 2: Grammar 
The following grammar list is the full grammar content that will be assessed by this 
qualification, in both receptive and productive tasks, at each tier.  
Nouns, pronouns and determiners 
 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
Forming feminine nouns 
• -o → -a (e.g. el vecino → la vecina) 
• Add -a to masculine nouns ending in -
or (e.g. el profesor → la profesora) 
• No change for nouns ending in 
-ante, -ente and -ista  
(e.g. el/la estudiante; el/la artista) 
• Feminised forms of nouns with 
biological gender relating to jobs are 
in flux and will be shown appropriate 
tolerance, reflecting standard and 
widespread usage (e.g. el jefe, la 
jefe/jefa)  
 
Forming plural nouns 
• Add -s to nouns ending in a vowel  
(e.g. el sitio → los sitios) 
• Add -es to nouns ending in a 
consonant (e.g. el plan → los planes) 
and sometimes lose an accent (e.g. el 
jardín → los jardines) 
• -z → -c and add -es to nouns ending in 
-z (e.g. la nariz → las narices) 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
145 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
• Add -es and drop the written accent 
for nouns ending in -(i)ón (e.g. la 
competición → las competiciones) 
Infinitives used as nouns 
Equivalent of -ing (gerund) in English  
(e.g. hacer ejercicio es bueno para la salud) 
 
Names of languages: add the article el 
before the masculine adjectives to form 
the noun (e.g. inglés → (el) inglés). 
Nouns of nationality: add the article 
before inflected forms of nationality 
adjectives listed in the vocabulary list (e.g. 
el español, la española, los españoles,  
las españolas). 
Determiners 
Articles 
• Agreement of definite and indefinite 
articles with nouns for gender and 
number (el, la, los, las; un, una, unos, 
unas) 
• Functions of definite and indefinite 
articles, including where their use or 
omission differs from English (e.g. la 
educación es importante) 
• Contraction of definite article el after 
prepositions de and a (e.g. después del 
viaje; voy al colegio) 
Other determiners 
• Demonstrative adjectives este, esta, ese, 
esa and plural forms estos, esos, estas, 
esas. 
Determiners 
• Demonstrative adjectives aquel, 
aquella, aquellos and aquellas.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
146 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
• Indefinite adjectives (cada, mismo, otro, 
todo, alguno*, ninguno*) 
*Note, these are listed as determiners, so 
will not be used after nouns. Therefore, 
these specific ‘base’ forms will not be 
tested; however, their inflections algún, 
alguna, algunos, algunas and ningún, 
ninguna, ningunos, ningunas will be tested. 
• Possessive adjectives (mi, tu, su, 
nuestro, vuestro)  
Pronouns 
• Agreement and position of subject 
pronouns (yo, tú, él, ella, usted, 
nosotros/as, vosotros/as, ellos/as, 
ustedes) and invariable pronouns algo 
and alguien 
• Default omission of subject pronouns 
apart from contexts where overt use is 
appropriate (i.e. change of subject and 
for emphasis)  
• Word order of direct object pronouns 
(me, te, lo, la, los, las) in one- and two-
verb constructions (e.g. lo leo, lo puedo 
leer, puedo leerlo, ¡léelo!), in which only 
a single pronoun is used 
• Word order of indirect object 
pronouns (me, te, le, les) in one- and 
two-verb constructions (e.g. te doy, te 
quiero dar, quiero darte, ¡dame...!), in 
which only a single pronoun is used 
Pronouns 
• Position of direct and indirect object 
pronouns nos, os in one- and two-verb 
constructions (e.g. os veo, os puedo ver, 
puedo veros) and plural reflexive 
pronouns (nos, os, se)  
• Relative pronouns lo que (invariable); el 
que, el cual (and their inflected forms 
for gender and number) in subject 
relative clauses  
• Relative clauses using wh- pronouns 
(cuando, donde, que) 
• Possessive pronouns, with agreement 
for gender and number, for singular 
and plural possessors (el mío, el tuyo, el 
suyo, el nuestro, el vuestro)  
• Neuter demonstrative pronoun 
(aquello)  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
147 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
• Word order of singular reflexive 
pronouns (me, te, se) in one- and two-
verb constructions (e.g. se prepara, se 
debe preparar, debe prepararse, 
¡prepárate!) 
• Interrogative pronouns (cuál, cuánto, 
quién) and their inflected forms for 
gender and number 
• Use of relative pronoun que in subject 
relative clauses 
• Neuter demonstrative pronouns (esto, 
eso) 
• Use of the pronouns alguno and 
ninguno, including their inflected forms 
for gender 
• Use of pronouns after prepositions 
(mí, ti, él, ella, usted, nosotros/as, 
vosotros/as, ellos/as, ustedes), irregular 
forms (conmigo, contigo), and emphatic 
use of pronouns after ‘a’ (e.g. a mí) 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
148 
Verbs 
 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
Negation 
Word order of verbal negation, with: 
• no 
• (no) nada 
• (no) nunca 
• (no) nadie 
• (no) ninguno  
Negation 
Word order of verbal negation, with: 
• ya no 
• (no) tampoco 
• (no)...ni...  
• (no) ni...ni... (for emphasis) 
Interrogatives 
Interrogatives expressed through: 
• intonation, including when using a 
question word (qué, quién, cuándo, por 
qué, cómo, cuál, cuánto, dónde) 
• question words + verb-subject word 
order, including where the overt 
subject is only sometimes required 
(e.g. ¿Dónde está (Diego)?; ¿Qué hace  
(la chica)?)  
 
 Passive voice  
• ser + past participle + por (e.g. la casa 
fue vendida por mi amigo) 
• se + 3rd person singular or plural (e.g. 
se vende pan; se venden huevos) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
149 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
Impersonal verbs 
• hay 
• hay que 
• se puede / se necesita to express the 
impersonal ‘you’ / ‘one’ (e.g. se puede ir 
en autobús) 
• hace + noun for weather expressions 
(e.g. hace sol) 
Impersonal verbs 
• parece  
• basta 
• falta 
• hace falta 
• vale la pena 
Reflexive verbs 
1st, 2nd and 3rd persons singular and 
plural, using reflexive pronouns me, te, se, 
nos, os, se, with both reflexive and 
reciprocal function for plural forms (e.g. 
me lavo; te levantas; se pone; nos vemos, os 
entendéis) 
Reflexive verbs are to be known in all the 
same tenses as non-reflexive verbs as 
applicable to each tier. 
 
 Periphrastic time expressions 
• acabar de + infinitive, to mean ‘have 
just done + verb’ (e.g. acabo de hacer 
los deberes) 
The use of verbs + present participle for 
ongoing actions in the present, such as: 
• seguir + present participle (e.g. 
seguimos haciendo los deberes)  
• llevar + time period + present 
participle (e.g. llevas cinco minutos 
buscando tus gafas) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
150 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
Modal verbs 
1st, 2nd and 3rd persons in singular and 
plural: 
• deber + infinitive 
• poder + infinitive 
• querer + infinitive 
• saber + infinitive 
• tener que + infinitive 
Two fixed phrases: 
• quisiera + infinitive 
• me/te/le gustaría + infinitive 
 
Interesar-type verbs  
These tend to occur in object-verb-
subject word order (e.g. me interesa este 
tema)  
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
151 
Verbs: Tenses 
 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
Present 
Present indicative, as equivalent of: 
• English simple (I walk) 
• English continuous (I am walking)  
1st, 2nd and 3rd persons singular and 
plural of: 
• regular -ar, -er, -ir verbs 
• verbs that follow one of the following 
five patterns: 
o encontrar (o→ue),  
o pensar (e→ie),  
o pedir (e→i),  
o conocer (c→zc), 
o poner (add -g to 1st person 
singular) 
• estar 
• hacer 
• ir 
• ser 
• tener (including use of tener + noun 
where the English equivalent is ‘be + 
adjective’ (e.g. tengo frío, Alejandro tiene 
hambre) 
Present 
Present tense with desde hace, as 
equivalent of ‘have been + ing for x time’ 
(e.g. vivimos en esta casa desde hace un 
año) 
Spelling changes 
Some verb forms change the spelling in 
their stems to preserve pronunciation: 
• first person g → j (e.g. coger → cojo) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
152 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
Present continuous  
Present tense of e.g. estar + present 
participle, as equivalent of the English ‘be 
+ -ing’ (e.g. estoy comiendo) 
1st, 2nd and 3rd persons singular and 
plural present tense forms of estar + 
present participle formation, including: 
• regular present participles:  
o -ar stem + ando (e.g. mirando) 
o -er / -ir stem + iendo (e.g. comiendo, 
viviendo) 
• spelling changes for verbs whose 
stems end in a vowel (e.g. leer 
→leyendo) and for verbs in the pedir 
cluster (e.g. pedir → pidiendo) 
 
Perfect  
haber + past participle, as equivalent of: 
English present perfect (e.g. he comido:  
I have eaten) 
1st, 2nd and 3rd persons singular and 
plural of haber + past participle 
formation, including: 
• regular past participles: 
o -ar stem + ado (e.g. trabajado) 
o -er / -ir stem + ido (e.g. perdido, 
preferido) 
• irregular past participles (e.g. visto, 
hecho) 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
153 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
Preterite 
To refer to events occurring at a specific 
time in the past, as equivalent of English 
simple past (e.g. ayer compré un vestido 
nuevo). 
1st, 2nd and 3rd persons singular and 
plural of: 
• regular -ar, -er and -ir verbs 
• irregular forms of ir, ser, dar, tener, 
poder, hacer, venir, estar, poner, querer, 
decir, traer and hacer (including verbs 
with prefixes that follow the same 
pattern) 
Preterite 
Spelling changes 
Some verb forms change the spelling in 
their stems to preserve pronunciation: 
• first person c → qu (e.g. significar → 
signifiqué) 
• first person z → c (e.g. utilizar → utilicé) 
• first person g → gu (e.g. jugar → jugué) 
• third person: addition of y (e.g. leer → 
leyó; creer → creyeron) 
Preterite stem changes in 3rd person 
singular and plural for -ir verbs, where the 
verbs are part of an anchor group in the 
present tense: 
• o → u (e.g. dormir → durmió, durmieron) 
• e → i (e.g. preferir → prefirió, prefirieron) 
Imperfect 
To describe actions in the past that are: 
• habitual (I used to walk) 
• continuous (I was walking) 
1st, 2nd and 3rd persons singular only of: 
• regular -ar, -er and -ir verbs (e.g. 
trabjaba; comías; vivía) 
• ser 
• ir 
• ver 
Imperfect 
1st, 2nd and 3rd persons singular and 
plural of: 
• regular -ar, -er and -ir verbs 
• ser 
• ir 
• ver 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
154 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
Imperfect continuous  
Imperfect tense of estar + present 
participle, as equivalent of English ‘be + -
ing’ (e.g. estaba comiendo) 
1st, 2nd and 3rd persons singular only. 
 
Periphrastic future 
ir a + infinitive, as equivalent of: 
• ‘will’ + verb (I will walk) 
• ‘be going to’ + verb (I am going to walk) 
1st, 2nd and 3rd persons singular and 
plural 
 
Inflectional future 
1st, 2nd and 3rd persons singular only of: 
• regular -ar, -er and -ir verbs  
(e.g. trabajaré, comerás, vivirá) 
• tener 
• hacer 
• poder 
• poner 
3rd person singular only: 
• habrá (there will be) 
Inflectional future 
1st, 2nd and 3rd persons singular and 
plural of: 
• regular -ar, -er and -ir verbs 
• tener 
• hacer 
• poder 
• poner 
• saber 
• querer 
• venir 
• decir 
• salir 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
155 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
3rd person singular only: 
• habrá 
Conditional  
1st, 2nd and 3rd persons singular only of: 
• regular -ar, -er and -ir verbs  
(e.g. trabajaría, comería, viviría) 
• tener 
• hacer 
• poder 
• poner 
3rd person singular only: 
• habría (there would be) 
Conditional 
1st, 2nd and 3rd persons singular and 
plural of: 
• regular -ar, -er and -ir verbs 
• tener 
• hacer 
• poder 
• poner 
• saber 
• querer 
• venir 
• decir 
• salir 
3rd person singular only: 
• habría  
Imperative 
Affirmative forms only, not negative 
forms. 2nd person singular only of: 
• regular -ar, -er and -ir verbs  
(e.g. ¡trabaja!, ¡come!, ¡vive!) 
• ser 
• ir 
Imperative 
Affirmative forms only, not negative 
forms. 2nd person singular and plural 
of: 
• regular -ar, -er and -ir verbs 
• ser 
• ir 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
156 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
• tener 
• venir 
• hacer 
• decir 
• poner 
• salir 
• tener 
• venir 
• hacer 
• decir 
• poner 
• salir 
 Present subjunctive 
1st, 2nd and 3rd persons singular only of: 
• hacer 
• ser 
• ir 
• venir 
• tener 
Functions and contexts of use:  
• future after the conjunction of time 
cuando (e.g. cuando vengas a mi casa) 
• after verbs of wishing, command, 
request, and emotion (e.g. él quiere 
que seas responsable) 
• after the conjunction que  
(e.g. me gusta que hagas los deberes) 
• to express purpose after para que 
(e.g. te ayudo para que tengas tiempo 
para ir al cine) 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
157 
Adjectives and adjectival phrases 
 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
Agreement in gender 
• -o → -a (e.g. viejo → vieja) 
• No change with adjectives ending in -e, 
-z or -ista in the masculine singular 
(e.g. verde, feliz) 
 
Agreement in number 
• Add final -s after a vowel  
(e.g. viejo → viejos) 
• -z → -ces (e.g. feliz → felices) 
• Highly frequent patterns of adjectives 
for nationality ending in consonant, 
e.g.: 
o francés, francesa, franceses, 
francesas (no accent) 
o español, española, españoles, 
españolas 
• Add -es after adjectives ending in a 
consonant, sometimes dropping an 
accent (e.g. social → sociales; común → 
comunes) 
 
Position 
• Mostly after nouns 
• Algún, ningún, primer, segundo, tercer, 
buen, mal and gran before nouns 
Position 
• Singular and plural possessive 
adjectives after verbs (e.g. esta casa es 
mía / tuya / nuestra) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
158 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
• Before or after nouns for adjectives 
whose meaning depends on their 
position (e.g. único, pobre, viejo) 
 Adjectives with the neuter article lo used 
as nouns (e.g. lo bueno)  
Regular comparative adjectival structures 
(e.g. más…que, menos…que) and irregular 
forms (e.g. mejor, peor) 
Regular superlative adjectival structures 
and irregular forms (e.g. el mejor, la peor, 
los peores)  
 
Adverbs and adverbial phrases 
 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
Position of adverbs of time (e.g. 
temprano), manner (e.g. solamente), place 
(e.g. aquí) 
 
Regular comparative adverbial structures 
(e.g. más…que / de, menos…que / de, 
tan…como) and irregular forms (e.g. mejor, 
peor) 
Regular and irregular superlative 
adverbial structures  
 
Prepositions 
 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
Use of the personal a (e.g. conozco a 
María) 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
159 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
De to indicate possession (e.g. la casa de 
Marta) 
 
Para + infinitive (e.g. para ver) 
Sin + infinitive (e.g. sin parar) 
Antes de + infinitive (e.g. antes de ir) 
Después de + infinitive (e.g. después de 
venir) 
 
Prepositions as needed in certain verb 
phrases before an infinitive or noun (e.g. 
disfruto de las vacaciones) as well as cases 
where the preposition changes or adds to 
the meaning of the verb (e.g. llegar ‘to 
arrive’; llegar a ‘to manage to’) 
Syntax of prepositions in questions (e.g. 
¿Con quién hablas?) 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
160 
Derivational morphology 
These grammar rules are primarily required for the Reading exam, as derived forms of 
any base words listed in our vocabulary list, or base words for any derived forms in our 
vocabulary list, may usually only appear in the Reading exam. 
Only one affix from this section will be applied to a base word to create a derived form. 
For example, using the rules below we may add the suffix -able to the stem of 
recomendar to create recomendable, or we may add the suffix -mente to the stem of any 
suitable adjective in the vocabulary list, e.g. diferente to create the adverb diferentemente, 
but we will not apply both suffixes to recomendar to create recomendablemente. Affixes 
from the rest of the grammar list above, for example to denote gender and number, 
may be applied to derived forms however – i.e. we may use recomendables as well as 
recomendable. 
 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
Suffixes 
• Adding -ito / -ita to nouns, or to nouns 
with -o / -a removed, only where the 
English meaning is ‘little’ (e.g. librito) or 
implies endearment (e.g. hermanita) 
• Adding -ísimo / -ísima to adjectives, or 
to adjectives with -o / -a removed, only 
where the English meaning is ‘very’ 
(e.g. facilísimo; durísimo)  
• Adverbs created by adding -mente to 
singular invariable adjectives (e.g. 
alegre → alegremente) or the singular 
feminine form of adjectives ending in -
o / -a (e.g. cómoda → cómodamente), 
only where the English equivalent is  
‘-ly’ 
• Nouns created by adding -idad to 
singular adjectives ending in a 
consonant (e.g. nacional → 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
161 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
nacionalidad) or with the final vowel 
removed (e.g. público → publicidad), 
only where the English equivalent is ‘-
(i)ty’ 
• Adjectives created by adding -able to a 
verb stem, only where the English 
equivalent is ‘-able’ (e.g. comparar → 
comparable) 
Sound-symbol correspondences (SSCs) 
The list which follows specifies key differences in sound-symbol correspondences (SSCs) 
between Spanish and English which students will need to learn at GCSE to be able to 
read out loud (Read aloud task in Paper 1, Speaking) and transcribe (Dictation task in 
Paper 2, Listening) with sufficient accuracy at this level, along with an example word 
from our vocabulary list containing the SSC. It is not an exhaustive list of all the SSCs in 
the Spanish language. Where a letter or combination of letters is pronounced (or a 
sound spelt) in approximately the same way in Spanish as in English, it is not listed. 
The use of hyphens indicates the position of the letters in a word, when position is 
relevant to the sound: xx- (at the beginning of a word); -xx- (in the middle of a word); -xx 
(at the end of a word).  
 
Sound-symbol correspondence Example 
a para 
o no 
e este 
i mil 
u uno 
ll llevar 
ch escuchar 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
162 
Sound-symbol correspondence Example 
ca cara 
co comer 
cu película  
cu + vowel cuando 
ce centro 
ci gracias 
z cabeza 
que porque 
qui equipo 
ga llegar 
go amigo 
gu gustar 
ge gente 
gi colegio 
gue hamburguesa 
gui alguien 
j viejo 
ñ año 
v vida 
-r- / -r hora / pensar 
rr / r- / -r- (after n, l or s) perro / realidad / sonreír 
silent h hacer 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
163 
Stress patterns (Higher Tier ONLY) 
The list which follows specifies key spelling rules determined by the position of stress, 
which Higher tier students are required to learn. 
When reading words aloud in Spanish: 
Stress pattern Example 
Stress any vowel that has a written 
accent. 
rápido 
útil 
transgénero 
Stress the second-to-last syllable for any 
word ending in a vowel, ‘n’ or ‘s’… 
…unless there is a written accent. 
problema 
examen 
nosotros  
 
mamá 
televisión 
después 
Stress the final syllable in all other words salir 
azul 
responsabilidad 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
164 
When transcribing Spanish, only write an accent on the stressed vowel for: 
Stress pattern Example 
Words with stress on a final syllable 
ending in a vowel, ‘n’ or ‘s’ 
así 
corazón 
inglés 
Words with stress on the second-to-last 
syllable for a word ending in any 
consonant other than ‘n’ or ‘s’ 
fácil 
dólar 
azúcar 
All words with stress on the third-to-last 
syllable 
número 
película 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
165 
Appendix 3: Names of people used in 
assessments  
Assessments in this qualification will only use names taken from the following list, which 
is representative of the most popular Spanish names in Spain and across the Spanish 
speaking world, in the current GCSE level age group, as well as some names for older 
adults. 
We hope students will all become familiar with these names during the course of 
teaching, so that all students come to the exams with the same knowledge and 
understanding. By committing to only use these names in our assessments, we aim to 
remove a barrier to understanding and avoid possible confusion over whether a proper 
noun is referring to a person or place. Ideally, if all students are familiar with these 
names before starting an assessment, all their comprehension focus can be on 
understanding the assessed content of the paper. 
 
14-16-year-old girls’ 
names 
14-16-year-old boys’ 
names 
14-16-year-old names used 
by both boys and girls 
Alba Alejandro Álex, Alex 
Amira Antonio Cris 
Ana Daniel Dani 
Andrea David Gaby 
Carla Diego Sasha 
Carmen Emilio Toni 
Elena Hugo  
Fátima Iván   
Indra Jalil  
Julia Javier  
Karima Jorge  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
166 
14-16-year-old girls’ 
names 
14-16-year-old boys’ 
names 
14-16-year-old names used 
by both boys and girls 
Leya Juan  
Lola  Lin  
Luisa Luis  
María Malek  
Marta Manuel  
Monika Marcos  
Nadia Mario  
Natalia Miguel  
Paula Nadim  
Pilar Omar  
Sara Raúl  
Sofía Vicente  
 
Adult male names Adult female names 
Nicolas (Nico) Dolores 
Sebastian Rosalía 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
167 
Appendix 4: Transferable skills 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently flagged 
the need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable them to 
respond with confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the world of 
work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines skills, or 
competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that can be 
learned and that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform an activity 
or task and can be built upon and extended through learning.’ [
3F
1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected and 
evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this process, 
we identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the most evidence-
based and robust skills framework. We adapted the framework slightly to include the 
Program for International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT Literacy and Collaborative 
Problem Solving (CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves: [
4F
2]  
Cognitive skills 
• Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
• Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
• Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve 
general cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
• ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and communicate. [
5F
3]  
 
 
 
[1]  OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012) 
[2]  Koenig J A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop (National 
Academies Press, 2011) 
[3]  PISA – The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy (2011) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
168 
Interpersonal skills 
• Communication – active listening, oral communication, written communication, 
assertive communication and non-verbal communication. 
• Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, service 
orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and negotiation. 
• Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared 
understanding, taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team 
organisation. 
Intrapersonal skills 
• Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work 
stress, adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, and 
physical adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
• Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual 
teams, work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and able 
to acquire new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher 
education, as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the teaching 
and learning of this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning materials, 
developed with stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Spanish 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
169 
Appendix 5: Codes 
Type of code Use of code Code 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for 
performance tables is assigned a 
discount code indicating the subject 
area to which it belongs. 
Discount codes are published by DfE in 
the RAISEonline library 
(www.raiseonline.org) 
FKS 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an 
Ofqual Regulated Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) code. 
The RQF code is known as a 
Qualification Number (QN). This is the 
code that features in the DfE Section 96 
and on the LARA as being eligible for 
16–18 and 19+ funding, and is to be 
used for all qualification funding 
purposes. The QN will appear on 
students’ final certification 
documentation. 
The QN for this 
qualification is: 
610/3469/1 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to 
enter students for a qualification. 
Centres will need to use the entry codes 
only when claiming students’ 
qualifications. 
GCSE –1SP1 
 
Paper/Component 
codes 
These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be 
entered for individual 
components/papers. 
Non-examination 
assessment: Paper 1: 
1SP1/1F and 1H 
Paper 2: 1SP1/2F and 2H 
Paper 3: 1SP1/3F and 3H 
Paper 4: 1SP1/4F and 4H 
 
DB241123 GQ000027 GCSE_SPANISH_SPECIFICATION_2024_ISSUE_1.DOCX.1–177/0 

 
 
May 2025 
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel,  
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com 
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited 
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office: 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL.  
VAT Reg No GB 278 53712 