GCSE (9-1)
Psychology
Specification
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9 - 1) in Psychology (1PS0)
First teaching from September 2017
First certification from June 2019 Issue 1
 
 
 
 
 
Contents 
1 Introduction 2 
Why choose the Edexcel GCSE in Psychology? 2 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this qualification 3 
Qualification at a glance 4 
2 Subject content 6 
Content 7 
3 Assessment information 30 
Assessment Objectives 32 
4 Administration and general information 33 
Entries 33 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special consideration and 
malpractice 33 
Student recruitment and progression 36 
Appendix 1: Command words used in examination papers 39 
Appendix 2: Calculators 40 
Appendix 3: The context for the development of this 
qualification 41 
Appendix 4: Transferable skills 43 
Appendix 5: Codes 44 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
2 
 
1 Introduction 
Why choose the Edexcel GCSE in Psychology? 
We’ve listened to feedback from all parts of the psychology subject community, including 
higher education. We’ve used this opportunity of curriculum change to redesign qualifications 
that will engage students as they explore human behaviour, get an understanding of 
themselves and others, and gain skills that will support progression to further study of 
psychology and a wide range of other subjects. 
A wide range of optional topics – we’re offering the full range of optional topics to make 
sure that you can meet the specific needs and interests of your students as they develop 
their understanding of human behaviour. 
Engaging and contemporary selection of studies – we’ve carefully selected 
contemporary and engaging studies relevant to today’s student, and highlighted those which 
are suited to be carried out practically in a classroom setting. 
Structured around key questions – we’ve listened to your feedback and will retain the 
approach you’ve told us you like from our current specification: Topics will be structured 
around key questions, providing a hook for teachers and students. 
Support with new content – to help you plan for 2017 with confidence, we’ll provide all 
the support you need to become familiar with new subject content, research methods and 
maths skills. 
Differentiation from A Level – we’ve considered the progression from GCSE to A Level 
and have differentiated the content where possible to maintain interest in the subject as 
students progress. 
 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
3 
Supporting you in planning and implementing 
this qualification 
Planning 
● Our Getting Started guide gives you an overview of the new GCSE Psychology 
qualification to help you to get to grips with the changes to content and assessment and 
to help you understand what these changes mean for you and your students. 
● We will give you an editable course planner and scheme of work that you can adapt to 
suit your department. 
● Our mapping documents highlight the key differences between the new and the  
2009 qualification. 
Teaching and learning 
There will be lots of free teaching and learning support to help you deliver the new 
qualification, including: 
● topic guides for each of the compulsory and optional topics 
● a guide to support using maths skills as part of research methods 
● a student and parent guide to GCSE Psychology. 
Preparing for exams 
We will also provide a range of resources to help you prepare your students for the 
assessments, including: 
● additional assessment materials to support formative assessments and mock exams 
● marked exemplars of student work with examiner commentaries. 
ResultsPlus 
ResultsPlus provides the most detailed analysis available of your students’ exam 
performance. It can help you identify the topics and skills where further learning would 
benefit your students. 
Get help and support 
Our subject advisor service, led by Julius Edwards, and online community will ensure that 
you receive help and guidance from us and that you can share ideas and information with 
other teachers. You can keep up to date with qualification updates and product and service 
news by signing up to receive e-newsletters from Julius. Email: 
TeachingSciences@pearson.com 
Learn more at qualifications.pearson.com 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
4 
Qualification at a glance 
Content and assessment overview 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology consists of two 
externally-examined papers. 
Students must complete all assessment in May/June in any single year. 
 
Paper 1 (*Paper code: 1PS0/01) 
Written examination: 1 hour and 45 minutes 
55% of the qualification 
98 marks 
Content overview 
These topics are in Section A of the content. This paper may also draw on knowledge and 
understanding of investigations from Section C. 
● Topic 1: Development – How did you develop? 
● Topic 2: Memory – How does your memory work? 
● Topic 3: Psychological problems – How would psychological problems affect you? 
● Topic 4: The brain and neuropsychology – How does your brain affect you? 
● Topic 5: Social influence – How do others affect you? 
Assessment overview 
● This is a written examination in which all questions must be answered. 
● The paper consists of six sections. The first five sections each cover one of the topics 
listed above. These sections will include multiple-choice, short-open and open-response 
questions. 
● The sixth section will contain two extended open-response questions. These questions will 
focus on debates within psychology and the interrelationships between the core areas 
of psychology. 
 
*See Appendix 5: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to this 
qualification. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
5 
 
Paper 2 (Paper code: 1PS0/02) 
Written examination: 1 hour and 20 minutes 
45% of the qualification 
79 marks 
Content overview 
Topics 6 to 10 are optional; students must study two of them. Topic 11 is compulsory. 
● Topic 6: Criminal psychology – Why do people become criminals? 
● Topic 7: The self – What makes you who you are? 
● Topic 8: Perception – How do you interpret the world around you? 
● Topic 9: Sleep and dreaming – Why do you need to sleep and dream? 
● Topic 10: Language, thought and communication – How do you communicate with others? 
● Topic 11: Research methods – How do you carry out psychological research? 
Assessment overview 
Students must answer: 
All questions from Section A. 
All questions from two sections – B to F. 
Section A: Research methods – How do you carry out psychological research? 
This section will focus primarily on Topic 11: Research methods – How do you carry out 
psychological research?, although it can draw on material from Topics 1 to 5 from Paper 1.  
It will contain question types that include calculations, multiple-choice, short-open and open-
response questions, and one extended open-response question. 
Sections B to F: Optional topics 
Each of these sections covers one of the optional Topics 6 to 10. These sections will include 
multiple-choice, short-open and open-response questions, and one extended open-response 
question. 
Calculators may be used in the examination. Information on the use of calculators during the 
examinations for this qualification can be found in Appendix 2: Calculators. 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
6 
2 Subject content 
Qualification aims and objectives 
The aims and objectives of this qualification are to enable students to: 
● use specialist vocabulary, psychological concepts, terminology and convention to engage 
in the process of psychological enquiry 
● acquire knowledge and understanding of psychology, developing an understanding of self 
and others, and how psychological understanding can help to explain everyday social 
phenomena 
● understand how psychological research is conducted, including the role of scientific 
method and data analysis 
● present information, develop arguments and draw conclusions through a critical approach 
to psychological evidence, developing as reflective thinkers 
● develop an understanding of the relationship between psychology and personal, moral, 
social and cultural issues, and develop an understanding of ethical issues in psychology 
● develop an understanding of psychological issues, the contribution of psychology to 
individual, social and cultural diversity, and how psychology contributes to society. 
Knowledge and understanding 
Students will gain knowledge and understanding of key features of the following core areas 
of psychology through the study of the compulsory and optional topics in this specification, 
including research methods: 
● biological – an understanding of biological concepts in psychology, including neuroscience 
and genetics as contributors to behaviour 
● cognitive – an understanding of thought, information and mental processing as 
contributors to behaviour 
● social – an understanding of the social area of psychology, the impact of social and 
environmental factors on behaviour and the influence of groups 
● developmental – an understanding of how individuals change throughout their lives, with a 
particular focus on childhood and how both nature and nurture can affect individuals 
● individual differences – an understanding of the complex nature of human behaviour and 
experiences and why and how people are different. 
 
Students will also gain knowledge and understanding of: 
● debates in psychology, including ‘reductionism/holism’ and ‘nature/nurture’ 
● how psychological knowledge and ideas change over time and how they inform our 
understanding of behaviour 
● the contribution of psychology to an understanding of individual, social and 
cultural diversity 
● the interrelationships of the core areas of psychology 
● how the studies for topics relate to the associated theory 
● research methods. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
7 
Content 
Students are expected to demonstrate and apply the knowledge, understanding and skills 
described in the content. 
To demonstrate their knowledge, students should undertake a range of activities, including 
the ability to recall, describe and define, as appropriate. 
To demonstrate their understanding, students should explain ideas and use their knowledge 
to apply, analyse, interpret and evaluate, as appropriate. 
Students will be expected to demonstrate their understanding of the interrelationships 
between the core areas of psychology and issues and debates within them. 
Students may be asked to consider the following issues when evaluating studies: 
● validity 
● reliability 
● generalisability 
● ethics 
● objectivity 
● subjectivity. 
The content contains three sections: 
Section A: Compulsory topics 
Students must study all topics in this section. These topics will be examined in Paper 1. 
The contexts in these topics will also be used in in Paper 2 for research methods 
(Topic 11: Research methods – How do you carry out psychological research?). 
Section B: Optional topics 
Students must study two of the topics in this section. These topics will be examined in  
Paper 2. 
Section C: Research methods 
Students must study the topic in this section. The knowledge and understanding of research 
methods will be assessed in both papers.  
Paper 1: Students may be asked to apply their knowledge and understanding of research 
methods and how studies are conducted in new contexts. Any detail students need to know 
about a study will be detailed in the question.  
Paper 2: Students’ knowledge and understanding of research methods will be assessed in 
depth in this section. The contexts used in question papers for this topic will draw on the 
contexts used in the compulsory topics for Paper 1. 
In the examination, students could be asked to design a research study and/or evaluate how 
a study has been carried out from stimulus material, drawing on any of the terms in 11.1. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
8 
Opportunities for practical activities 
Students should gain hands-on experience of carrying out ethical, investigative activities to 
aid their understanding of this subject. To help centres identify opportunities for carrying out 
these activities, studies that can be replicated have been marked with an asterisk. Practical 
activities should also be used to deliver Section C. For example, students could produce their 
own questionnaires to help them understand sampling methods. 
Although students will not be directly assessed on these activities, the experience they gain 
will give them a better understanding of this subject and may enhance their examination 
performance. 
Mathematical requirements 
Psychology requires the use of mathematical skills for handling data in investigations. 
The mathematical skills required for this qualification are set out in Section 11.2 of 
Topic 11: Research methods – How do you carry out psychological research? 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
9 
Section A: Compulsory topics 
Students must study all the topics in this section. These topics will be examined in Paper 1. 
The contexts in these topics will also be used in Paper 2 for research methods 
(Topic 11: Research methods – How do you carry out psychological research?). 
Topic 1: Development – How did you develop? 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
1.1 
Development 
1.1.1 Understand early brain development, including the 
development of: 
a. forebrain 
b. midbrain 
c. hindbrain 
d. cerebellum 
e. medulla 
1.1.2 Understand the role of education and intelligence, including 
Piaget’s Theory of Cognitive Development, and the four 
stages of cognitive development, including strengths and 
weaknesses of the theory: 
a. sensorimotor 
b. pre-operational 
c. concrete operational 
d. formal operational 
e. schemata/schemas 
f. assimilation 
g. accommodation 
h. equilibrium 
1.1.3  Understand the effects of learning on development using 
Carol Dweck’s mindset theory, including strengths and 
weaknesses of the theory: 
a. fixed mindset 
b. growth mindset 
c. ability and effort 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
10 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
 1.1.4  Understand the effects of learning on development using 
Daniel Willingham’s learning theory, including strengths and 
weaknesses of the theory: 
a. factual knowledge precedes skill 
b. the importance of practice and effort 
c. strategies to support cognitive development 
d. strategies to support physical development 
e. strategies to support social development 
1.2 Studies Understand the aims, procedures and findings (results and 
conclusions), strengths and weaknesses of: 
1.2.1 Piaget and Inhelder (1956) Three mountains task 
1.2.2  Gunderson et al. (2013) Parent Praise to 1-to 3-Year-Olds 
Predicts Children's Motivational Frameworks 5 Years Later 
1.3 Issues and 
debates 
1.3.1 Understand morality issues in psychology and the individual, 
including: 
a. the terms ‘morality’ and ‘moral(s)’ 
b. pre-conventional, conventional and post-conventional 
stages of morality 
c. the use of content, theories and research drawn from 
cognitive development to explain development of 
morality 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
11 
Topic 2: Memory – How does your memory work? 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
2.1 Memory 
 
2.1.1 Know the structure and process of memory and information 
processing: 
a. input 
b. processing 
c. output 
d. encoding 
e. storage 
f. retrieval 
2.1.2 Understand the features of short-term and long-term 
memory, including: 
a. duration 
b. capacity 
2.1.3 Understand retrograde and anterograde amnesia, including: 
a. the term ‘retrograde amnesia’ 
b. the term ‘anterograde amnesia’ 
c. the symptoms of retrograde amnesia 
d. the symptoms of anterograde amnesia 
2.1.4 Understand the active process of memory through the 
Theory of Reconstructive Memory (Bartlett, 1932), including 
strengths and weaknesses of the theory: 
a. how schemas are formed 
b. how schemas influence memory 
2.1.5 Understand the structure and process of memory through 
the Multi-store Model of Memory (Atkinson and Shiffrin, 
1968), including strengths and weaknesses of the theory: 
a. sensory register 
b. the capacity of short-term memory 
c. the duration of short-term memory 
d. the capacity of long-term memory 
e. the duration of long-term memory 
f. role of attention in memory 
g. role of rehearsal in memory 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
12 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
2.2 Studies Understand the aims, procedures, and findings (results and 
conclusions), strengths and weaknesses of: 
*2.2.1  Bartlett (1932) War of the Ghosts 
*2.2.2  Peterson and Peterson (1959) Short-term Retention of 
Individual Verbal Items 
2.3 Issues and 
debates 
2.3.1 Understand the reductionism and holism debate, including: 
a. the terms ‘reductionism’ and ‘reductionist’ 
b.  the terms ‘holism’ and ‘holistic’ 
c.  the use of content, theories and research drawn from 
human memory to explain the reductionism and 
holism debate 
*This study can be replicated and therefore provides an opportunity for students to carry out 
an ethical, investigative practical activity to aid their understanding of the study. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
13 
Topic 3: Psychological problems – How would psychological 
problems affect you? 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
3.1 Psychological 
problems 
Understand the two mental health problems unipolar depression and 
addiction, including: 
3.1.1 the symptoms and features according to the International 
Classification of Diseases (ICD) of 
a. depression 
b. addiction 
3.1.2 how the incidence of mental health problems changes 
over time 
3.1.3 how mental health problems affect individuals and society 
3.1.4 the influence of genes as an explanation, including strengths 
and weaknesses of each explanation 
a. depression 
b. addiction 
3.1.5 the use of cognitive theory as an explanation of depression, 
including strengths and weaknesses of the explanation 
3.1.6 the use of learning theory as an explanation of addiction, 
including strengths and weaknesses of the explanation 
3.1.7 the use of cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) as a 
treatment, including strengths and weaknesses of each 
therapy 
a. depression 
b. addiction 
3.1.8 the use of drugs as a treatment, including strengths and 
weaknesses of each treatment 
a. depression 
b. addiction 
3.2 Studies Understand the aims, procedures, and findings (results and 
conclusions), strengths and weaknesses of the following studies: 
Depression 
3.2.1 Caspi et al. (2003) Influence of Life Stress on Depression: 
Moderation by a Polymorphism in the 5-HTT Gene 
Addiction 
3.2.2  Young (2007) Cognitive Behavior Therapy with Internet 
Addicts: Treatment Outcomes and Implications
 
3.3 Issues and 
debates 
3.3.1 Understand the nature and nurture debate, including: 
a. the term ‘nature’ 
b. the term ‘nurture’ 
c. the use of content, theories, and research drawn from 
psychological problems to explain the nature and 
nurture debate 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
14 
Topic 4: The brain and neuropsychology – How does your brain 
affect you? 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
4.1 The brain 
and 
neuropsychology 
4.1.1 Know the structure and function of the brain, including: 
a. temporal 
b. occipital 
c. frontal 
d. parietal lobes 
e. cerebellum 
4.1.2 Understand the lateralisation of function in the 
hemispheres, including: 
a. asymmetrical function 
b. role of the left hemispheres 
c. role of the right hemispheres 
d. role of the corpus callosum 
e. strengths and weaknesses of lateralisation as an 
explanation of sex differences between males 
and females 
4.1.3 Know what neurons and synapses are, including: 
a. function of neurotransmitters 
b. synaptic functioning 
c. how neurons and synapses interact 
d. understand the role of the central nervous system 
4.1.4 Understand the impact of neurological damage on 
cognitions and behaviour, including: 
a. the term ‘visual agnosia’ 
b. the term ‘prosopagnosia’ 
c. the symptoms of visual agnosia 
d. the symptoms of prosopagnosia 
e. the impact of damage to the pre-frontal cortex 
4.2 Studies Understand the aims, procedures and findings (results and 
conclusions), strengths and weaknesses of: 
4.2.1 Damasio et al (1994) The Return of Phineas Gage: Clues 
About the Brain from the Skull of a Famous Patient 
4.2.2 Sperry (1968) Hemisphere Deconnection and Unity in 
Conscious Awareness 
4.3 Issues and 
debates 
4.3.1 Understand how psychology has changed over time, 
including: 
• the use of content, theories, and research drawn from 
studying the brain to explain how psychology has 
changed over time 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
15 
Topic 5: Social influence – How do others affect you? 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
5.1 Social 
influence 
5.1.1 Know the terms: 
a. obedience 
b. conformity 
c. deindividuation 
d. bystander effect 
5.1.2 Understand factors affecting bystander intervention, 
including: 
a. personal factors 
b. situational factors 
5.1.3 Understand conformity to majority influence and factors 
affecting conformity to majority influence, including: 
a. personality 
b. the situation 
5.1.4 Understand obedience to authority and factors affecting 
obedience to authority figures, including: 
a. personality 
b. the situation 
5.1.5 Understand the behaviour of crowds and the individuals 
within them and the effect of collective behaviour, including  
a. pro- and anti-social behaviour 
5.1.6 Understand possible ways to prevent blind obedience to 
authority figures 
5.2 Studies Understand the aims, procedures, and findings (results and 
conclusions), strengths and weaknesses of: 
5.2.1 Piliavin et al (1969) Good Samaritanism: An Underground 
Phenomenon? 
5.2.2 Haney, Banks, and Zimbardo (1973) A Study of Prisoners 
and Guards in a Simulated Prison 
5.3 Issues and 
debates 
5.3.1 Understand social and cultural issues in psychology, 
including: 
a. know the terms ‘society’ and ‘social issues’ 
b. know the term ‘culture’ 
c. the use of content, theories, and research drawn from 
social influence to explain social and cultural issues 
in psychology 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
16 
Section B: Optional topics 
Students must study two of the topics in this section. These topics will be examined in 
Paper 2. 
Topic 6: Criminal psychology – Why do people become criminals? 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
6.1 Criminal 
psychology 
6.1.1 Understand learning theories as an explanation of 
criminality, including strengths and weaknesses of each 
theory: 
• Operant Conditioning (Skinner, 1948), to include 
a. positive reinforcement 
b. negative reinforcement 
c. positive punishment 
d. negative punishment 
e. primary reinforcers 
f. secondary reinforcers 
 
• Social Learning Theory (Bandura, 1977), to include 
g. role models 
h. modelling 
i. identification 
j. observational learning 
k. vicarious reinforcement 
6.1.2 Understand biological explanations of criminality, including 
personality types (Eysenck, 1964), to include strengths and 
weaknesses of the theory: 
a. extraversion 
b. introversion 
c. neuroticism 
d. psychoticism 
6.1.3 Understand the effects of punishments on recidivism, 
including strengths and weaknesses of each punishment: 
a. prison 
b. community sentencing 
c. restorative justice 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
17 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
 6.1.4 Understand two treatments to rehabilitate and reduce 
criminal and antisocial behaviour and increase pro-social 
behaviour, including strengths and weaknesses of each 
treatment: 
a. token economy programmes 
b. anger-management programmes 
6.2 Studies Understand the aims, procedures and findings (results and 
conclusions), strengths and weaknesses of: 
6.2.1 Bandura, Ross and Ross (1961) Transmission of Aggression 
through Imitation of Aggressive Models 
6.2.2 Charlton et al (2000) Children’s Playground Behaviour Across 
Five Years of Broadcast Television: A Naturalistic Study in a 
Remote Community 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
18 
Topic 7: The self – What makes you who you are? 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
7.1 The self 7.1.1 Understand the concepts of the self and self-concept, 
including: 
Lewis (1990) 
a. existential self 
b. categorical self 
Rogers (1959) 
c. self-image 
d. self-esteem 
e. ideal self 
f. self-actualisation 
g. congruence 
h. incongruence 
7.1.2 Understand the role of identity and free will in the 
development of self, including strengths and weaknesses of 
each theory: 
a. Erikson (1959) the eight stages of identity development 
b. Baumeister (2008) the consequence of belief in free will 
7.1.3 Understand the Humanistic Theory of Self, including strengths 
and weaknesses of each theory: 
a. humanistic explanations of the development of self-esteem 
b.  humanistic explanations of the development of personality 
Rogers (1951) 
c. conditional positive regard 
d. unconditional positive regard 
e. conditions of worth 
f. congruence 
g. incongruence 
h. Maslow (1943) hierarchy of needs 
7.1.4 Understand the role of internal and external influences on the 
self and self-esteem, including: 
a. temperament 
b. experience 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
19 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
 7.1.5 Understand how personality can be measured, including: 
a. personality scales 
b. personality types 
7.1.6 Understand the use of trait theory as a measure of personality, 
including strengths and weaknesses of trait theory: 
a. Allport (1936) cardinal, central and secondary 
personality traits 
b. Cattell (1946) 16PF personality factor assessment 
7.2 Studies Understand the aims, procedures and findings (results and conclusions), 
strengths and weaknesses of: 
7.2.1 Vohs and Schooler (2008) The Value of Believing in Free Will: 
Encouraging a Belief in Determinism Increases Cheating 
7.2.2 Van Houtte and Jarvis (1995) The Role of Pets in Preadolescent 
Psychosocial Development 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
20 
Topic 8: Perception – How do you interpret the world around you? 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
8.1 Perception 8.1.1 Understand examples of, and the reasons for, monocular and 
binocular depth cues: 
visual cues, to include: 
a. superimposition 
b. relative size 
c. linear perspective 
d. stereopsis 
e. texture gradient 
f. height in the plane 
visual illusions, to include: 
g. fictions 
h. ambiguous figures 
i. distortions 
visual constancies, to include:  
j. shape 
k. colour 
l. size 
8.1.2 Understand the Direct Theory of Perception (Gibson, 1996) as 
an explanation of sensation and perception, including 
strengths and weaknesses of the theory: 
a. sensory input 
b. optic flow 
c. invariants 
d. affordances 
8.1.3 Understand the Constructivist Theory of Perception (Gregory, 
1970) as an explanation of sensation and perception, including 
strengths and weaknesses of the theory: 
a. sensory input 
b. perceptual hypothesis 
c. inferences 
d. prior knowledge 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
21 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
 8.1.4 Understand the effects of the following on perceptual set: 
a. motivation 
b. expectation 
c. emotion 
d. culture 
8.2 Studies Understand the aims, procedures and findings (results and conclusions), 
strengths and weaknesses of: 
*8.2.1 Haber and Levin (2001) The Independence of Size Perception 
and Distance Perception 
*8.2.2 Carmichael, Hogan and Walter (1932) An Experimental Study 
on the Effect of Language on the Reproduction of Visually 
Perceived Form 
*This study can be replicated and therefore provides an opportunity for students to carry out 
an ethical, investigative practical activity to aid their understanding of the study. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
22 
Topic 9: Sleep and dreaming – Why do you need to sleep 
and dream? 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
9.1 Sleep and 
dreaming 
9.1.1 Understand the functions, features and benefits of sleep, 
including: 
a. the four sleep stages 
b. REM 
c. the sleep cycle 
9.1.2 Understand the internal and external influences on sleep, 
including strengths and weaknesses of each explanation: 
a. bodily rhythms, to include  
(i) circadian rhythms 
(ii) ultradian rhythms 
b. hormones, to include  
(i) pineal gland  
(ii)  melatonin 
c.  zeitgebers, to include 
(i) light 
9.1.3 Understand symptoms and explanations of sleep disorders, 
including: 
a. insomnia 
b. narcolepsy 
9.1.4 Understand Freudian theory of dreaming (Freud, 1900), 
including strengths and weaknesses of the theory: 
a. manifest content 
b. latent content 
c. dreamwork 
9.1.5 Understand Activation Synthesis Theory (Hobson and 
McCarley, 1977), including strengths and weaknesses of the 
theory: 
a. random activation 
b. sensory blockade 
c. movement inhibition 
9.2 Studies Understand the aims, procedures and findings (results and conclusions), 
strengths and weaknesses of: 
9.2.1 Freud (1909) Little Hans, analysis of a phobia in a five-year-
old boy 
9.2.2 Siffre (1975) Six months alone in a cave 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
23 
Topic 10: Language, thought and communication – How do you 
communicate with others? 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
10.1 Language, 
thought and 
communication 
10.1.1 Understand the possible relationship between language and 
thought, including strengths and weaknesses of each 
theory: 
a.  Piaget’s (1950) explanation that representational 
thinking precedes language 
b.  Vygotsky’s (1981) explanation that language and 
thinking are separate; to include 
c. pre-linguistic thought 
d. pre-intellectual language 
10.1.2 Understand how thought and language structures affect 
views of the world, including strengths and weaknesses of 
each theory: 
a. linguistic relativism 
b. linguistic determinism 
10.1.3 Understand how communication is different in humans to 
animals, including: 
a. Aitchison (1983) criteria of language features 
b. similarities and differences between humans and animal 
communication 
10.1.4 Understand examples of non-verbal communication, 
including: 
a. facial expressions 
b. eye contact 
c. body language, to include 
(i) postures 
(ii) gestures 
d. personal space, to include 
(i) proxemics 
(ii)  cultural differences in non-verbal communication 
10.1.5 Understand explanations of non-verbal communication, 
including Darwin’s (1872) theory of evolution 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
24 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
10.2 Studies Understand the aims, procedures, and findings (results and 
conclusions), strengths and weaknesses of: 
*10.2.1  Yuki et al. (2007) Are the windows to the soul the same in 
the East and West? Cultural differences in using the eyes and 
mouth as cues to recognize emotions in Japan and the 
United States 
10.2.2  Boroditsky (2001) Does Language Shape Thought?: 
Mandarin and English Speakers’ Conceptions of Time 
*This study can be replicated and therefore provides an opportunity for students to carry out 
an ethical, investigative practical activity to aid their understanding of the study. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
25 
Section C: Research methods 
Students must study the topic in this section. The knowledge and understanding of research 
methods will be assessed in both papers.  
Paper 1: students may be asked to apply their knowledge and understanding of research 
methods and how studies are conducted in new contexts. Any detail students need to know 
about a study will be detailed in the question.  
Paper 2: students knowledge and understanding of research methods will be assessed in 
depth in this section. The contexts used in question papers for this topic will draw on the 
contexts used in the compulsory topics for Paper 1. 
In the examination, students could be asked to design a research study and/or evaluate how 
a study has been carried out from stimulus material, drawing on any of the terms in 11.1. 
Opportunities for practical activities 
Students should gain hands-on experience of carrying out ethical, investigative activities to 
aid their understanding of this subject. To help centres identify opportunities for carrying out 
these activities, studies that can be replicated have been marked with an asterisk. Practical 
activities should also be used to deliver Section C. For example, students could produce their 
own questionnaires to help them understand sampling methods. 
Although students will not be directly assessed on these activities, the experience they gain 
will give them a better understanding of this subject and may enhance their examination 
performance. 
Mathematical requirements 
Psychology requires the use of mathematical skills for handling data in investigations.  
The mathematical skills that are required for this qualification are set out in Section 11.2 of  
Topic 11: Research methods – How do you carry out psychological research? 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
26 
Topic 11: Research methods – How do you carry out 
psychological research? 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
11.1 Designing 
psychological 
research 
11.1.1 Be able to identify: 
a. an independent variable (IV) 
b. a dependent variable (DV) 
c. extraneous variables, including 
(i) situational variables 
(ii) participant variables 
11.1.2 Understand the influence of extraneous variables and 
suggest possible ways to control for them, including: 
a. use of standardised procedures 
b. counterbalancing 
c. randomisation 
d. single-blind techniques 
e. double-blind techniques 
11.1.3 Be able to write a null hypothesis 
11.1.4 Be able to write an alternative hypothesis 
11.1.5 Methods of sampling, including strengths and weaknesses of 
each sampling method: 
a. understand target population samples 
b. understand random sampling 
c. stratified sampling 
d. volunteer sampling 
e. opportunity sampling 
11.1.6 Understand experimental and research designs, including 
strengths and weaknesses: 
a. independent measures 
b. repeated measures 
c. matched pairs 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
27 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
 11.1.7 Understand the reliability and validity of the following when 
analysing the planning and conducting of research 
procedures: 
a. sampling methods 
b. experimental designs 
c. quantitative methods 
d. qualitative methods 
11.1.8 Understand ethical issues in psychological research and how 
to deal with ethical issues, including: 
a. informed consent 
b. deception 
c. confidentiality 
d. right to withdraw 
e. protection of participants 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
28 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
11.1 Designing 
psychological 
research 
continued 
Understand research methods, including the features, strengths and 
weaknesses of the following, and the types of research for which they 
are suitable: 
11.1.9 laboratory experiment 
11.1.10 field experiment 
11.1.11 natural experiment 
11.1.12 interview, including  
a. structured 
b. semi-structured 
c. unstructured 
11.1.13 questionnaire, including 
a. closed-ended questions to elicit quantitative data 
b. open-ended questions to elicit qualitative data 
11.1.14 correlation 
11.1.15 case study 
11.1.16 observation 
11.2 
Data analysis 
11.2.1 Arithmetic and numerical computation: 
a. recognise and use expressions in decimal and 
standard form 
b. estimate results 
c. use an appropriate number of significant figures 
11.2.2 Be able to understand and use, including calculations: 
a. mean, and finding arithmetic means 
b. median 
c. mode 
d. ratios 
e. fractions 
f. percentages 
g. range as a measure of dispersion 
h. know the characteristics of normal distributions 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
29 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
 11.2.3 Be able to: 
a. construct and interpret frequency tables and diagrams 
b. construct and interpret bar charts 
c. construct and interpret histograms 
d. construct a scatter diagram 
e. use a scatter diagram to identify a correlation between 
two variables 
f. translate information between graphical and numerical 
forms 
g. plot two variables from experimental or other data and 
interpret graphs 
 11.2.4 Understand, and know the difference between: 
a. primary data 
b. secondary data 
11.2.5 Understand, and know the difference between: 
a. qualitative data 
b. quantitative data 
11.3 Issues 
and debates 
11.3.1 Understand ethical issues in psychological research, 
including: 
a. know the term ‘ethical issue(s)’ 
b. use content, theories, and research drawn from the 
compulsory topics (Topics 1, 2, 3, 4, 5) to explain ethical 
issues in psychological research 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
30 
3 Assessment information 
Paper 1 (Paper code: 1PS0/01) 
● First assessment: May/June 2019. 
● The assessment is 1 hour and 45 minutes. 
● The assessment is out of 98 marks. 
● The paper consists of six sections. Students must answer all questions in each section. 
● The first five sections will contain multiple-choice, short-open and open-response 
questions. 
● The sixth section will contain two extended open-response questions. These questions will 
focus on debates within psychology and the interrelationships between the core areas of 
psychology. 
Content assessed 
These topics are in Section A of the content. This paper may also draw on knowledge and 
understanding of investigations from Section C. 
● Topic 1: Development – How did you develop? 
● Topic 2: Memory – How does your memory work? 
● Topic 3: Psychological problems – How would psychological problems affect you? 
● Topic 4: The brain and neuropsychology – How does your brain affect you? 
● Topic 5: Social influence – How do others affect you? 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
31 
 
Paper 2 (Paper code: 1PS0/02) 
● First assessment: May/June 2019. 
● The assessment is 1 hour and 20 minutes. 
● The assessment is out of 79 marks. 
● This paper contains six sections. 
● The paper will include calculations, multiple-choice, short-open, open-response and 
extended-writing questions. 
● The paper will include questions that target mathematics at Key Stage 3. 
● Calculators may be used in the examination. Information on the use of calculators during 
the examinations for this qualification can be found in Appendix 2: Calculators. 
Assessment overview 
Students must answer: 
All questions from Section A. 
All questions from two sections – B to F. 
Section A: How do you carry out psychological research? 
This section will focus primarily on Topic 11: Research methods – How do you carry out 
psychological research?, although it can draw on material from Topics 1 to 5 from Paper 1. 
It will contain question types that include calculations, multiple-choice, short-open and open-
response questions, and one extended open-response question. 
Sections B to F: Optional topics 
Each of these sections covers one of the optional Topics 6 to 10. These sections will include 
multiple-choice, short-open and open-response questions, and one extended  
open-response question. 
Content assessed 
● Topic 6: Criminal psychology – Why do people become criminals? 
● Topic 7: The self – What makes you who you are? 
● Topic 8: Perception – How do you interpret the world around you? 
● Topic 9: Sleep and dreaming – Why do you need to sleep and dream? 
● Topic 10: Language, thought and communication – How do you communicate with others? 
● Topic 11: Research methods – How do you carry out psychological research? 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
32 
Assessment Objectives 
 
Students must: % in GCSE 
AO1 Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of psychological ideas, 
processes and procedures 
35 
AO2 Apply knowledge and understanding of psychological ideas, 
processes and procedures 
35 
AO3 Analyse and evaluate psychological information, ideas, processes 
and procedures to make judgements and draw conclusions  
30 
Total 100% 
 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
 
Paper 
Assessment Objectives Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives AO1 % AO2 % AO3 % 
Paper 1 20.3 14.6 20.3 55% 
Paper 2 14.2 20.3 10.1 45% 
Total for GCSE 35% 35% 30% 100% 
 
NB Totals have been rounded either up or down. 
Please see Appendix 1 for a description of the command words used in the examination. 
Synoptic 
Synoptic assessment requires students to work across different parts of a qualification and to 
show their accumulated knowledge and understanding of a topic or subject area. 
Synoptic assessment enables students to show their ability in combining their skills, 
knowledge and understanding with breadth and depth of the subject.  
Synopticy will be assessed in some extended-response questions where learners must draw 
on at least two different areas of psychology. 
Sample assessment materials 
Sample papers and mark schemes can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2  
GCSE (9–1) in Psychology Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
33 
4 Administration and general information 
Entries 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for this qualification can be found in 
our UK Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations officers and is 
available on our website: qualifications.pearson.com 
Discount code and performance tables 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more than one GCSE, or other Level 2 
qualifications with the same discount code, will have only the grade for their 'first entry' 
counted for the purpose of the school and college performance tables (please see  
Appendix 5: Codes). For further information about what constitutes 'first entry' and full 
details of how this policy is applied, please refer to the DfE website: 
www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-education 
Students should be advised that if they take two GCSEs with the same discount code, the 
schools and colleges to which they wish to progress are likely to take the view that this 
achievement is equivalent to only one GCSE. The same view may be taken if students take 
two GCSEs or other Level 2 qualifications that have different discount codes but which have 
significant overlap of content. Before embarking on their programmes, students or their 
advisers who have any doubts about their subject combinations should check with the 
institution to which they wish to progress.  
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, 
special consideration and malpractice 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality policy requires all students to 
have equal opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our qualifications 
to be awarded in a way that is fair to every student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the Equality Act 2010) are not, 
when they are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in comparison to 
students who do not share that characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification and that 
this achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their peers. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be available in English. All student work must be 
in English. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
34 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with special 
educational needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to: 
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the assessment. 
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an individual 
student with a disability, without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding bodies comply with the duty under the 
Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students will 
then know what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for assessment. 
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable adjustments 
where a person with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in undertaking an 
assessment. The awarding organisation is required to take reasonable steps to overcome 
that disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be unique to that individual and 
therefore might not be in the list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of factors, 
including: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding 
organisation, or affects timeframes or the security or integrity of the assessment. This is 
because the adjustment is not ‘reasonable’. 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student's mark or grade to 
reflect temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the examination/ 
assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a material effect on a 
candidate’s ability to take an assessment or demonstrate their level of attainment in 
an assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to apply for access arrangements 
and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special 
consideration, please refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
35 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that compromises or seeks to 
compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in examinations must be reported to Pearson using a JCQ Form M1 
(available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to Investigations Team, Pearson, 190 High Holborn, 
London, WC1V 7BH. Please provide as much information and supporting documentation as 
possible. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice constitutes staff or centre malpractice. 
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and maladministration of 
our qualifications. As with candidate malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is any act that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the 
integrity of the qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported 
immediately, before any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson on a  
JCQ Form M2(a) (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form, 
supporting documentation and as much information as possible can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to Investigations Team, Pearson, 
190 High Holborn, London, WC1V 7BH. Note that the final decision regarding 
appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the document 
General and Vocational Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments Policies and Procedures, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to comply with the requirements of 
Ofqual's General Conditions of Recognition. 
This GCSE qualification will be graded and certificated on a nine-grade scale from 9 to 1 
using the total subject mark where 9 is the highest grade. Individual papers are not graded. 
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum judged by Pearson to be of 
sufficient standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U result. 
The first certification opportunity for this qualification will be 2019. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
36 
Student recruitment and progression 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this qualification. 
Progression 
Students can progress from this qualification to Level 3 qualifications by: 
● using specialist vocabulary, psychological concepts, terminology and convention to engage 
in the process of psychological enquiry 
● acquiring knowledge and understanding of psychology, developing an understanding of 
self and others, and how psychological understanding can help to explain everyday 
social phenomena 
● understanding how psychological research is conducted, including the role of scientific 
method and data analysis 
● presenting information, developing arguments and drawing conclusions through a critical 
approach to psychological evidence, developing as reflective thinkers 
● developing an understanding of the relationship between psychology and personal, moral, 
social and cultural issues, and developing an understanding of ethical issues in psychology 
● developing an understanding of psychological issues, the contribution of psychology to 
individual, social and cultural diversity, and how psychology contributes to society. 
 
Students may progress from this qualification to: 
● GCEs, for example in psychology, biology and geography 
● Level 3 vocational qualifications, for example the BTEC Level 3 in Health and Social Care, 
Applied Science and Children's Care, Learning and Development 
● employment in a wide range of careers (with further training), for example product 
management and general management, or a science-based apprenticeship. 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
37 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Command words used in examination papers 39 
Appendix 2: Calculators 40 
Appendix 3: The context for the development of this qualification 41 
Appendix 4: Transferable skills 43 
Appendix 5: Codes 44 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
38 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
39 
Appendix 1: Command words used in 
examination papers 
The table below lists the command words used in the external assessments. 
Command 
verb 
Definition 
Assess Give careful consideration to all the factors or events that apply, and 
identify which are the most important or relevant. Make a judgement 
on the importance of something, and come to a conclusion  
where needed. 
Calculate Obtain a numerical answer, showing relevant working. If the answer 
has a unit, this must be included. 
Compare Looking for the similarities and differences of two (or more) things. 
This should not require the drawing of a conclusion. The answer must 
relate to both (or all) things mentioned in the question. The answer 
must include at least one similarity and one difference. 
Complete To fill in/write all the details asked for. 
Define Provide a definition of something. 
Describe To give an account of something. Statements in the response need to 
be developed as they are often linked but do not need to include a 
justification or reason. 
Draw Produce an output, either by freehand or using a ruler (e.g. graph). 
Evaluate Review information then bring it together to form a conclusion, 
drawing on evidence including strengths, weaknesses, alternative 
actions, relevant data or information. Come to a supported 
judgement of a subject’s qualities and relation to its context. 
Explain An explanation that requires a justification/exemplification of a point. 
The answer must contain some element of reasoning/justification. 
This can include mathematical explanations. 
Give, State, 
Name 
Generally involves the recall of one or more pieces of information; 
when used in relation to a context, it is used to determine a 
candidate’s grasp of the factual information presented. 
Identify Usually requires some key information to be selected from a given 
stimulus/resource. 
 
Please refer to the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology Sample 
Assessment Materials (SAMs) document for the application of these command verbs. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
40 
Appendix 2: Calculators 
Students may use a calculator in assessments for this qualification. Centres are responsible 
for making sure that calculators used by their students meet the requirements given in the 
table below. 
Students must be familiar with the requirements before their assessments for this 
qualification. 
 
Calculators must be: 
● of a size suitable for use on a desk 
● either battery or solar powered 
● free of lids, cases and covers that 
contain printed instructions or 
formulae. 
 
Calculators must not: 
● be designed or adapted to offer any of 
these facilities: 
o language translators 
o symbolic algebraic manipulation 
o symbolic differentiation or integration 
o communication with other machines 
or the internet 
● be borrowed from another candidate 
during an examination for any reason* 
● have retrievable information stored in 
them. This includes: 
o databanks 
o dictionaries 
o mathematical formulae 
o text. 
The candidate is responsible for 
the following: 
● the calculator’s power supply 
● the calculator’s working condition 
● clearing anything stored in the 
calculator. 
 
*An invigilator may give a student a calculator. 
 
Further information can be found in the JCQ documents Instructions for conducting 
examinations and Information for candidates for written examinations, available at 
www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
41 
Appendix 3: The context for the 
development of this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] and our 
ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
● reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with those 
taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
● consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including learned bodies, 
subject associations, higher-education academics and teachers to ensure this qualification 
is suitable for a UK context 
● reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in their 
documents GCSE (9 to 1)/GCE Qualification Level Conditions and Requirements and 
GCSE/GCE Subject Level Conditions and Requirements for Psychology, published in  
April 2014. 
 
                                           
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification Principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
● demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning and 
measuring higher-order skills 
● rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and valid 
assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in end users of the knowledge, skills 
and competencies of certified students 
● inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students develop at 
different rates and have different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
● empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills, see Appendix 4. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
42 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
 
“The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important change to the 
education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications will assist them in 
helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an ‘Expert 
Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or because of 
our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the world as diverse as 
Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification development 
process that has included: 
● establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-specific 
expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
● subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future oriented. The 
design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, meaning learner outcomes 
have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a learner’s 
success in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident that we have 
supported the development of qualifications that are outstanding for their coherence, 
thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as representing world-class best 
practice.
”    
  
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Lee Sing Kong 
Director, National Institute of Education, 
Singapore 
  
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
  
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
43 
Appendix 4: Transferable skills 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently flagged the 
need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable them to respond with 
confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines skills, or 
competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that can be learned and 
that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform an activity or task and can be 
built upon and extended through learning.’ 
[1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected and 
evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this process, we 
identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the most evidence-based and 
robust skills framework. We adapted the framework slightly to include the Program for 
International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT Literacy and Collaborative Problem Solving 
(CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves: [2]  
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve general 
cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and communicate. [3]  
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, oral communication, written communication, assertive 
communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, service 
orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared understanding, 
taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team organisation. 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work stress, 
adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, and physical 
adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual teams, 
work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and able to acquire 
new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher education, 
as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the teaching and learning of 
this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning materials, developed with 
stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
                                           
[1]  OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012) 
[2]  Koenig J A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop (National 
Academies Press, 2011) 
[3]  PISA – The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy (2011) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Psychology 
– Specification – Issue 1 – December 2016 © Pearson Education Limited 2016 
44 
Appendix 5: Codes 
 
Type of code Use of code Code 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for performance 
tables is assigned a discount code 
indicating the subject area to which it 
belongs. 
Discount codes are published by the DfE in 
the RAISEonline library 
(www.raiseonline.org) 
PK1 
 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an 
Ofqual Regulated Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) code. 
The NQF code is known as a Qualification 
Number (QN). This is the code that 
features in the DfE Section 96 and on the 
LARA as being eligible for 16–18 and 19+ 
funding, and is to be used for all 
qualification funding purposes. The QN will 
appear on students’ final certification 
documentation. 
The QN for this 
qualification is: 
603/0890/4 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to 
enter students for a qualification. Centres 
will need to use the entry codes only when 
claiming students’ qualifications. 
GCSE – 1PS0 
 
Paper codes These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be 
entered for individual papers. 
Paper 1: 1PS0/01 
Paper 2: 1PS0/02 
 
 
 
 
Sb141216Z:\LT\PD\GCSE 2017\9781446933565_GCSE2017_L12_PSYCHOLOGY.DOC.1–48/1 
 
 
Edexcel, BTEC and LCCI qualifications 
Edexcel, BTEC and LCCI qualifications are awarded by Pearson, the UK’s largest awarding 
body offering academic and vocational qualifications that are globally recognised and 
benchmarked. For further information, please visit our qualifications website at 
qualifications.pearson.com. Alternatively, you can get in touch with us using the details on 
our contact us page at qualifications.pearson.com/contactus 
 
About Pearson 
Pearson is the world's leading learning company, with 35,000 employees in more than 
70 countries working to help people of all ages to make measurable progress in their lives 
through learning. We put the learner at the centre of everything we do, because wherever 
learning flourishes, so do people. Find out more about how we can help you and your 
learners at qualifications.pearson.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References to third party material made in this specification are made in good faith. Pearson 
does not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may 
be subject to change, or any opinions expressed therein. (Material may include textbooks, 
journals, magazines and other publications and websites.) 
 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
 
ISBN 978 1 446 93356 5 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2016 
 
For information about Edexcel, BTEC or LCCI qualifications  
visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel is a registered trademark of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office: 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL 
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121