This dra/f_t   qualiﬁ  cation has not yet been accredited by Ofqual. It is published to enable teachers to have early sight of our 
proposed approach to Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9 - 1) in Music (1MU0). Further changes may be required 
and no assurance can be given at this time that the proposed qualiﬁ  cation will be made available in its current form, or 
that it will be accredited in time for ﬁ  rst teaching in September 2016 and ﬁ  rst award in 2018.
Speciﬁ  cation
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9 - 1) in Turkish (1TU0)
First teaching from September 2018
First certiﬁ  cation from June 2020
GCSE (9-1)
Turkish
Issue 4

 
 
Summary of Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2  
GCSE (9-1) in Turkish specification 
Issue 4 changes  
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this current 
issue 
Page 
number 
Removal of Subject Advisor name: 
‘Our subject advisor serviceand online community’ 
3 
Update to Foundation tier paper timing: 
‘Foundation tier: 1 hour 20 minutes…’ 
6 and 39 
Clarification of question titles appearing in English added: 
‘The instructions to students are in Turkish. The question titles appear in 
English.’ 
38 
Update to Foundation tier Assessment Information for Paper 4, bullet point 5: 
‘Question 2 has two options from which students have to select one. This 
question assesses students on their ability to note down key points and 
convey information. Students must use the formal register.’ 
39 
Reference to ‘GCE AS’ removed in the following sentence: 
This qualification offers a suitable progression route to GCE A level in Turkish.  
67 
 
If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, contact us via our 
website at: qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/contact-us.html. 
 
 
Contents 
1 Introduction 2 
Why choose Edexcel GCSE Turkish? 2 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this qualification 3 
Qualification at a glance 4 
2 Subject content 7 
Themes and topics 8 
Paper 1: Listening and understanding in Turkish 10 
Paper 2: Speaking in Turkish 12 
Paper 3: Reading and understanding in Turkish 36 
Paper 4: Writing in Turkish 38 
Assessment Objectives 63 
3 Administration and general information 64 
Entries 64 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special consideration and 
malpractice 64 
Student recruitment and progression 67 
Appendix 1: Candidate speaking examination record form 
(CS2) 71 
Appendix 2: Grammar list 72 
Appendix 3: Vocabulary list 76 
Appendix 4: The context for the development of this 
qualification 131 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 133 
Appendix 6: Codes 134 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
2 
1 Introduction 
Why choose Edexcel GCSE Turkish? 
We believe languages should be accessible for all students. Our new Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Turkish has been developed to help students of all abilities 
progress and develop a passion for languages, through culturally engaging content. 
We’ve listened to feedback from the languages community and have developed an engaging 
and inspirational course of study that will enable your students to manipulate and use the 
target language effectively, independently and creatively, so that they have a solid basis 
from which to progress to A Level or employment. 
Engaging and popular topics 
Our specification includes both familiar and new topics that you have told us you like and 
that motivate your students. 
Manageable content 
Our content has been structured across five themes. This flexible programme of study allows 
time for a focused revision period at the end of the course. 
Content and assessments that provide an engaging real-world focus 
The authentic situations and stimuli enable students to see language in context and learn 
about the culture of the target language country. Our assessments allow for spontaneity and 
test grammar as well as providing plenty of opportunities for students to apply their 
knowledge independently, creatively and in authentic situations. 
Straightforward assessments that are accessible to all students 
Special care has been taken to ensure that all our papers are designed to be clear and 
concise and, where appropriate, questions feature scaffolding to help all students’ progress 
through the assessments confidently. Reading and listening papers are structured so that 
questions set in the target language are in a separate section from those questions requiring 
responses in English. Both papers are also structured so that they are progressive in their 
level of demand with the most demanding question being the final question in the paper. 
Translation tasks are progressive in their level of difficulty and are of appropriate demand at 
each tier. 
Carefully selected texts 
We have worked closely with teachers and expert practitioners to ensure we include 
interesting and relevant texts at the right level for students at each tier and that will 
encourage the use of a wide range of texts in the classroom. 
Clear and precise assessment criteria 
Our mark schemes have been trialled with sample student answers to ensure they reward 
students appropriately and that it is clear what is expected of students at each band. 
Continuous progression 
Our content builds on the understanding developed at prior language learning experience at 
Key Stage 3 while also ensuring that students new to the subject are appropriately 
supported, and provides a firm foundation for students to make a smooth transition to 
A Level. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
3 
Supporting you in planning and implementing 
this qualification 
Planning 
● To support you in delivering this specification, our Getting Started guide, available on 
our website, gives you an overview of the new GCSE qualification. 
● We will give you an editable course planner and scheme of work that you can adapt to 
suit your department. 
Teaching and learning 
There are lots of free teaching and learning support to help you deliver the new qualification, 
including: 
● a guide to questions in the target language 
● student guide 
● online and face-to-face training events. 
Preparing for exams 
We also provide a range of resources to help you prepare your students for the assessments, 
including: 
● marked exemplars of student work with examiner commentaries 
ResultsPlus 
ResultsPlus provides the most detailed analysis available of your students’ exam 
performance. It can help you identify the topics and skills where further learning would 
benefit your students. 
Get help and support 
Our subject advisor service and online community will ensure you receive help and guidance 
from us and that you can share ideas and information with other teachers. You can sign up 
to receive e-newsletters to keep up to date with qualification updates and product and 
service news. 
Learn more at qualifications.pearson.com 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
4 
Qualification at a glance 
Content and assessment overview 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Turkish consists of four externally 
examined papers based on the following skills: listening, speaking, reading and writing. 
Students must complete their speaking assessment in April/May and all other assessments in 
May/June in any single year. 
Each paper is available at Foundation tier or Higher tier. Students must be entered for a 
single tier across all papers. 
The use of dictionaries is not permitted. For Paper 2 this includes during the 
preparation time. 
 
Paper 1: Listening and understanding in Turkish (*Paper code: 1TU0/1F and 1H) 
Written examination 
Foundation tier: 35 minutes, including 5 minutes’ reading time; 50 marks 
Higher tier: 45 minutes, including 5 minutes’ reading time; 50 marks 
25% of the total qualification 
Content overview 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes and topics. 
Assessment overview 
Students are assessed on their understanding of standard spoken Turkish by one or more 
speakers in a range of public and social settings. Students will respond to multiple-
response and short-answer open-response questions based on a recording featuring male 
and female Turkish speakers. 
Students must answer all questions in both sections. 
There is no requirement for students to produce written responses in Turkish. 
Foundation tier 
● Section A is set in English. The instructions to students are in English. 
● Section B is set in Turkish. The instructions to students are in Turkish. 
Higher tier 
● Section A is set in Turkish. The instructions to students are in Turkish. 
● Section B is set in English. The instructions to students are in English. 
 
The listening audio files are available on our website. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
5 
 
Paper 2: Speaking in Turkish (*Paper code: 1TU0/2F and 2H) 
Internally conducted and externally assessed 
Foundation tier: 7–9 minutes plus 12 minutes’ preparation time; 70 marks 
Higher tier: 10–12 minutes plus 12 minutes’ preparation time; 70 marks 
25% of the total qualification 
Content overview 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes and topics. 
Assessment overview 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate and interact effectively through 
speaking in Turkish for different purposes and in different settings. 
There are three tasks which must be conducted in the following order: 
Task 1 – a role play based on one topic that is allocated by Pearson 
Task 2 – questions based on a picture stimulus based on one topic that is allocated by 
Pearson 
Task 3 – conversation based on two themes. The first theme is based on the topic chosen 
by the student in advance of the assessment. The second theme is allocated by Pearson. 
The assessments are conducted by teachers in one session within a prescribed assessment 
window, the recordings are then submitted to Pearson for external marking. 
 
Paper 3: Reading and understanding in Turkish (*Paper code: 1TU0/3F and 3H) 
Written examination 
Foundation tier: 50 minutes; 50 marks. Higher tier: 1 hour 5 minutes; 50 marks 
25% of the total qualification 
Content overview 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes and topics. 
Assessment overview 
Students are assessed on their understanding of written Turkish across a range of different 
types of texts, including advertisements, emails, letters, articles and literary texts. 
Students are required to respond to multiple-response and short-answer questions based 
on these texts. 
Students must answer all questions in each of the three sections: 
Section A is set in English. The instructions to students are in English 
Section B is set in Turkish. The instructions to students are in Turkish 
Section C includes a translation passage from Turkish into English with instructions in 
English. 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
6 
 
Paper 4: Writing in Turkish (*Paper code: 1TU0/4F and 4H) 
Written examination 
Foundation tier: 1 hour 20 minutes; 60 marks 
Higher tier: 1 hour 25 minutes; 60 marks 
25% of the total qualification 
Content overview 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes and topics. 
Assessment overview 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate effectively through writing in 
Turkish for different purposes and audiences. Students are required to produce responses 
of varying lengths and types to express ideas and opinions in Turkish. The instructions to 
students are in Turkish. Word counts are specified for each question. Students must 
answer all questions. 
Foundation tier – three open-response questions and one translation into Turkish. 
Higher tier – two open-response questions and one translation into Turkish. 
 
*See Appendix 6: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to this 
qualification. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
7 
2 Subject content 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Turkish allows students to develop their 
ability to communicate with Turkish native speakers in both speech and writing. Students will 
study a variety of contexts relevant to their age and interests and will also develop a greater 
awareness of the culture of Turkish-speaking communities and countries. These contexts are 
listed under Themes and topics. 
Students will need to develop and use their knowledge and understanding of Turkish 
grammar progressively through their course of study. Grammar requirements are given in 
the grammar list (see Appendix 2: Grammar list). 
To help students build on their range of vocabulary, a list is provided of words that students 
are expected to use and understand (see Appendix 3: Vocabulary list). These lists are not 
exhaustive but are intended as a guide; students at both tiers will be required to understand 
and respond to familiar words (appropriate to the tier) that are not on the lists. 
Qualification aims and objectives 
The aims and objectives of this qualification are to enable students to: 
● develop their ability to communicate confidently and coherently with native speakers in 
speech and writing, conveying what they want to say with increasing accuracy 
● express and develop thoughts and ideas spontaneously and fluently 
● listen to and understand clearly articulated, standard speech at near normal speed 
● deepen their knowledge about how language works and enrich their vocabulary in order 
for them to increase their independent use and understanding of extended language in a 
wide range of contexts 
● acquire new knowledge, skills and ways of thinking through the ability to understand and 
respond to a rich range of authentic spoken and written material, adapted and abridged, 
as appropriate, including literary texts 
● develop awareness and understanding of the culture and identity of the countries and 
communities where the language is spoken 
● be encouraged to make appropriate links to other areas of the curriculum to enable 
bilingual and deeper learning, where the language may become a medium for constructing 
and applying knowledge 
● develop language-learning skills both for immediate use and to prepare them for further 
language study and use in school, higher education or employment 
● develop language strategies, including repair strategies. 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
8 
Themes and topics 
Questions across all four language skills are set in common contexts, addressing a range of 
relevant contemporary and cultural themes. They are organised into five themes, each 
broken down into topics and sub-topics. 
The five themes are: 
1. Identity and culture 
2. Local area, holiday, travel 
3. School 
4. Future aspirations, study and work 
5. International and global dimension. 
All themes and topics must be studied in the context of both the students’ home 
country and that of countries and communities where Turkish is spoken. 
For listening and reading assessments, the majority of contexts are based on the culture  
and countries where the assessed language is spoken. Students may also refer to the culture 
of the assessed language country/countries or communities in the speaking and writing 
papers. It is, therefore, important that students are exposed to materials relating to  
Turkish-speaking countries throughout the course. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
9 
Each topic has been highlighted in bold. 
All topics must be studied in the context of both the students’ home country and 
that of countries and communities where Turkish is spoken. 
 
Theme 1: Identity and culture 
● Who am I?: relationships; when I was younger; what my friends and family are like; 
what makes a good friend; interests; socialising with friends and family; role models 
● Daily life: customs and everyday life; food and drink; shopping; social media and 
technology (use of, advantages and disadvantages) 
● Cultural life: celebrations and festivals; reading; music; sport; film and television 
 
Theme 2: Local area, holiday and travel 
● Holidays: preferences; experiences; destinations 
● Travel and tourist transactions: travel and accommodation; asking for help and 
dealing with problems; directions; eating out; shopping 
● Town, region and country: weather; places to see; things to do 
 
Theme 3: School 
● What school is like: school types; school day; subjects; rules and pressures; celebrating 
success 
● School activities: school trips; events and exchanges 
 
Theme 4: Future aspirations, study and work 
● Using languages beyond the classroom: forming relationships; travel; employment 
● Ambitions: further study; volunteering; training 
● Work: jobs; careers and professions 
 
Theme 5: International and global dimension 
● Bringing the world together: sports events; music events; campaigns and good causes 
● Environmental issues: being ‘green’; access to natural resources 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
10 
Paper 1: Listening and understanding in Turkish 
Content 
Students are assessed on their understanding of standard spoken Turkish in a variety of 
scenarios. 
Students will need to:  
● identify the overall message, key points, details and opinions 
● deduce meaning from a variety of spoken texts 
● recognise the relationship between past, present and future events 
● recognise and respond to key information, important themes and ideas in spoken text, 
including authentic sources, adapted and abridged, as appropriate 
● be able to answer questions, extract information, evaluate and draw conclusions. 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes (see Themes and 
topics). 
Students are presented with recorded scenarios involving one or more speakers in public and 
social settings. Recordings include authentic sources and are based on the themes. Recorded 
material features both male and female voices and represents different age groups. 
Students should be given the opportunity to become accustomed to hearing the Turkish 
language spoken in a range of styles and registers. 
Recordings for individual questions within the assessment vary in length, including both short 
and longer spoken passages, using both familiar language and, where appropriate, more 
complex language and abstract material, as appropriate to the tier. 
To prepare students adequately for this assessment, teachers should present and exploit a 
range of vocabulary relevant to each theme listed and build on the Key Stage 3  
Programme of Study, where appropriate. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
11 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2020. 
● The assessment is out of 50 marks. 
● Students must be allocated five minutes in which to read through the paper before the 
first extract of the recording starts. This gives students an opportunity to familiarise 
themselves with the length and the layout of the paper and to read the questions before 
hearing the first extract. 
● Students will listen to the recording featuring Turkish-language speakers who will speak at 
a rate appropriate to the expected level of student understanding. 
● Each passage is recorded twice, with pauses following the second hearing to allow each 
student sufficient time to write or note their response to each question (or part of a 
question) and to read the next question before the related extract is played. 
● Recordings will be issued as digital sound files accessed via a secure download. 
● Each question is set in a context drawn from the topics. The assessment tasks will feature 
general content that is familiar and accessible to all students. 
● Students must answer all questions in both sections.  
● Foundation tier 
o 35 minutes is given for the assessment, including 5 minutes’ reading time. 
o Section A contains 12 questions set in English. Question types comprise both  
multiple-response and short-answer open-response questions. The instructions to 
students are in English. 
o Section B contains two questions set in Turkish. The question type is multiple-response. 
The instructions to students are in Turkish. 
● Higher tier 
o 45 minutes is given for the assessment, including 5 minutes’ reading time. 
o Section A contains two questions set in Turkish. The question type is multiple-response. 
The instructions to students are in Turkish. 
o Section B contains eight questions set in English. Question types comprise both  
multiple-response and short-answer open-response questions. The instructions to  
students are in English. 
● Four of the questions will be common to both tiers. 
● For both tiers, there is no requirement for students to produce written responses in 
Turkish. 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and mark scheme for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Turkish Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
12 
Paper 2: Speaking in Turkish 
Content 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate and interact effectively through 
speaking in Turkish for different purposes. 
Students will need to: 
● convey information and narrate events coherently and confidently, using and adapting 
language for different purposes 
● speak spontaneously, responding to unpredictable questions, points of view or situations, 
sustaining communication by using rephrasing or repair strategies, as appropriate 
● use a range of vocabulary and grammatical structures accurately, including some more 
complex forms, with reference to past, present and future events 
● make creative and more complex use of the language, as appropriate, to express and 
justify their own thoughts and points of view 
● use accurate pronunciation and intonation in order to be understood by a native speaker, 
however they will be able to access the highest marks available for each task without a 
‘perfect’ command of Turkish. 
These are assessed through a series of three consecutive tasks. 
Task 1 – Role play 
The role play is an interaction requiring the student to ask and answer questions, to 
exchange information and to use different registers (see definition of registers beneath the 
Role play mark grid within the marking guidance section of the specification). The role play 
relates to either formal or informal scenarios, in turn inviting the student to use either formal 
or informal language relevant to the scenario. The task is set in the register that the student 
is required to use, so students should use that register in their responses. All role plays are 
marked for communication only. 
The role plays are set and provided by Pearson at the time of assessment together with a 
sequencing grid and instructions. For an example, please see the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Turkish Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document – 
Paper 2: Speaking in Turkish, General instructions to the teacher section. 
Scenarios require an exchange of information. Some scenarios are transactional in nature. 
The scenarios are based on any of the topics from themes 1 to 4 (listed on page 9), i.e. not 
on the theme International and global dimension as this theme lends itself better to the  
picture-based task and the conversation. 
Task 2 – Picture-based task 
The assessment scenario is based on any of the topics (listed on page 9). The topic is 
allocated by Pearson at the time of assessment together with a sequencing grid and 
instructions. For an example, please see the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in 
Turkish Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document – Paper 2: Speaking in Turkish, 
General instructions to the teacher section. 
This assessment allows students to: 
● describe and narrate events 
● give information 
● express, justify and exchange opinions. 
Students are required to refer to past, present and future events in this assessment at both 
Foundation and Higher tiers, using different tenses. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
13 
Task 3 – Conversation 
The conversation allows students to cover all of the requirements outlined in the Content 
section on page 12, including conveying information, giving points of view, developing and 
initiating conversation and discussion and producing extended sequences of speech. 
The conversation is based on any two themes (see Themes and topics) and is in two parts. 
For the first part of the conversation, the student selects one topic from one theme in 
advance of the assessment. The choice of topic must be agreed between the student and the 
teacher and must be selected no later than two weeks before the assessment takes place. 
This part of the conversation task starts with this first topic and then may move on to other 
topics within the same theme. 
The second part of the conversation must be on a different theme. This will be prescribed by 
Pearson through instructions on a sequencing grid. For an example please see the Pearson 
Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Turkish Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) 
document – Paper 2: Speaking in Turkish, General instructions to the teacher section. 
This part of the conversation may focus on one or more topics from within the selected 
theme (see page 9). 
Students are required to refer to past, present and future events in this assessment, using a 
range of tenses. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
14 
Assessment information 
General information  
● First assessment: April/May 2020. 
● The entire assessment must be conducted in Turkish. 
● Students complete three tasks. 
o Task 1 – a role play based on one topic. This is allocated by Pearson at the time of 
assessment. 
o Task 2 – a task containing a picture and questions drawn from one topic. This is 
allocated by Pearson at the time of assessment. 
o Task 3 – conversation based on two themes. The first theme is based on the topic 
chosen by the student in advance of the assessment. The second theme is selected by 
the teacher from a choice of two themes allocated by Pearson. 
● Task 1 is set in the register that the student is required to use. 
At the time of assessment, Pearson will issue a prescribed order per student for their role 
play, picture-based task and two themes for the second part of the conversation. The 
teacher does not choose the order of the cards. Pearson will provide instructions on 
sequencing and a sequencing grid. For an example please see the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Turkish Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document – 
Paper 2: Speaking in Turkish, General instructions to the teacher, section. 
This grid has been designed to help ensure that each student covers a broad range of 
themes from this specification. 
● Assessments are conducted by centres within a five-week assessment period in April and 
May in any single year. Dates for the assessment period will be confirmed in the  
UK Information Manual at the start of each academic year. The assessment period will not 
always be continuous or be the same period each year, for example it will need to 
accommodate the Easter break which changes each year. 
● The assessment materials provided by Pearson for all tasks may be accessed by the 
teacher no more than three working days before the prescribed five week assessment 
period. This is to enable the teacher to prepare for the assessment. The assessment 
materials in this pack must not be removed from the centre premises.   
● Assessments are conducted by teachers in one session within a prescribed assessment 
window and then submitted to Pearson for external marking. 
● Students are presented with instructions in English but must communicate entirely in 
Turkish for the duration of the assessment. 
● Complete, unedited recordings of all assessments must be submitted to Pearson via the 
online Learner Work Transfer (LWT) portal. 
● Each question is set in a context drawn from the topics. The assessment tasks will feature 
general content that is familiar and accessible to all students. 
● Students must be permitted 12 minutes’ preparation time to consider the questions and 
stimulus cards for Tasks 1 and 2. 
● Students are assessed on the quality of responses rather than length of assessment, 
however the assessment times are different to reflect the demand of each tier. 
● All assessments are marked against assessment criteria, please see Marking Guidance for 
Paper 2. 
● Centres must have procedures in place to verify the identity of all students at the time of 
the assessment and confirm this on the Candidate speaking examination record 
form (CS2) (see Appendix 1). Centres are required to submit to Pearson one completed  
CS2 form for all students for each tier. 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted during the preparation time or during the 
assessment. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
15 
Foundation tier assessment time and marks 
● The total assessment for the three tasks is 7 to 9 minutes plus 12 minutes’ 
preparation time. 
● The assessment is worth 70 marks. 
● The assessment consists of the following three tasks, which must be conducted in the 
following order: 
o Task 1 – one role play recommended to last between one to one-and-a-half minutes for 
10 marks 
o Task 2 – one picture-based task recommended to last between two-and-a-half to  
three minutes for 24 marks 
o Task 3 – a conversation recommended to last between three-and-a-half to 
four-and-a-half minutes for 36 marks. 
Higher tier assessment time and marks 
● The total assessment for the three tasks is 10 to 12 minutes plus 12 minutes’ preparation 
time. 
● The assessment is worth 70 marks. 
● The assessment consists of the following three tasks, which must be conducted in the 
following order: 
o Task 1 – one role play recommended to last between two to two-and-a-half minutes for 
10 marks 
o Task 2 – one picture-based task recommended to last between three to  
three-and-a-half minutes for 24 marks 
o Task 3 – a conversation recommended to last between five to six minutes for 36 marks. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
16 
Preparation time 
Students are allocated 12 minutes’ preparation time, under supervised conditions, 
immediately prior to the assessment for Tasks 1 and 2. The purpose is to consider the 
questions and stimulus for the role play and picture-based scenarios allocated. 
Students are permitted to make notes (up to a maximum of one side of A4 for both Tasks 1 
and 2) during this period and they can refer to them during the role play and picture-based 
assessment, but not during the conversation task. Students must return their notes to the 
teacher before commencing Task 3 (conversation). 
The notes should be for reference only and students must not read out whole, prepared 
sentences in answer to questions. 
Any notes made during the preparation time must be kept securely by the centre until the 
end of October in the year the assessment is completed, after which time they should be 
securely destroyed. 
Students cannot have access to a dictionary, or any other resource, during the preparation 
time. 
Task 1 – Role play 
Pearson will set and provide ten different sets of role plays for each tier. Each role play 
consists of two cards – one for the teacher and one for the student. 
Teacher cards 
The teacher cards contain instructions on how to conduct the role play and the exact 
questions to ask. 
Each role play opens with an introduction from the teacher who then asks the first question. 
Candidate cards 
The candidate cards include prompts as a guide and highlight where the candidate needs to 
ask a question (indicated by the symbol ‘?’), and where an unpredictable question is posed 
to them by the teacher (indicated by the symbol ‘!’). 
Students have access to this during their preparation time to help in preparing for the 
assessment. 
Each candidate card contains instructions in English and the task is in Turkish. The context of 
the role play is provided in both sections. Candidates must read both sections fully to 
support understanding of each bullet point. 
At Foundation tier, the candidate cards contain five bullet points, eliciting five utterances. 
Students need to ask one question and respond to one unpredictable question. Students are 
required to speak only in the present tense for four of the prompts or they may also use a 
conditional tense if it is more natural to do so. 
At Higher tier, the candidate cards contain five bullet points, eliciting five utterances. 
Students need to ask two questions and respond to one unpredictable question. Students are 
required to speak in the present tense for four of the prompts or they may also use a 
conditional tense if it is more natural to do so and respond to one question set in a past 
tense. 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
17 
Task 2 – Picture-based task 
Pearson will provide ten different sets of picture-based tasks for each tier. Each task consists 
of two cards – one for the teacher and one for the student. 
Teacher cards 
The teacher cards contain instructions on how to conduct this task and the five questions to 
ask the student. Teachers are allowed to repeat questions and use set prompts to enable 
students to give a developed response. They are not allowed to deviate from the set 
prompts. 
Each task opens with the teacher asking the first question, which is based on the picture. 
The first question is directly based on the picture; the remaining questions extend beyond 
the picture, but are based on the overall topic from which the picture is drawn, inviting an 
exchange of views or opinions. 
Candidate cards 
At Foundation tier, students are provided with a picture and five bullets in Turkish to help in 
preparing for the five questions that will be asked during the assessment. Students are 
allowed to ask for questions to be repeated. 
Students have access to this during their preparation time. 
At Higher tier, students are provided with a picture and five bullets in Turkish to help in 
preparing for the five questions that will be asked during the assessment. The final bullet is 
marked by the symbol ‘!’ to denote one unpredictable question. Students are allowed to ask 
for questions to be repeated. 
Students have access to this during their preparation time. 
Task 3 – Conversation 
The first part of the conversation opens with the topic chosen by the student. The student 
may choose to focus on any aspect(s) of the topic as each has a number of different 
features. For example, a student who has selected the topic What school is like may: 
● choose to focus on ‘school types’ and ‘rules and pressures’, or 
● choose to focus only on ‘rules and pressures’. 
To enable them to make a confident start, the teacher should allow the student to state their 
chosen aspect(s) from their nominated topic and to talk about this aspect/these aspects for 
up to one minute. 
The teacher continues the conversation on the chosen topic and then may move on to other 
topics within the same theme, if necessary, to ensure that students use the recommended 
time for this task most effectively. 
The second part of the conversation is based on a different theme allocated by Pearson and 
covers any of the topics across that single theme. 
Teachers must ensure that an equal amount of time is allocated to both parts of the 
conversation. 
Throughout the conversation, in order to facilitate a genuine and spontaneous interaction, 
the nature of questions from the teacher should enable students to: 
● answer questions freely, in turn allowing them to produce extended sequences of speech 
● develop conversations and discussions 
● give and justify own thoughts and opinions 
● refer to past, present and future events. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
18 
Administration and general information about the conduct of the 
speaking assessment 
Preparation time and notes for Tasks 1 and 2 only 
● The notes made during the preparation time should be a reference only, and students 
should not read out whole, prepared sentences. 
● The preparation time must be supervised. It can take place either in the examination 
room with the teacher or outside of the room with an invigilator. 
● Students are not permitted to write on the candidate cards. 
● Students must return their notes and candidate cards to the teacher at the end of the 
second task (picture-based task). 
● Any notes made during the preparation time must be kept securely by the centre until the 
end of October in the year the assessment is completed, after which time they should be 
securely destroyed. 
● Students cannot have access to a dictionary, or any other resource, during the preparation 
time. 
Sample assessment materials 
Sample candidate and teacher cards for the role-play and picture-based tasks and 
accompanying marking guidance and assessment criteria can be found in the Pearson 
Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Turkish Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) 
document. 
Marking guidance and assessment criteria are also provided in this document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
19 
Marking guidance for Paper 2: Speaking in Turkish 
This marking guidance is for the use of Pearson-appointed external examiners. The guidance 
has been included for teacher reference to aid understanding of how the assessment criteria 
will be applied. 
General guidance on using levels-based mark schemes 
Step 1 Decide on a band 
● The examiner will first of all consider the answer as a whole and then decide which descriptors 
most closely match the answer and place it in that band. The descriptors for each band 
indicate the different features that will be seen in the student’s answer for that band. 
● When assigning a band they will look at the overall quality of the answer and not focus 
disproportionately on small and specific parts of the answer where the student has not 
performed quite as well as the rest. If the answer covers different aspects of different 
bands of the mark scheme they will use a ‘best fit’ approach for defining the band and then 
use the variability of the response to help decide the mark within the band, for example if 
the response is predominantly band 5–8 with a small amount of band 9–12 material, it 
would be placed in band 5–8 but be awarded a mark near the top of the band because of 
the band 9–12 content. 
Step 2 Decide on a mark 
● Once they have decided on a band they will then need to decide on a mark within the 
band. 
● They will decide on the mark to award based on the quality of the answer; they will award 
a mark towards the top or bottom of that band depending on how the student has 
evidenced each of the descriptor bullet points. 
● They will modify the mark based on how securely the trait descriptors are met at that band. 
● They will need to go back through the answer as they apply the mark scheme to clarify 
points and assure themselves that the band and the mark are appropriate. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
20 
Assessment criteria for the Foundation tier – Part 1 
Role play – Foundation tier (10 marks) 
For this task, students’ work is marked by Pearson using the following assessment criteria. 
The mark grid is applied once to each individual response to the prompts. There is a 
maximum of 2 marks for each of the five prompts on the role-play cards. 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable communication; highly ambiguous OR pronunciation prevents 
communication 
1 Partially clear/ambiguous OR partially appropriate within the context of the role 
play; pronunciation may affect clarity of communication 
2 Clearly communicated; appropriate within the context of the role play; 
unambiguous; pronunciation supports clear communication 
 
Exemplification of how to apply the role-play mark grid can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Turkish Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Additional guidance 
Appropriate: relevant response related to the prompt, uses appropriate register for 
the scenario. 
Informal register: includes language that students would use with friends and people of a 
similar age; informal greetings, endearments and forms of address. Informal register also 
requires the use of informal structures when using, for example, verbs and possessive 
adjectives. 
Formal register: includes language that students would use with adults, for example 
teachers, employers, customers, officials, in a formal context. It includes avoidance of slang, 
over-familiar language, exaggeration and endearments. It also includes the use of formal 
greetings and forms of address where appropriate. Formal register requires formal structures 
when using, for example, verbs, personal pronouns and possessive adjectives. 
Partially clear/pronunciation may affect clarity of communication: makes speech 
difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is eventually understood)/forces the 
listener to strain to understand what is meant. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
21 
Assessment criteria for the Foundation tier – Part 2 
Picture-based task – Foundation tier (24 marks) 
There are two mark grids to be applied to this task: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
Picture-based task: communication and content – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–4 ● Limited response to set questions, likely to consist of single-word answers 
● Minimal success in adapting language to describe, narrate, inform using 
individual words/phrases; sometimes unable to respond 
● A straightforward opinion may be expressed but without justification 
● Pronunciation and intonation are inconsistently intelligible with inaccuracies 
that lead to frequent impairment in communication 
5–8 ● Responds briefly to set questions, there is much hesitation and continuous 
prompting needed 
● Some limited success in adapting language, to describe, narrate and inform in 
response to the set questions; may occasionally be unable to respond 
● Straightforward, brief opinions are given but without justification 
● Pronunciation and intonation are mostly intelligible but inaccuracies lead to 
some impairment in communication 
9–12 ● Responds to set questions with some development, some hesitation and some 
prompting necessary 
● Some effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform in 
response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions with occasional, brief justification 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, occasionally inaccuracies affect 
clarity of communication 
13–16 ● Responds to set questions with frequently developed responses, occasional 
hesitation, occasional prompting necessary 
● Frequently effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform in 
response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions and gives justification with some development 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, inaccuracies are minimal and 
have no impact on clarity of communication 
Additional guidance 
Adaptation of/adapting language to describe, narrate and inform: adapts language to 
achieve different purposes in the language; students may adapt language more effectively 
for one purpose than another, for example they may use language effectively to inform but 
less effectively to narrate. 
Straightforward opinions and justification are those that form part of a 
minimum/standard/predictable response. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
22 
Picture-based task: linguistic knowledge and accuracy – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Limited accuracy when responding to set questions; minimal success when 
referring to past, present and future events 
● Individual words and phrases are coherent when responding to set 
questions; high frequency of errors prevent meaning throughout most of the 
conversation 
3–4 ● Occasionally accurate grammatical structures when responding to set 
questions; occasional success when referring to present events, limited 
success when referring to future or past events, much ambiguity 
● Some coherent phrases and sentences within responses to set questions; 
regular errors prevent coherent overall speech and frequently prevent 
meaning 
5–6 ● Some accurate grammatical structures, including some successful references 
to past, present and future events in response to the set questions, some 
ambiguity 
● Responses are partially coherent, errors occur that sometimes hinder clarity 
of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
7–8 ● Generally accurate grammatical structures, generally successful references to 
past, present and future events in response to the set questions, occasional 
ambiguity 
● Responses are generally coherent although errors occur that occasionally 
hinder clarity of communication 
Additional guidance 
Errors: the mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on 
clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example using the locative, dative, ablative cases 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the listener from the content of what is being said. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make speech difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force listeners to strain to understand what is meant, 
for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of time expressions and the verb 
endings 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the listener from the content of what is 
being said. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
23 
Assessment criteria for the Foundation tier – Part 3 
Conversation – Foundation tier (36 marks) 
There are three mark grids to be applied to this task: 
● communication and content 
● interaction and spontaneity 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
Conversation: communication and content – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Communicates limited information relevant to the topics and questions 
● Uses language to express limited, straightforward ideas and thoughts; 
occasional straightforward opinion expressed without justification 
● Uses limited, familiar vocabulary and expression with much repetition; 
communication is disjointed and frequently breaks down because of restricted 
range of vocabulary 
● Pronunciation and intonation are inconsistently intelligible with inaccuracies 
that lead to frequent impairment in communication 
4–6 ● Communicates brief information relevant to the topics and questions 
● Uses language to produce straightforward ideas and thoughts; expresses 
straightforward opinions with limited justification 
● Uses repetitive, familiar vocabulary and expression; communication is often 
constrained and occasionally breaks down because of restricted range of 
vocabulary 
● Pronunciation and intonation are mostly intelligible but inaccuracies lead to 
some impairment in communication 
7–9 ● Communicates information relevant to the topics and questions, with 
occasionally extended sequences of speech 
● Uses language to produce straightforward ideas, thoughts and opinions with 
occasional justification 
● Uses a limited variety of mainly straightforward vocabulary, communication for 
some purposes is constrained because of restricted range of vocabulary 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, occasionally inaccuracies affect 
clarity of communication  
10–12 ● Communicates information relevant to the topics and questions, with some 
extended sequences of speech 
● Occasionally uses language creatively to express some individual thoughts, 
ideas and opinions, some of which are justified 
● Occasional variety in use of vocabulary, including some examples of 
uncommon language with some variation of expression, fulfils 
most purposes 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, inaccuracies are minimal and 
have no impact on clarity of communication 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
24 
Additional guidance 
Uses language creatively – examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● manipulating language, including familiar, high-frequency and simple language, to 
respond to unfamiliar/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to maintain 
interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, to 
convince. 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view which go 
beyond the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
Straightforward ideas, thoughts and opinions are those that give the 
minimum/standard/predictable response. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
25 
Conversation: interaction and spontaneity – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Basic exchange where only some questions are responded to; answers rely 
on rehearsed language that is frequently irrelevant to the question 
● Short, undeveloped responses, many incomplete 
● Isolated examples of ability to sustain communication, pace is slow and 
hesitant throughout 
4–6 ● Responds with limited spontaneity; answers rely on rehearsed language that 
is occasionally irrelevant to the question 
● Short responses, any development depends on teacher prompting 
● Limited ability to sustain communication, pace is mostly slow and hesitant 
7–9 ● Occasionally able to respond spontaneously with some examples of natural 
interaction although often stilted 
● Occasionally able to initiate and develop responses independently but regular 
prompting needed 
● Occasionally able to sustain communication, using rephrasing/repair 
strategies if necessary to continue the flow; frequent hesitation 
10–12 ● Responds spontaneously to some questions, interacting naturally for parts of 
the conversation 
● Sometimes able to initiate and develop the conversation independently, 
some prompting needed 
● Sometimes able to sustain communication, using rephrasing/repair strategies 
if necessary to continue the flow; some hesitation 
Additional guidance 
Rephrasing/repair strategies: strategies that aid communication and allow the 
conversation to be sustained, for example rephrasing, circumlocution, adjusting the 
message, asking for clarification/repetition, repair strategies such as self-correction; these 
strategies enable students to deliver the message when exact vocabulary or expressions are 
not known. 
Responds/responding spontaneously: gives a relevant, impromptu response based on 
what they have heard. 
Rehearsed language: language learned by heart, which may not give a relevant, 
impromptu response based on what has been heard (not spontaneous). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
26 
Conversation: linguistic knowledge and accuracy – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Uses straightforward, individual words/phrases; limited evidence of language 
manipulation 
● Limited accuracy, minimal success when referring to past, present and future 
events 
● Individual words and phrases are coherent; high frequency of errors prevent 
meaning throughout much of the conversation 
4–6 ● Uses straightforward, repetitive, grammatical structures 
● Occasionally accurate grammatical structures, occasional success when 
referring to present events, limited success when referring to future or past 
events, much ambiguity 
● Some coherent phrases and sentences; regular errors prevent coherent 
overall speech and frequently prevent meaning 
7–9 ● Manipulates a limited variety of mainly straightforward grammatical 
structures, minimal use of complex structures 
● Some accurate grammatical structures, some successful references to past, 
present and future events, some ambiguity 
● Sequences of coherent speech although errors occur that often hinder clarity 
of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
10–12 ● Manipulates grammatical structures with occasional variation, complex 
structures used but repetitive 
● Generally accurate grammatical structures, generally successful references to 
past, present and future events 
● Generally coherent speech although errors occur that sometimes hinder 
clarity of communication 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be:  
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language. 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: the mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on 
clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example using the locative, dative, ablative cases 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the listener from the content of what is being said. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
27 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make speech difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force listeners to strain to understand what is meant, 
for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of time expressions and the verb 
endings 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the listener from the content of what is 
being said. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
28 
Assessment criteria for the Higher tier – Part 1 
Role play – Higher tier (10 marks) 
For this task, students’ work is marked by Pearson using the following assessment criteria. 
The mark grid is applied once to each individual response to the prompts. There is a 
maximum of 2 marks for each of the five prompts on the role-play cards. 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable communication; highly ambiguous OR pronunciation prevents 
communication 
1 Partially clear/ambiguous OR partially appropriate within the context of the role 
play; pronunciation may affect clarity of communication 
2 Clearly communicated; appropriate within the context of the role play; 
unambiguous; pronunciation supports clear communication 
 
Exemplification of how to apply the role-play mark grid can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Additional guidance 
Appropriate: relevant response related to the prompt, uses appropriate register for the 
scenario. 
Informal register: includes language that students would use with friends and people of a 
similar age; informal greetings, endearments and forms of address. Informal register also 
requires the use of informal structures when using, for example, verbs and possessive 
adjectives. 
Formal register: includes language that students would use with adults, for example 
teachers, employers, customers, officials, in a formal context. It includes avoidance of slang, 
over-familiar language, exaggeration and endearments. It also includes the use of formal 
greetings and forms of address where appropriate. Formal register requires formal structures 
when using, for example, verbs, personal pronouns and possessive adjectives. 
Partially clear/pronunciation may affect clarity of communication: makes speech 
difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is eventually understood)/forces the 
listener to strain to understand what is meant. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
29 
Assessment criteria for the Higher tier – Part 2 
Picture-based task – Higher tier (24 marks) 
There are two mark grids to be applied to this task: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
Picture-based task: communication and content – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–4 ● Responds to set questions with some development, some hesitation and 
some prompting necessary 
● Some effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform in 
response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions with occasional, brief justification 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, occasionally inaccuracies affect 
clarity of communication 
5–8 ● Responds to set questions with frequently developed responses, occasional 
hesitation, occasional prompting necessary 
● Frequently effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform 
in response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions and gives justification with some development 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, inaccuracies are minimal and 
have no impact on clarity of communication 
9–12 ● Responds to set questions with mostly developed and fluent responses, 
minimal hesitation and minimal prompting necessary 
● Predominantly effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and 
inform, in response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions effectively and gives justification which is mostly 
developed  
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible and predominantly accurate  
13–16 ● Responds to the set questions with consistently fluent and developed 
responses 
● Consistently effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and 
inform, in response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions with ease and gives fully-developed justification 
● Pronunciation and intonation are consistently accurate and intelligible 
Additional guidance 
Adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform: adapts language to achieve 
different purposes in the language; students may adapt language more effectively for one 
purpose than another, for example they may use language effectively to inform but less 
effectively to narrate. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
30 
Picture-based task: linguistic knowledge and accuracy – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Some accurate grammatical structures, including some successful 
references to past, present and future events in response to the set 
questions, some ambiguity 
● Responses are partially coherent, errors occur that sometimes hinder clarity 
of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Generally accurate grammatical structures, generally successful references 
to past, present and future events in response to the set questions, 
occasional ambiguity 
● Responses are generally coherent although errors occur that occasionally 
hinder clarity of communication 
5–6 ● Predominantly accurate grammatical structures, mostly successful 
references to past, present and future events in response to the set 
questions 
● Responses are predominantly coherent, errors occur but they rarely hinder 
clarity of communication 
7–8 ● Consistently accurate grammatical structures, successful references to 
past, present and future events in response to the set questions 
● Responses are coherent, any errors do not hinder the clarity of the 
communication 
Additional guidance 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free speech in order to access 
the top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the 
frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example using the locative, dative, ablative cases 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the listener from the content of what is being said. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make speech difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force listeners to strain to understand what is meant, 
for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of time expressions and the verb 
endings 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the listener from the content of what is 
being said. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
31 
Assessment criteria for the Higher tier – Part 3 
Conversation – Higher tier (36 marks) 
There are three mark grids to be applied to this task: 
● communication and content 
● interaction and spontaneity 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
Conversation: communication and content – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Communicates information relevant to the topics and questions, with 
occasionally extended sequences of speech 
● Uses language to produce straightforward ideas, thoughts and opinions with 
occasional justification 
● Uses a limited variety of mainly straightforward vocabulary, communication 
for some purposes is constrained because of restricted range of vocabulary 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, occasionally inaccuracies affect 
clarity of communication 
4–6 ● Communicates information relevant to the topics and questions, with some 
extended sequences of speech 
● Occasionally uses language creatively to express some individual thoughts, 
ideas and opinions, some of which are justified 
● Occasional variety in use of vocabulary, including some examples of 
uncommon language with some variation of expression, fulfils 
most purposes 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, inaccuracies are minimal and 
have no impact on clarity of communication 
7–9 ● Communicates detailed information relevant to the topics and questions, 
usually with extended sequences of speech 
● Frequently uses language creatively to express and justify a variety of 
individual thoughts, ideas and opinions 
● Uses a variety of vocabulary, including frequent use of uncommon language, 
to regularly vary expression for different purposes 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible and predominantly accurate  
10–12 ● Communicates detailed information relevant to the topics and questions, 
consistently extended sequences of speech 
● Consistently uses language creatively to express and justify a wide variety of 
individual thoughts, ideas and opinions 
● Consistently uses a wide variety of vocabulary, including uncommon 
language, to consistently vary expression for different purposes 
● Pronunciation and intonation are consistently accurate and intelligible 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
32 
Additional guidance 
Uses language creatively: examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● manipulating language, including familiar, high-frequency and simple language, to 
respond to unfamiliar/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to maintain 
interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, to 
convince. 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view that go beyond 
the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
Straightforward ideas, thoughts and opinions are those that give the 
minimum/standard/predictable response. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
33 
Conversation: interaction and spontaneity – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Occasionally able to respond spontaneously with some examples of natural 
interaction although often stilted 
● Occasionally able to initiate and develop responses independently but 
regular prompting needed 
● Occasionally able to sustain communication, using rephrasing/repair 
strategies if necessary to continue the flow; frequent hesitation 
4–6 ● Responds spontaneously to some questions, interacting naturally for parts 
of the conversation 
● Sometimes able to initiate and develop the conversation independently, 
some prompting needed 
● Sometimes able to sustain communication, using rephrasing/repair 
strategies if necessary to continue the flow; some hesitation 
7–9 ● Responds to most questions spontaneously, resulting in mostly natural 
interaction 
● Mostly able to initiate and develop the conversation independently 
● Able to sustain communication throughout most of the conversation, using 
rephrasing/repair strategies if necessary to continue the flow, occasional 
hesitation 
10–12 ● Responds spontaneously and with ease to questions, resulting in natural 
interaction 
● Consistently able to initiate and develop the conversation independently 
● Able to sustain communication throughout, using rephrasing/repair 
strategies if necessary to continue the flow 
Additional guidance 
Respond(s) spontaneously: gives a relevant, impromptu response based on what they 
have heard. 
Rephrasing/repair strategies are strategies that aid communication and allow the 
conversation to be sustained, for example rephrasing, circumlocution, adjusting the 
message, asking for clarification/repetition, repair strategies such as self-correction; these 
strategies enable students to deliver the message when exact vocabulary or expressions are 
not known. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
34 
Conversation: linguistic knowledge and accuracy – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Manipulates a limited variety of mainly straightforward grammatical 
structures, minimal use of complex structures 
● Some accurate grammatical structures, some successful references to past, 
present and future events, some ambiguity 
● Sequences of coherent speech although errors occur that often hinder clarity 
of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
4–6 ● Manipulates grammatical structures with occasional variation, complex 
structures used but repetitive 
● Generally accurate grammatical structures, generally successful references to 
past, present and future events 
● Generally coherent speech although errors occur that sometimes hinder 
clarity of communication 
7–9 ● Manipulates a variety of grammatical structures, some variety of complex 
structures 
● Predominantly accurate grammatical structures, mostly successful references 
to past, present and future events 
● Predominantly coherent speech; errors occur but they rarely hinder clarity of 
communication 
10–12 ● Manipulates a wide variety of grammatical structures, frequent use of 
complex structures 
● Consistently accurate grammatical structures, consistently successful 
references to past, present and future events 
● Fully coherent speech; any errors do not hinder the clarity of the 
communication 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● all grammar and structures included in the grammar list that are specific to 
Higher tier GCSE 
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free speech in order to access 
the top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the 
frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example using the locative, dative, ablative cases 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the listener from the content of what is being said. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
35 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make speech difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force listeners to strain to understand what is meant, 
for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of time expressions and the verb 
endings 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the listener from the content of what is 
being said. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
36 
Paper 3: Reading and understanding in Turkish 
Content 
Students are assessed on their understanding of written Turkish across a range of different 
types of texts. 
Students need to: 
● identify the overall message, key points, details and opinions in texts 
● deduce meaning from a variety of written texts 
● recognise the relationship between past, present and future events 
● understand texts, organise and present relevant details, and, where appropriate, draw 
inferences in context and recognise implicit meaning 
● recognise and respond to key information, important themes and ideas in more extended 
written text, including authentic sources, adapted and abridged as appropriate, by being 
able to extract information and answer questions. 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes (see Themes and 
topics). 
Texts for individual questions within the assessment use high-frequency language and vary 
in length, including both short- and longer written passages. Texts include authentic sources 
that introduce more complex language and unfamiliar materials. 
The range of text types include: 
● advertisements, emails, letters, articles and literary texts 
● a short passage to be translated from Turkish into English. 
Literary texts consist of short extracts from texts that may have been adapted and abridged 
from authentic sources to be appropriate to this level – from letters, short stories, novels or 
plays to contemporary and historical sources. Students are also expected to translate a short 
passage of written Turkish into English to demonstrate an ability to transfer meaning 
accurately into English. 
Scenarios in the texts are set either at home or, more frequently, in a Turkish-speaking 
country, allowing students to develop appropriate cultural awareness and understanding. 
To prepare students adequately for this assessment, teachers should present and exploit a 
range of vocabulary relevant to each theme listed, building on the Key Stage 3  
Programme of Study, where appropriate. 
Students should be presented with Turkish language in a range of styles or registers and in a 
variety of different contexts, as appropriate to their age and level of understanding. Students 
should also be presented with different fonts and formats, for example short, printed 
messages, articles and email messages. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
37 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2020. 
● The assessment time is: 
o Foundation tier – 50 minutes in length 
o Higher tier – 1 hour 5 minutes in length. 
● The assessment is out of 50 marks. 
● The assessment consists of 10 questions. 
● Students must answer all questions from each of the three sections. 
● Students are required to respond to questions based on passages of text from a range of 
sources. Each question is set in a context drawn from the themes. 
● Section A has six questions set in English. Question types comprise both multiple-response 
and short-answer open response questions. The instructions to students are in English. 
● Section B contains three questions set in Turkish. The instructions to students are in 
Turkish: 
o for the Foundation tier there are three multiple-response questions 
o for the Higher tier, there are two multiple-response questions and one short-answer 
open-response question. 
● Section C contains one translation passage from Turkish into English. The instructions to 
students are in English. 
● Four of the questions are common to both tiers. 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and mark scheme for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 
1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Turkish Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
38 
Paper 4: Writing in Turkish 
Content 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate effectively through writing in Turkish. 
Students need to: 
● communicate effectively in writing for a variety of purposes across a range of specified 
contexts 
● write short texts, using simple sentences and familiar language accurately to convey 
meaning and exchange information 
● produce clear and coherent text of extended length to present facts and express ideas and 
opinions appropriately for different purposes and in different settings 
● make accurate use of a variety of vocabulary and grammatical structures, including some 
more complex forms, to describe and narrate with reference to past, present and future 
events 
● manipulate the language, using and adapting a variety of structures and vocabulary with 
increasing accuracy and fluency for new purposes, including using appropriate style and 
register 
● make independent, creative and more complex use of the language, as appropriate, to 
note down key points, express and justify individual thoughts and points of view, in order 
to interest, inform or convince 
● translate sentences and short texts from English into the assessed language to convey key 
messages accurately and to apply grammatical knowledge of language and structures in 
context. 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2020. 
● The assessment is out of 60 marks. 
● Each question is set in a context drawn from the themes and topics. The assessment tasks 
feature general content that is familiar and accessible to all students. 
● Students are required to produce responses of varying lengths and types to express facts, 
ideas and opinions in Turkish. 
● The length of each response required and complexity of language increases across the 
paper. Recommended word counts are specified for each question. Students will not be 
penalised for writing more or fewer words than recommended in the word count or for 
going beyond the mandatory bullets. 
● One question is a translation of a short passage from English into Turkish. 
● All assessments are marked against assessment criteria, please see Marking guidance for 
Paper 4: Writing in Turkish. 
● The instructions to students are in Turkish. The question titles appear in English. 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
39 
● Foundation tier 
o The assessment time is 1 hour and 20 minutes in length. 
o The paper consists of three open questions and one translation from English into 
Turkish. 
o Students must answer all questions. 
o Question 1 assesses students on their ability to write to describe and to express 
opinions. 
o Question 2 has two options from which students have to select one. This question 
assesses students on their ability to note down key points and convey information. 
Students must use the formal register, please see the definition in Marking guidance 
for Paper 4: Writing in Turkish. 
o Question 3 has two options from which students have to select one. This question 
assesses students on their ability to convey information, narrate, express opinions, 
interest, and convince the reader about a certain point. Students must use the informal 
register, please see the definition in Marking guidance for Paper 4: Writing in Turkish. 
This question is common to the Higher tier. 
o Question 4 is the translation question. Students are required to translate five sentences 
from English to Turkish. The sentences are ordered by increasing level of difficulty. 
● Higher tier 
o The assessment time is 1 hour and 25 minutes in length. 
o The paper consists of two questions and one translation from English into Turkish. 
o Students must answer all questions. 
o Question 1 has two options from which students have to select one. This question 
assesses students on their ability to convey information, narrate, express opinions, 
interest, and convince the reader about a certain point. Students must use the informal 
register, please see the definition in Marking guidance for Paper 4: Writing in Turkish. 
This question is common to the Foundation tier. 
o Question 2 has two options from which students have to select one. This question 
assesses students on their ability to convey information, narrate, express and justify 
ideas and opinions, and interest or convince the reader. Students must use the formal 
register, please see the definition in Marking guidance for Paper 4: Writing in Turkish. 
o Question 3 is the translation question. Students are required to translate a short 
paragraph from English into Turkish. The individual sentences are ordered by increasing 
level of difficulty. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample question paper and accompanying marking guidance and assessment criteria can 
be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Turkish Sample Assessment 
Materials (SAMs) document. 
Marking guidance and assessment criteria are also provided in this document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
40 
Marking guidance for Paper 4: Writing in Turkish 
This marking guidance is for the use of Pearson-appointed external examiners. The guidance 
has been included for teacher reference to aid understanding of how the assessment criteria 
will be applied. 
General guidance on using levels-based mark schemes 
Step 1 Decide on a band 
● The examiner will first of all consider the answer as a whole and then decide which descriptors 
most closely match the answer and place it in that band. The descriptors for each band 
indicate the different features that will be seen in the student’s answer for that band. 
● When assigning a band they will look at the overall quality of the answer and not focus 
disproportionately on small and specific parts of the answer where the student has not 
performed quite as well as the rest. If the answer covers different aspects of different 
bands of the mark scheme they will use a ‘best fit’ approach for defining the band and then 
use the variability of the response to help decide the mark within the band, for example if 
the response is predominantly band 5–8 with a small amount of band 9–12 material, it 
would be placed in band 5–8 but be awarded a mark near the top of the band because of 
the band 9–12 content. 
Step 2 Decide on a mark 
● Once they have decided on a band they will then need to decide on a mark within the 
band. 
● They will decide on the mark to award based on the quality of the answer; they will award 
a mark towards the top or bottom of that band depending on how the student has 
evidenced each of the descriptor bullet points. 
● They will modify the mark based on how securely the trait descriptors are met at that band. 
● They will need to go back through the answer as they apply the mark scheme to clarify 
points and assure themselves that the band and the mark are appropriate. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
41 
Assessment criteria for the Foundation tier 
Question 1 – Foundation tier (12 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria given in two 
mark grids: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
The student is expected to produce 20–30 words for this task. The number of words is 
approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer words than 
recommended in the word count. All work produced by the student must be marked. 
Question 1: communication and content mark grid – Foundation tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Some relevant, basic information without development 
● Uses language to inform, give short descriptions and express opinions with 
limited success 
● Uses limited selection of common, familiar vocabulary and expression with 
frequent repetition 
3–4 ● Mostly relevant information, minimal extra detail 
● Uses language to give short descriptions, simple information and opinions 
with variable success 
● Uses small selection of common, familiar vocabulary and expression with 
some repetition 
5–6 ● Relevant information with occasional extra detail 
● Uses language to give short descriptions, simple information and opinions 
with some success 
● Uses small selection of common, familiar vocabulary and expression with 
little repetition 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
42 
Question 1: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Foundation tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Produces simple, short sentences in isolation 
● Limited accurate application of a small selection of straightforward 
grammatical structures, limited success in referring to present events; 
frequently errors prevent meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Produces simple, short sentences with little linking 
● Inconsistently accurate application of a small selection of straightforward 
grammatical structures, inconsistently successful reference to present 
events; often errors occur that hinder clarity of communication and 
occasionally 
prevent meaning 
5–6 ● Produces simple sentences with some linking 
● Accurate application of a small selection of straightforward grammatical 
structures, refers successfully to present events as appropriate to the task; 
occasionally errors occur that hinder clarity of communication 
Additional guidance 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: the mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on 
coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example using the locative, dative, ablative cases 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of time expressions and the 
verb endings 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
43 
Question 2 – Foundation tier (16 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria given in two 
mark grids: 
● communication and content  
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
This question requires students to write in a formal style/register (see Additional guidance). 
The student is expected to produce 40–50 words for this task. The number of words is 
approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer words than 
recommended in the word count. All work produced by the student must be marked. 
Question 2: communication and content mark grid – Foundation tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Limited information given likely to consist of single words and phrases 
● Limited ability to use language to present simple facts, inform and note 
down key points; expression is frequently constrained and communication 
often breaks down 
● Repetitive use of a limited selection of common words and phrases; heavy 
reliance on language of the stimulus material to express thoughts 
● Knowledge of register and style is rarely evident because of restricted use 
of vocabulary and expression 
3–4 ● Some brief information given, basic points made without development 
● Occasional success in using language to present simple facts, information 
and to note down key points but expression is sometimes constrained and 
communication occasionally breaks down 
● Limited use of common, familiar vocabulary and expression with frequent 
repetition; some reliance on language of the stimulus material to express 
thoughts 
● Occasional appropriate use of register and style 
5–6 ● Some relevant information given appropriate to the task, basic points made 
with little development 
● Uses language with some success, to present simple facts, information and 
to note down key points, expression is occasionally constrained 
● Uses a small range of, common, familiar vocabulary and expression, mostly 
independently selected, with some repetition; mostly goes beyond the 
language of the stimulus material 
● Mostly appropriate use of register and style, mostly sustained 
7–8 ● Relevant information given appropriate to the task, basic points made with 
some development 
● Uses language mostly with success, to present simple facts, information 
and to note down key points using simple ideas 
● Uses independently selected, common, familiar vocabulary and expression 
with little repetition; goes beyond the language of the stimulus material 
● Appropriate use of register and style sustained 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
44 
Additional guidance 
Independently selected vocabulary and expression: students may use key words from 
the stimulus material but to demonstrate their knowledge of vocabulary and ability to 
express themselves independently they must be able to use vocabulary and expression that 
is not in the stimulus material. 
Register and style definition: formal register and style includes, for example, avoidance 
of slang, over-familiar language, exaggeration, ‘text-speak’, inappropriate colloquialisms or 
writing in a conversational style. Formal register and style require the use of the formal 
structure when using, for example, verbs, personal pronouns and possessive adjectives. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
45 
Question 2: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Foundation tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Repetitive use of minimal selection of straightforward grammatical 
structures 
● Produces individual words/set phrases 
● Limited accuracy in grammatical structures used, limited success in 
referring to present and future events; regular errors prevent meaning 
being conveyed 
3–4 ● Use of a restricted range of straightforward grammatical structures, 
frequent repetition 
● Produces simple, short sentences, which are not linked 
● Occasional accuracy in grammatical structures used, occasional success in 
referring to present and future events; sometimes errors prevent meaning 
being conveyed 
5–6 ● Uses straightforward grammatical structures, some repetition 
● Produces simple, short sentences; minimal linking 
● Some accurate use of straightforward grammatical structures, some 
success in referring to present and future events to meet the requirements 
of the task; occasionally errors prevent meaning being conveyed 
7–8 ● Uses straightforward grammatical structures, occasional repetition 
● Produces predominantly simple sentences occasionally linked together 
● Mostly accurate use of straightforward grammatical structures, mostly 
successful references to present and future events to meet the 
requirements of the task; occasionally errors hinder clarity of 
communication 
Additional guidance 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: the mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on 
coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example using the locative, dative, ablative cases 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of time expressions and the 
verb endings 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
46 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
47 
Question 3 – Foundation tier (20 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria given in two 
mark grids: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
This question contains four bullet points that form part of the task. Failure to cover all four 
bullet points will impact on the marks that can be awarded against the requirements of the 
two mark grids for this question. There is no requirement for even coverage of the bullet 
points in any band. However, in order to access marks in the top band, students must refer 
to all bullet points and meet the other assessment criteria in the top band. 
This question requires students to write in an informal style (see Additional guidance). 
The student is expected to produce 80–90 words for this task. The number of words is 
approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer words than 
recommended in the word count. All work produced by the student must be marked. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
48 
Question 3: communication and content mark grid – Foundation tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Communicates brief information relevant to the task with little development 
● Limited adaptation of language to narrate, inform and interest; 
straightforward personal opinions are given with limited justification 
● Expresses straightforward thoughts and ideas; uses common, familiar 
language with repetition 
● Variable use of appropriate register and style 
4–6 ● Communicates information relevant to the task, with development of the 
occasional key point and idea 
● Some effective adaptation of language to narrate and inform; attempts are 
made to interest and give convincing personal opinions which are 
occasionally successful 
● Expresses mainly straightforward thoughts and ideas with the occasional 
individual thought/idea; some different examples of common, familiar 
language 
● Appropriate use of register and style is evident but with inconsistencies 
7–9 ● Communicates information relevant to the task, with development of some 
key points and ideas 
● Mostly effective adaptation of language to narrate and inform, some 
effective language to interest and give convincing personal opinions 
● Some examples of creative language use to express individual thoughts and 
ideas; a variety of mainly common, familiar language with the occasional 
example of uncommon language 
● Appropriate use of register and style is evident but with occasional 
inconsistency 
10–12 ● Communicates information relevant to the task with expansion of key points 
and ideas 
● Effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest and give 
convincing personal opinions 
● Frequent examples of creative language use to express individual thoughts 
and ideas; a variety of vocabulary and expression, some examples of 
uncommon language 
● Appropriate use of register and style throughout with minimal inconsistency 
Additional guidance 
Creative language use – examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● using language, including familiar, high-frequency and simple language, to respond to 
unfamiliar/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to maintain 
interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, to 
convince. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
49 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view which go 
beyond the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
Register and style definition: informal register and style–examples of informal style 
include colloquial, conversational language that students would use with friends. It also 
requires use of the informal structure when using, for example, verbs, personal pronouns 
and possessive adjectives. 
Adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest and give convincing opinions: 
adapts language to achieve different purposes in the language; students may adapt language 
more effectively for one purpose than another, for example they may use language 
effectively to narrate but less effectively to interest or give a convincing opinion. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
50 
Question 3: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Foundation tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Uses straightforward grammatical structures, some repetition 
● Produces brief, simple sentences, limited linking of sentences 
● Variable accuracy with language and structures, variable success when 
referring to past, present and future events, regular ambiguity; often errors 
prevent meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Uses mostly straightforward grammatical structures, occasional repetition 
● Produces occasionally extended sentences linked with familiar, 
straightforward conjunctions 
● Some accurate language and structures, including some successful 
references to past, present and future events, some ambiguity; often errors 
occur that hinder clarity of communication and occasionally prevent 
meaning being conveyed 
5–6 ● Different examples of straightforward grammatical structures are evident 
● Produces some extended sentences that are linked with familiar, 
straightforward conjunctions 
● Frequently accurate language and structures, including mostly successful 
references to past, present and future events, occasional ambiguity; 
sometimes errors occur that hinder clarity of communication 
7–8 ● Some variation of grammatical structures, occasional complex structure 
● Produces frequently extended sentences, well linked together 
● Generally accurate language and structures, including successful references 
to past, present and future events; occasionally errors occur that hinder 
clarity of communication 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language. 
Straightforward grammatical structures is considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access 
the top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the 
frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example using the locative, dative, ablative cases 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
51 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of time expressions and the 
verb endings 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
52 
Question 4 – Foundation tier (12 marks) 
Translation mark grids 
Mark grid for sentences (a), (b) and (c), which are worth 2 marks each. The mark 
grid will be applied to each individual sentence.  
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1 ● Meaning partially communicated with errors that hinder clarity or prevent 
meaning being conveyed 
2 ● Meaning fully communicated with occasional errors that do not hinder clarity 
 
Mark grid for sentences (d) and (e), which are worth 3 marks each. The mark grid 
will be applied to each individual sentence. 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1 ● Some words are communicated but the overall meaning of the sentence is not 
communicated 
2 ● The meaning of the sentence is partially communicated 
● Linguistic structures and vocabulary are mostly accurate with some errors that 
hinder clarity or prevent meaning being conveyed 
3 ● The meaning of the sentence is fully communicated 
● Linguistic structures and vocabulary are accurate with only occasional errors 
that do not hinder clarity 
Additional guidance 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access 
the top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the 
frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example using the locative, dative, ablative cases 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of time expressions and the 
verb endings 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
53 
Assessment criteria for the Higher tier 
Question 1 – Higher tier (20 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria given in two 
mark grids: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
This question contains four bullet points that form part of the task. Failure to cover all four 
bullet points will impact on the marks that can be awarded against the requirements of the 
two mark grids for this question. There is no requirement for even coverage of the bullet 
points in any band. However, in order to access marks in the top band, students must refer 
to all bullet points and meet the other assessment criteria in the top band. 
This question requires students to write in an informal style (see Additional guidance). 
The student is expected to produce 80–90 words for this task. The number of words is 
approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer words than 
recommended in the word count. All work produced by the student must be marked. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
54 
Question 1: communication and content mark grid – Higher tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Communicates brief information relevant to the task with little development 
● Limited adaptation of language to narrate, inform and interest; straightforward 
personal opinions are given with limited justification 
● Expresses straightforward thoughts and ideas; uses common, familiar language 
with repetition 
● Variable use of appropriate register and style 
4–6 ● Communicates information relevant to the task, with development of the 
occasional key point and idea 
● Some effective adaptation of language to narrate and inform; attempts are 
made to interest and give convincing personal opinions which are 
occasionally successful 
● Expresses mainly straightforward thoughts and ideas with the occasional 
individual thought/idea; some different examples of common, familiar language 
● Appropriate use of register and style is evident but with inconsistencies 
7–9 ● Communicates information relevant to the task, with development of some key 
points and ideas 
● Mostly effective adaptation of language to narrate and inform, some effective 
language to interest and give convincing personal opinions 
● Some examples of creative language use to express individual thoughts and 
ideas; a variety of mainly common, familiar language with the occasional 
example of uncommon language 
● Appropriate use of register and style is evident but with occasional 
inconsistency 
10–12 ● Communicates information relevant to the task with expansion of key points 
and ideas 
● Effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest and give convincing 
personal opinions 
● Frequent examples of creative language use to express individual thoughts and 
ideas; a variety of vocabulary and expression, some examples of uncommon 
language 
● Appropriate use of register and style throughout, with minimal inconsistency 
Additional guidance 
Creative language use: examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● using language, including familiar, high frequency and simple language, to respond to 
unfamiliar/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to maintain 
interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, to 
convince. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
55 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view that go beyond 
the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
Register and style definition: informal register and style – examples of informal style 
include colloquial, conversational language that students would use with friends. It also 
requires use of the informal structure when using, for example, verbs, personal pronouns 
and possessive adjectives. 
Adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest and give convincing opinions: 
adapts language to achieve different purposes in the language; students may adapt language 
more effectively for one purpose than another, for example they may use language 
effectively to narrate but less effectively to interest or give a convincing opinion. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
56 
Question 1: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Higher tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Uses straightforward grammatical structures, some repetition 
● Produces brief, simple sentences, limited linking of sentences 
● Variable accuracy with language and structures, variable success when 
referring to past, present and future events, regular ambiguity; often errors 
prevent meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Uses mostly straightforward grammatical structures, occasional repetition 
● Produces occasionally extended sentences linked with familiar, straightforward 
conjunctions 
● Some accurate language and structures, including some successful references 
to past, present and future events, some ambiguity; often errors occur that 
hinder clarity of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being 
conveyed 
5–6 ● Different examples of straightforward grammatical structures are evident 
● Produces some extended sentences that are linked with familiar, 
straightforward conjunctions 
● Frequently accurate language and structures, including mostly successful 
references to past, present and future events, occasional ambiguity; 
sometimes errors occur that hinder clarity of communication 
7–8 ● Some variation of grammatical structures, occasional complex structure 
● Produces frequently extended sentences, well linked together 
● Generally accurate language and structures, including successful references to 
past, present and future events; occasionally errors occur that hinder clarity of 
communication 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● all grammar and structures included in the grammar list that are specific to  
Higher tier GCSE 
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language. 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access 
the top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the 
frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example using the locative, dative, ablative cases 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
57 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of time expressions and the 
verb endings 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
58 
Question 2 – Higher tier (28 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria contained in 
two mark grids: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
This question contains four bullet points that form part of the task. Failure to cover all four 
bullet points will impact on the marks that can be awarded against the requirements of the 
two mark grids for this question (see below). There is no requirement for even coverage of 
the bullet points in any band. However, in order to access marks in the top band, students 
must refer to all bullet points and meet the other assessment criteria in the top band. 
This question requires students to write in a formal register/style (see Additional guidance). 
The student is expected to produce 130–150 words for this task. The number of words is 
approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer words than 
recommended in the word count. All work produced by the student must be marked. 
Question 2: communication and content mark grid – Higher tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–4 ● Communicates occasionally detailed information relevant to the task with 
occasionally effective development of key points and ideas 
● Some effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest/convince 
● Occasional examples of creative use of language to express individual thoughts, 
ideas and points of view, occasional justification; variety of mainly common, 
familiar language, occasional examples of uncommon language 
● Appropriate use of register and style with the occasional inconsistency 
5–8 ● Communicates some detailed information relevant to the task, frequently 
effective development of key points and ideas 
● Frequently effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest/convince 
● Examples of creative use of language to express some individual thoughts, ideas 
and points of view, some justified; some variation of vocabulary and expression 
with some examples of uncommon language 
● Appropriate use of register and style with few inconsistencies 
9–12 ● Communicates detailed information relevant to the task, with mostly effective 
development of key points and ideas 
● Mostly effective adaptation of language, to narrate, inform, interest/convince 
● Creative use of language to express a range of individual thoughts, ideas and 
points of view, most of which are justified; variety of vocabulary and expression, 
frequent examples of uncommon language 
● Predominantly appropriate use of register and style 
13–16 ● Communicates detailed information relevant to the task, with consistently 
effective development of key points and ideas 
● Consistently effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, 
interest/convince 
● Creative use of language to express and fully justify a wide range of individual 
thoughts, ideas and points of view; wide variety of vocabulary and expression, 
many examples of uncommon language 
● Consistent use of appropriate register and style throughout 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
59 
Additional guidance 
Creative use of language: examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● using language, including familiar, high frequency and simple language, to respond to 
unfamiliar/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to maintain 
interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, to 
convince. 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view that go beyond 
the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
Adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest/convince: adapts language to 
achieve different purposes in the language; students may adapt language more effectively 
for one purpose than another, for example they may use language effectively to narrate but 
less effectively to interest/convince. 
Register and style definition: formal register and style includes, for example, avoidance 
of slang, over-familiar language, exaggeration, ‘text-speak’, inappropriate colloquialisms or 
writing in a conversational style. Formal register and style require the use of the formal 
structure when using, for example, verbs, personal pronouns and possessive adjectives. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
60 
Question 2: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Higher tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Uses a variety of mainly straightforward grammatical structures, occasional 
examples of repetitive complex language 
● Occasional sequences of fluent writing, occasionally extended, well-linked 
sentences 
● Straightforward grammatical structures are largely accurate with occasional 
accurate use of complex language, some successful references to past, present 
and future events but some ambiguity; errors occur that sometimes hinder clarity 
of communication 
4–6 ● Some variation of grammatical structures, including some repetitive instances of 
complex language 
● Prolonged sequences of fluent writing, some extended, well-linked sentences 
● Generally accurate language and structures, frequently successful references to 
past, present and future events, occasional ambiguity; errors occur that 
occasionally hinder clarity of communication 
7–9 ● Uses a variety of grammatical structures including some different examples of 
complex language 
● Predominantly fluent response; frequent extended sentences, mostly well linked 
● Mostly accurate language and structures, mostly successful references to past, 
present and future events; errors occur but they rarely hinder clarity of 
communication 
10–12 ● Uses a wide variety of grammatical structures, including complex language 
● Fluent response throughout with extended, well-linked sentences 
● Consistently accurate language and structures, consistently successful references 
to past, present and future events; any errors do not hinder the clarity of the 
communication 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● all grammar and structures included in the grammar list that are specific to Higher tier 
GCSE 
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language. 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access 
the top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the 
frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
61 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example using the locative, dative, ablative cases 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of time expressions and the 
verb endings 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
62 
Question 3 – Higher tier (12 marks) 
Translation mark grid 
The translation mark grid assesses both communication and content and linguistic knowledge 
and accuracy. When awarding marks, the student’s response across the whole paragraph 
should be considered. 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Meaning of some individual words or phrases is conveyed; frequent 
omissions/incorrectly communicated words and phrases/mother-tongue 
interference 
● Some straightforward structures are accurate but regular errors prevent 
meaning of individual phrases/sentences being conveyed 
4–6 ● The meaning of the passage is partially communicated, some words and phrases 
are omitted/incorrectly communicated 
● Language and structures are accurate in some phrases and sentences but some 
errors prevent meaning being conveyed 
7–9 ● The meaning of the passage is mostly communicated, occasional words are 
omitted/incorrectly communicated 
● Mostly accurate language and structures; errors occur that occasionally hinder 
clarity and in rare instances prevent meaning being conveyed 
10–12 ● The meaning of the passage is fully communicated 
● Consistently accurate language and structures, any errors do not hinder clarity 
Additional guidance 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access 
the top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the 
frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example using the locative, dative, ablative cases 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of time expressions and the 
verb endings 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
63 
Assessment Objectives 
 
Students must: % in GCSE 
AO1 Listening – understand and respond to different types of spoken 
language 
25 
AO2 Speaking – communicate and interact effectively in speech 25 
AO3 Reading – understand and respond to different types of written 
language 
25 
AO4 Writing – communicate in writing 25 
Total 100% 
 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
 
Paper 
Assessment Objectives Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives AO1 % AO2 % AO3 % AO4 % 
Paper 1: Listening and 
understanding in Turkish 
25 0 0 0 25% 
Paper 2: Speaking in Turkish 0 25 0 0 25% 
Paper 3: Reading and 
understanding in Turkish 
0 0 25 0 25% 
Paper 4: Writing in Turkish 0 0 0 25 25% 
Total for GCSE 25% 25% 25% 25% 100% 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
64 
3 Administration and general information 
Entries 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for this qualification can be found in 
our UK Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations officers and is 
available on our website: qualifications.pearson.com 
Discount code and performance tables 
Students taking the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Turkish must take all 
assessments in either the Foundation tier or the Higher tier only. 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more than one GCSE, or other Level 2 
qualifications with the same discount code, will have only the grade for their 'first entry' 
counted for the purpose of the school and college performance tables (please see 
Appendix 6: Codes). For further information about what constitutes 'first entry' and full 
details of how this policy is applied, please refer to the DfE website: 
www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-education 
Students should be advised that if they take two GCSEs with the same discount code, 
schools and colleges they wish to progress to are likely to take the view that this 
achievement is equivalent to only one GCSE. The same view may be taken if students take 
two GCSEs or other Level 2 qualifications that have different discount codes but have 
significant overlap of content. Students or their advisers who have any doubts about their 
subject combinations should check with the institution they wish to progress to before 
embarking on their programmes. 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, 
special consideration and malpractice 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality policy requires all students to 
have equal opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our qualifications 
to be awarded in a way that is fair to every student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the Equality Act 2010) are not, 
when they are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in comparison to 
students who do not share that characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification and that 
this achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their peers. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be available in English, with the exception of specific 
questions in the listening, reading and writing assessments. 
For speaking and writing assessments, all student work must be in Turkish. For listening and 
reading, all student work must follow the instruction provided for the individual question. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
65 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with special 
educational needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to: 
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the assessment. 
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an individual 
student with a disability, without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding bodies comply with the duty under the 
Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students will 
then know what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for assessment. 
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable adjustments 
where a person with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in undertaking an 
assessment. The awarding organisation is required to take reasonable steps to overcome 
that disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be unique to that individual and 
therefore might not be in the list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of factors, 
including: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding 
organisation, or affects timeframes or the security or integrity of the assessment. This is 
because the adjustment is not ‘reasonable’. 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student's mark or grade to 
reflect temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the 
examination/assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a material 
effect on a candidate’s ability to take an assessment or demonstrate their level of attainment 
in an assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to apply for access arrangements 
and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special 
consideration, please refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
66 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that compromises or seeks to 
compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in examinations must be reported to Pearson using a JCQ Form M1 
(available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to Investigations Team, Pearson, 190 High Holborn, 
London, WC1V 7BH. Please provide as much information and supporting documentation as 
possible. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice constitutes staff or centre malpractice. 
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and maladministration of 
our qualifications. As with candidate malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is any act that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the 
integrity of the qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported 
immediately, before any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson on a  
JCQ Form M2(a) (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form, 
supporting documentation and as much information as possible can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to Investigations Team, Pearson, 
190 High Holborn, London, WC1V 7BH. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate 
sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the document 
General and Vocational Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments Policies and Procedures, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice. 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to comply with the requirements of 
Ofqual's General Conditions of Recognition. 
The raw marks for papers 1, 3 and 4 in this qualification will be scaled by Pearson to 
represent the relative weighting of 25% for each paper. 
Foundation and Higher tier 
Paper  Weighting Raw marks Scaling factor Scaling mark 
1 25% 50 1.400 70 
2 25% 70 1.000 70 
3 25% 50 1.400 70 
4 25% 60 1.167 70 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
67 
This GCSE qualification will be graded and certificated on a nine-grade scale from 9 to 1 
using the total subject mark where 9 is the highest grade. Individual papers are not graded. 
For Foundation tier, grades 1–5 are available and for Higher tier, grades 4–9 are available, 
however if the mark achieved is a smaller number of marks below the 4/3 grade boundary, 
then a grade 3 may be awarded. 
The first certification opportunity for this qualification will be 2020. 
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum judged by Pearson to be of 
sufficient standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U result. 
Student recruitment and progression 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this qualification. 
Progression 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Turkish builds on the programme of 
study at Key Stages 2 and 3, focusing on the development of all four language skills, 
listening, speaking, reading and writing. Grammar and the mastering of linguistic features 
are key elements of this specification as is the inclusion of authentic written and spoken 
sources. 
Students will be expected to be able to talk about themselves as well as matters that go 
beyond their immediate experience. They should be able to express and justify their own 
opinions in speech and writing, building on the fluency and spontaneity developed at Key 
Stage 3. 
The skill of translation will be developed from those skills initiated from Key Stage 3. The 
broader range of topics promotes a clear progression in grammar and vocabulary from Key 
Stage 3 and will increase linguistic and cognitive demand. The grammar and vocabulary lists 
illustrate the level required for this qualification. 
This qualification offers a suitable progression route to GCE A Level in Turkish. In addition, 
the study of one language at GCSE can facilitate and help promote the learning of other 
languages. The qualification may also add to an individual’s employability profile. 
Students will be able to apply their knowledge, skills and understanding to authentic, real-life 
contexts. They will develop transferable skills that support higher education study and the 
transition to employment, together with an understanding and appreciation of  
Turkish-speaking countries and their cultures. 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
68 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
69 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Candidate speaking examination record form (CS2) 71 
Appendix 2: Grammar list 72 
Appendix 3: Vocabulary list 76 
Appendix 4: The context for the development of this qualification 131 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 133 
Appendix 6: Codes 134 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
70 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
71 
Appendix 1: Candidate speaking examination record form (CS2) 
A separate form must be submitted for Foundation-tier and Higher-tier candidates. Please indicate the tier below. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 1TU0:       2F/2H*                     (*Please delete as appropriate) 
Centre name:  Centre number:  
 
Candidate name and number Declaration and permissions signature 
and date* 
Role play Picture-
based 
discussion 
Conversation 
(1)                  (2) 
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
Teacher name Declaration and permissions signature 
and date* 
        
            
 
*I declare that the above examinations have been carried out in line with Pearson and JCQ documentation for the conduct of the examinations and agree to 
this work being used to support teachers and examiners. 
Please photocopy and continue on a separate sheet as necessary. Please do not write in shaded boxes – these areas are for Pearson Examiner use 
only. A ‘Word’ version of this form is available on our website to facilitate administration in centres. 
 

 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
72 
Appendix 2: Grammar list 
GCSE students will be expected to have acquired knowledge and understanding of Turkish 
grammar during their course. In the examination they will be required to apply their 
knowledge and understanding, drawing from the following lists. The examples in brackets are 
indicative, not exclusive. For structures marked (R) receptive knowledge only is required. 
Turkish (Foundation tier) 
Nouns 
Types of nouns 
● Proper noun: İstanbul, Kemal... 
● Common noun: insan, hayvan, bitki... 
● Concrete noun: masa, kız... 
● Abstract noun: bağımsızlık, özgürlük... 
● Singular noun: kalem, dolap... 
● Plural noun: kuzular, bebekler... 
● Collective nouns: sürü, alay 
● Diminutive nouns: kızcağız, evceğiz 
Cases of nouns 
● Nominative: ev 
● Accusative (objective case): evi 
● Dative: eve 
● Locative: evde 
● Ablative: evden 
● Possessive (genitive) case (of) evin 
Construction of nouns 
● Simple noun: oda, kitap 
● Derived noun: başlık, başkanlık 
● Compound noun: balıkadam, devetabanı 
Pronouns 
● Personal pronoun: ben, sen, o... 
● Reflective pronoun: kendi, kendin... 
● Demonstrative pronoun: bu, şu, bunlar... 
● Indefinite pronoun: kimseye, hiçbirine... 
● Interrogative pronoun: kim, ne, nereye... 
● Possessive pronoun: benim, benimki 
Pronoun suffixes 
● Possessive suffix: benim, kitabınızı... 
● Personal suffix: geldim, gelmişim, gideyim, gitsin... 
● Pronominal suffix: ondaki, seninki… 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
73 
Adjectives 
1. Qualificative (defining) adjectives: uzun, kısa, zengin... 
2. Determinative adjectives 
o Demonstrative adjective: bu, şu, o... 
o Interrogative adjective: kaç, ne kadar, hangi... 
o Numeral adjective: iki, birer, birinci, yüzde bir... 
o Indefinite (nondefining) adjective: birçok, birkaç... 
3. Construction of adjectives 
o Simple adjective: beyaz, uzun... 
o Compound adjective: yurtsever, zeytinyağlı, açıkgöz... 
o Derived adjective: kuvvetli, çalışkan, köylü... 
o Intensive adjective: bembeyaz, kıpkırmızı, beyaz beyaz... 
o Multiplex adjective: şekerli, pişmiş 
o Position and order: birinci, ikinci 
Comparative adjectives: daha, daha çok 
Superlative adjectives: en güzel 
Adverbs 
● Adverb of manner: birdenbire, böyle, şöyle 
● Adverb of place: ileri, dışarı... 
● Adverb of quality: istemeye istemeye uyudu, tertemiz, mutlaka... 
● Adverb of quantity: az, çok... 
● Adverb of time: bugün, yazın... 
Construction of adverbs 
● Simple adverb: iyi, dün... 
● Compound adverb: akşamüstü, ilkönce... 
● Repetitive adverb: sabah sabah 
● Interrogative adverb: niçin?, neden?... 
● Derived adverb: ilkin, sabahleyin 
● Comparative adverbs: kadar, gibi 
● Superlative adverbs: en, daha 
Particles 
gibi, için, kadar, ile, -a ait, -a doğru, -e göre, -in için, -den başka... 
Conjunction 
aksi halde, yoksa, ama, ayrıca, üstelik, dahi, bu nedenle, çünkü, demek ki, eğer, oysa, 
halbuki, bununla beraber, ancak, mademki, veya, yine de, ki, hem... hemde, ne... ne, de... 
de, ya... ya, ve... 
Interjection 
Aferin! Ah! Ay! Aman! Eyvah! Haydi! Eh! Yok Canım! Yaşasın! Yazık! Vah! Yahu! Sakın! 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
74 
Verbs 
Indicative 
● Past definite: aldım... 
● Past indefinite: almışım... 
● Present continuous: alıyorum... 
● Simple Present: alırım... 
● Future: alacağım... 
Subjunctive 
● Optative: alayım... 
● Desiderative: alsam... 
● Necessitative: almalıyım... 
● Imperative: alsın, almalısın... 
Compound tense 
geldiydim (R), gelmiştim, geliyordum, gelirdim, gelecektim, gelmeliydim... 
Conditional 
gelseydim, gelirsem, gelsem, geleydim 
Voice 
● Active verb: gelmek, gitmek... 
● Passive verb: sevilmek, alınmak... 
● Reciprocal verb (R): koşuşmayın, dövüşmüşler... 
● Reflexive verb: yıkanmak, sevinmek… 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
75 
Turkish (Higher tier) 
All grammar and structures listed for Foundation tier, as well as: 
Verbs 
Conditional 
geldiysem, gelmişsem, geliyorsam, gelirsem, geleceksem, gelmeliysem… 
Accelerative verbs 
getirivermek, götürüvermek 
Continuative verbs 
uyuyakalmak, bakakalmak 
Causative verbs 
güldürmek, dinletmek 
Verbalia 
● Infinitive: aldırmak, gitme zamanı, yerleşmeye, gidişine... 
● Participle: -acak/-ecek (yakacak odun/görecek gün), -mış (susamış çocuk), -an/-en 
(kırılan bacağım/gelen adam), -maz/-mez (utanmaz adam/tükenmez kalem) ... 
● Gerund: -a (on kala uyanırım), (-acağı yerde), - eli beri... sessizce... koşarak, görünce 
● Since: -li beri, -liden beri 
● Rather than - mektense – maktansa 
● Unless: -dikçe, -dükçe 
Narrative 
gitmiştim, gidiyormuşum, gidermişim, gidecekmişiz, gitmeliymişim, gideymişim, gitseymişim 
Voice 
● Factitive verb: açtırmak, diktirmek, okutturmak... 
● Participle: ası (eli kırılasıca), - dık (tanıdık yüz) 
● Gerund: -a... (-e... -e) (Kendini öve öve bitiremiyor), -acağına (Perhiz yapacağına ne 
bulsa yiyor.) Hasta olduğu halde okula gitti. Evlendi evleneli buraya gelmez oldu. Odanı 
istediğin biçimde düzeltebilirsin. 
● Anacoluthon (R): ağır ağır çıkacaksın bu merdivenlerden...  
● Parenthesis sentence: isterse, ummam ya, sana yardım edebilir… 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
76 
Appendix 3: Vocabulary list 
The following vocabulary list is intended to assist teachers in planning their work. It provides 
the core generic vocabulary that all students will need to acquire. It is an essential 
vocabulary list that students should refer to and build on when preparing for the duration of 
their study for the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Turkish. 
However, students entered for the Foundation tier are required to understand and respond to 
common or familiar words and/or forms of words that are not on the vocabulary list. 
Similarly, students entered for the Higher tier are required to understand and respond to 
common or familiar words and/or forms of words that are not on the vocabulary list and 
which are less common or familiar than those used in relation to Foundation-tier 
assessments. 
Word lists 
Section 1: High-frequency language 
● Common verbs 
● Common adjectives 
● Common adverbs 
● Prepositions 
● Colours 
● Numbers 
● Ordinal numbers 
● Quantities and measures 
● Some useful connecting words 
● Time expressions 
● Times of day 
● Days of the week 
● Months and seasons of the year 
● Question words 
● Other useful expressions 
● Other high-frequency words 
● Countries 
● Continents 
● Nationalities 
● Areas/mountains/seas 
● Useful acronyms 
● Social conventions 
● Language used in dialogue and messages 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
77 
Section 2: Topic-specific language 
Although words are listed under specific topic headings, the words are not exclusive to those 
particular headings. Many words also relate to other themes but may be listed in only one 
theme. Many common verbs are given in the verb list, with a few others included under a 
specific topic. 
Each topic has been highlighted in bold. 
All topics must be studied in the context of both the student’s home country and 
that of countries and communities where Turkish is spoken. 
 
Theme 1: Identity and culture 
Who am I?: relationships; when I was younger; what my friends and family are like; what 
makes a good friend; interests; socialising with friends and family; role models 
Daily life: customs and everyday life; food and drink; shopping; social media and 
technology (use of, advantages and disadvantages) 
Cultural life: celebrations and festivals; reading; music; sport; film and television 
 
Theme 2: Local area, holiday and travel 
Holidays: preferences, experiences and destinations 
Travel and tourist transactions: travel and accommodation; asking for help and dealing 
with problems; directions; eating out; shopping 
Town, region and country: weather; places to see; things to do 
 
Theme 3: School 
What school is like: school types; school day; subjects; rules and pressures; 
celebrating success 
School activities: school trips; events and exchanges 
 
Theme 4: Future aspirations, study and work 
Using languages beyond the classroom: forming relationships; travel; employment 
Ambitions: further study; volunteering; training 
Work: jobs; careers and professions 
 
Theme 5: International and global dimension 
Bringing the world together: sports events; music events; campaigns and good causes 
Environmental issues: being ‘green’; access to natural resources 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
78 
Section 1: High-frequency language 
Common verbs 
to accept kabul etmek 
to adore hayran olmak 
to agree, accept aynı fikirde olmak, kabul etmek 
to apply (for) başvurmak 
to argue tartışmak 
to ask sormak 
to ask (for something) bir şey istemek 
to attach iliştirmek, eklemek 
to avoid kaçınmak, önlemek 
to babysit bebek bakmak 
to bath banyo yapmak 
to be born doğmak  
to be called isimlendirilmek, adlandırılmak 
to be ill; to hurt hasta olmak; acımak, acıtmak, yaralamak 
to be in a good/bad mood iyi/kötü ruh halinde olmak 
to be in form formunda olmak 
to be interested in ilgilenmek 
to be missing özlemek 
to be situated yer almak 
to become haline gelmek, olmak 
to believe inanmak 
to be used to alışmak 
to book yer ayırmak 
to bring back; to take back geri getirmek; geri almak 
to build inşa etmek 
to buy satın almak 
to calculate hesaplamak 
to cancel iptal etmek 
to carry taşımak 
to celebrate kutlamak 
to change (train, bus etc.) aktarma yapmak 
to chat sohbet etmek 
to check kontrol etmek 
to choose seçmek 
to clean temizlemek 
to clear away kaldırıp götürmek 
to click (ict) tıklamak 
to climb tırmanmak 
to close kapatmak 
to collect toplamak, biriktirmek 
to come gelmek 
to comment yorum yapmak 
to complain şikayet etmek 
to congratulate tebrik etmek 
to consider dikkate almak, hesaba katmak 
to contact temas etmek, bağlantı kurmak 
to continue/carry on devam etmek, sürdürmek, sürmek 
to convince ikna etmek 
to cook pişirmek 
to copy kopyalamak 
to correct yanlışı düzeltmek 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
79 
Common verbs (continued) 
to cost değerinde olmak, mal olmak 
to cross, go across karşıya geçmek 
to cry ağlamak 
to cut kesmek 
to dance dans etmek, oynamak 
to decide karar vermek 
to deny inkar etmek, yalanlamak 
to depart ayrılmak, yola çıkmak 
to describe tasvir etmek, tanımlamak, betimlemek, anlatmak 
to die ölmek 
to discuss tartışmak, görüşmek, müzakere etmek 
to do yapmak 
to do a course kurs yapmak 
to do cleaning     temizlik yapmak 
to do gymnastics cimnastik yapmak 
to do sport spor yapmak 
to do the washing up bulaşık yıkamak 
to download indirmek (bilgisayar) 
to dream hayal etmek, rüya görmek 
to draw çizmek 
to drink içmek 
to drive sürmek 
to drop in uğramak 
to dust toz almak 
to earn para kazanmak 
to eat yemek yemek 
to enable etkinleştirmek 
to end bitirmek, bitmek 
to enjoy hoşa gitmek, eğlenmek, zevk almak, hoşlanmak 
to enter/go in giriş yapmak, girmek 
to erase, delete silmek 
to exchange değiştirmek, bozdurmak 
to explain açıklamak 
to fail başaramamak, başarısız olmak 
to fall düşmek 
to fall asleep uykuya dalmak, uyuya kalmak 
to feed, nourish beslemek, doyurmak, bakmak, büyütmek 
to feel hissetmek 
to fill doldurmak 
to find bulmak 
to find out öğrenmek, keşfetmek 
to fine ceza kesmek/yazmak 
to finish bitirmek 
to fish/to go fishing balık tutmak / balık tutmaya gitmek 
to fit into (a place) sığmak 
to fly uçmak 
to follow takip etmek 
to forget unutmak 
to forgive affetmek 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
80 
Common verbs (continued) 
to gather toplanmak 
to get angry kızmak 
to get dressed giyinmek 
to get in/on (bus, car, train) bir araca binmek (otobüs, araba, tren) 
to get off (bus, car, train) araçtan inmek (otobüs, araba, tren) 
to get undressed giysileri üzerinden çıkarmak, soyunmak 
to get up kalkmak 
to give vermek 
to give back geri vermek 
to go gitmek 
to go down aşağıya doğru gitmek/inmek 
to go for a walk yürüyüşe çıkmak 
to go out dışarı gitmek  
to go shopping alışverişe gitmek 
to go to bed yatağa, yatmaya gitmek 
to go up yukarı çıkmak 
to grow büyümek, yetişmek 
to guarantee garanti etmek, güvence vermek 
to hang (e.g something on the wall)  (örn. bir şeyi duvara) asmak  
to harm/damage zarar vermek 
to hate nefret etmek 
to have a picnic piknik yapmak 
to have breakfast kahvaltı yapmak 
to have lunch öğle yemeği yemek 
to have dinner/supper akşam yemeği yemek 
to hear duymak 
to help yardım etmek 
to hesitate çekinmek 
to hike uzun yürüyüş yapmak 
to hire kiralamak 
to hit vurmak 
to hold tutmak 
to hope umut etmek 
to hurry acele etmek 
to improve gelişmek, ilerlemek 
to inform bildirmek, bilgilendirmek 
to intend niyet etmek, kastetmek 
to interest ilgilendirmek 
to introduce (a person) birini tanıtmak/tanıştırmak 
to invite davet etmek, çağırmak 
to iron ütülemek 
to jump atlamak 
to justify doğrulamak, haklı çıkarmak, savunmak 
to knock vurmak, kapı çalmak 
to knock over çarpmak, çarpıp devirmek 
to know bilmek 
to know how to nasıl yapıldığını bilmek 
to land konmak, (havadan) yere inmek 
to last sürmek (zaman), devam etmek, dayanmak 
to laugh gülmek  
to learn öğrenmek 
to leave terk etmek, ayrılmak 
to leave (behind) bir şeyi bir yerde unutup gitmek 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
81 
Common verbs (continued) 
to lie yalan söylemek 
to lie down uzanmak 
to light, turn/switch on ışığı yakmak, bir aleti çalıştırmak 
to like beğenmek 
to listen dinlemek 
to live yaşamak 
to look after/mind (child, dog) birine (bir çocuğa, yaşlıya) bakmak 
to look for aramak 
to lose kaybetmek 
to love sevmek 
to manage (business) (bir işi) yönetmek, idare etmek 
to mean/to signify ifade etmek, anlamına gelmek 
to meet buluşmak, tanışmak 
to miss (appointment, train etc) kaçırmak, yetişememek (randevu, tren vs.) 
to move house taşınmak 
to notice fark etmek 
to offer teklif etmek 
to open açmak 
to order sipariş vermek 
to organise düzenlemek 
to pack (cases) bavul toplamak, hazırlamak 
to park arabayı park etmek 
to participate, to join in katılmak 
to pass geçmek 
to pay ödemek 
to pay attention dikkat etmek 
to phone telefon etmek 
to play  oynamak 
to play cards  iskambil oynamak  
to play chess satranç oynamak 
to pop in/go in uğramak, içeri girmek 
to possess sahip olmak 
to practise uygulamak, pratik yapmak 
to prefer tercih etmek 
to present takdim etmek, sunmak 
to prevent önlemek 
to print out yazdırmak 
to produce üretmek 
to pronounce telaffuz etmek 
to protect korumak 
to put koymak 
to put back geri koymak 
to read okumak 
to receive almak (gönderilen birşeyi) 
to recommend tavsiye etmek, önermek 
to recycle geri dönüştürmek 
to refund geri ödemek 
to regret, be sorry pişman olmak, üzgün olmak 
to remain kalmak, durmak, olduğu gibi durmak 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
82 
Common verbs (continued) 
to remember hatırlamak, anımsamak 
to repair tamir etmek, onarmak 
to repeat tekrarlamak 
to replace yenisiyle değiştirmek, yerini almak 
to reply cevap/yanıt vermek 
to research araştırma yapmak 
to reserve yer ayırtmak 
to rest dinlenmek 
to return; to go back geri dönmek/gitmek 
to revise tekrarlamak, gözden geçirmek 
to ride (a bicycle, motorcycle) sürmek 
to ride a horse atı sürmek, ata binmek 
to ring (a bell) (zil) çalmak 
to row kürek çekmek 
to run koşmak 
to sail yelkenle açılmak 
to save biriktirmek, saklamak, kurtarmak 
to say söylemek 
to see görmek 
to seem görünmek 
to sell satmak 
to send göndermek 
to serve hizmet etmek, servis yapmak 
to set the table sofrayı kurmak 
to share paylaşmak 
to show göstermek 
to sign imzalamak 
to sing şarkı söylemek 
to sit oturmak 
to sit (an exam) sınava girmek 
to skate paten kaymak 
to ski kaymak, kayak yapmak 
to skive/to skip/bunk lessons okuldan kaçmak/ okulu kırmak 
to sleep uyumak 
to smell kokmak 
to smile gülümsemek 
to smoke sigara içmek, fümelemek 
to socialise sosyalleşmek 
to solve (a problem) (bir problemi) çözmek 
to sort/separate (e.g. rubbish) (örn. çöp) ayırmak, ayrıştırmak 
to speak konuşmak 
to spend (money) (para) harcamak 
to spend (time) (zaman) geçirmek 
to spread yaymak, yayılmak 
to stand ayakta durmak 
to stand up ayağa kalkmak 
to steal çalmak 
to stop durmak, durdurmak 
to stroll, go for a walk dolaşmak, yürüyüşe çıkmak 
to study (a subject) (ders) çalışmak 
to suggest önermek 
to sunbathe güneşlenmek, güneş banyosu yapmak 
to support desteklemek 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
83 
Common verbs (continued) 
to surf the net internette dolaşmak 
to swim yüzmek 
to switch off (elektriği) söndürmek, kapatmak  
to take almak 
to take off (clothes etc) üstünden (giysileri vs.) çıkarmak 
to take off (plane) uçağın kalkması 
to taste tatmak, tadına bakmak 
to teach öğretmek 
to telephone telefon etmek 
to tell/recount anlatmak, hikâye etmek, yeniden saymak 
to tell/to say anlatmak, söylemek 
to thank teşekkür etmek 
to think (about) (bir şey hakkında) düşünmek  
to throw fırlatmak, atmak 
to throw away atmak 
to tidy toplamak, düzenlemek 
to touch dokunmak 
to train eğitim almak 
to translate tercüme etmek 
to travel seyahat etmek, yolculuk yapmak 
to try denemek, uğraşamak 
to type yazmak  
to understand anlamak 
to unpack (a case) bavulu boşaltmak 
to upload uzaktan bilgisayara yüklemek 
to use kullanmak 
to vacuum elektrik süpürgesiyle süpürmek 
to visit (place, person) (bir yeri, birini) ziyaret etmek 
to volunteer gönüllü olmak 
to wait for beklemek 
to wake up uyanmak 
to walk yürümek 
to want istemek 
to warn uyarmak 
to wash yıkamak 
to wash (clothes) çamaşır yıkamak 
to watch izlemek, gözlemek 
to water sulamak 
to wear giymek 
to weigh (have weight) kiloda olmak    
to weigh (something) (bir şeyi) tartmak 
to weight ağırlık yapmak, ağırlığı olmak 
to whisper fısıldamak 
to win kazanmak 
to wish istemek, dilemek 
to work çalışmak 
to write yazmak 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
84 
Common adjectives 
active hareketli, etken 
alike; the same benzer 
any sort of herhangi bir çeşit 
bad kötü 
better daha iyi 
big, large büyük, geniş 
boring sıkıcı 
cheap ucuz  
clean temiz 
complicated karışık, karmaşık 
cosy rahat, sıcak, samimi 
crowded kalabalık 
dangerous tehlikeli 
dark (colour) koyu (renk) 
dirty kirli 
easy kolay 
entertaining eğlendirici 
every her 
excellent mükemmel 
exciting  heyecanlı 
expensive pahalı 
fair (just) adil 
famous ünlü, meşhur 
fashionable moda 
fast hızlı 
fat şişman 
favourite favori, en çok beğenilen 
foreign yabancı 
former önceki 
fortunate şanslı 
free (at no cost) bedava 
free (unoccupied, available) boş, kullanılmayan 
friendly arkadaş canlısı, arkadaşça 
frightening korkutucu 
full dolu 
fun; amusing eğlenceli 
funny (comical) komik 
generous cömert 
good iyi 
good (well behaved) terbiyeli 
grateful minnettar 
great harika 
happy mutlu 
hard (not soft) sert (yumuşak olmayan) 
hard (difficult) zor 
hardworking çalışkan 
harmful zararlı 
healthy (food/way of life) sağlıklı (yiyecek/ yaşam tarzı) 
heavy ağır 
high; tall (building) yüksek (bina) 
honest dürüst 
hot sıcak 
huge büyük, kocaman 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
85 
Common adjectives (continued) 
ideal ideal, ülkü, mükemmel 
ill  hasta  
important önemli 
in a good mood keyifli, neşeli 
independent bağımsız  
intelligent; clever zeki, akıllı  
interesting ilginç 
jolly, happy neşeli, mutlu 
kind çeşit 
last son, geçen 
lazy tembel 
light (colour) açık (renk) 
light (weight) hafif 
long uzun 
lost kayıp 
loud yüksek (ses) 
magnificent muhteşem 
main ana 
marvellous harika 
modern modern, çağdaş 
narrow dar 
naughty yaramaz 
necessary, needed gerekli, lüzumlu 
negative olumsuz 
new yeni 
next gelecek 
nice; likeable hoş, sevilen 
noisy gürültülü 
normal normal 
old yaşlı 
older daha yaşlı 
old (former) önceki, eski 
old fashioned modası geçmiş 
open açık 
optimistic iyimser 
original özgün, orijinal 
other diğer 
patient (im-) sabırlı (sabırsız) 
peaceful huzurlu, sakin 
pessimistic iyimser 
pleasant, nice hoş, güzel 
pleased memnun 
polite (im-) kibar (kaba) 
poor fakir 
popular popüler, beğenilen 
positive olumlu 
practical pratik 
pretty güzel 
quiet sessiz 
ready hazır 
real gerçek 
reasonable makul, mantıklı, akıllıca 
recent en son, yakında olmuş 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
86 
Common adjectives (continued) 
reliable güvenilir 
responsible sorumlu 
rich zengin 
sad kederli 
safe emniyetli 
same aynı 
selfish bencil 
serious ciddi 
short kısa 
short (person) kısa boylu (kişi) 
silent sessiz 
silly aptal, budala 
situated yerleşmiş, bulunan 
slow yavaş 
small küçük 
soft yumuşak 
splendid harika 
strange garip, tuhaf 
strict sert, titiz 
strong kuvvetli 
suitable uygun 
surprised şaşırmış 
talkative konuşkan 
terrible berbat 
thin, slim ince, zayıf 
tired yorgun 
traditional geleneksel 
typical tipik 
ugly çirkin 
unfair haksız, adaletsiz 
unhappy mutsuz 
unhealthy sağlıksız 
unique eşsiz 
unpleasant hoş olmayan, nahoş, tatsız 
useful yararlı 
useless yararsız 
valuable değerli 
various çeşitli 
weak zayıf 
well known, famous tanınmış ünlü 
wet ıslak 
wise akıllı, tedbirli, bilge, tecrübeli 
wonderful harika 
worse daha kötü 
young genç 
younger daha genç 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
87 
Common adverbs 
(for) a long time uzun zamandan beri 
again tekrar 
almost hemen hemen 
already zaten, halen, şimdiden 
also aynı zamanda 
always daima 
approximately yaklaşık olarak 
badly kötü bir şekilde 
better daha iyi 
cheap(ly) ucuzca 
completely tamamen 
constantly/continuously sürekli 
down (there) aşağıda 
earlier daha evvel 
early erken 
especially özellikle 
everywhere her yerde 
fairly; quite oldukça 
fortunately/(un-) neyse ki, şans eseri/(maalesef, ne yazık ki) 
hardly zorla, güçlükle, hemen hemen 
here burada, buraya 
inexpensive(ly) ucuzca 
later daha sonra 
loud(ly) yüksek sesle 
never asla 
normally çoğunlukla, normalde 
not yet henüz değil 
nowhere hiçbir yerde 
often sık sık 
only, just sadece 
over there orada 
perhaps belki 
possibly mümkün 
quick(ly) çabuk, çabucak, çabukça 
rarely arada sırada 
rather oldukça, -den çok, tercih etmek 
recently son zamanlarda 
regularly düzenli olarak 
similarly benzer şekilde 
simply basit olarak 
slowly yavaşca 
sometimes bazen 
somewhere herhangi bir yerde 
soon yakında 
still hala 
straight away hemen 
there orada, oraya 
together birlikte 
too de, da 
up (there) yukarıda 
usually genellikle, 
very çok 
well iyi 
worse daha kötü 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
88 
Prepositions 
about hakkında 
after sonra 
among arasında 
around etrafında, yaklaşık 
at -de, -da 
at (someone’s house) (birisinin evin)-de 
at the back arkada 
because of nedeniyle/sebebiyle, yüzünden 
before önce 
behind arkasında 
between arasında 
far from -den uzakta 
from -den -dan 
in içinde 
in front of önünde 
in the background arka planda 
in the foreground ön planda 
in the middle (of) -nin ortasında 
near (to) yanında, yakınında, -e yakın 
next to bitişiğinde 
on  üstünde; -de, -da 
onto üstüne, üstünde 
opposite karşısında, karşıt, zıt 
outside dışarıda 
through boyunca, içinden, bir yanından öbür yanına 
to -e,-a/-ye,-ya 
towards -e doğru 
under altında 
until -e kadar 
with ile 
Colours 
black siyah 
blue (dark) lacivert, koyu mavi 
blue (light) açık mavi 
brown kahverengi 
chestnut brown kestane rengi 
dark koyu 
green yeşil 
grey gri 
grey (hair) kır (saç) 
light açık 
orange turuncu, portakal rengi 
pink pembe 
purple mor, eflatun 
red kırmızı 
red (hair) kızıl 
white beyaz 
yellow sarı 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
89 
Numbers 
1 bir 
2 iki 
3 üç 
4 dört 
5 beş 
6 altı 
7 yedi 
8 sekiz 
9 dokuz 
10 on 
11 on bir 
12 on iki 
13 on üç 
14 on dört 
15 on beş 
16 on altı 
17 on yedi 
18 on sekiz 
19 on dokuz 
20 yirmi 
21 yirmi bir 
22 yirmi iki 
23 yirmi üç 
24 yirmi dört 
25 yirmi beş 
26 yirmi altı 
27 yirmi yedi 
28 yirmi sekiz 
29 yirmi dokuz 
30 otuz 
31 otuz bir 
32 etc otuz iki vs. 
40 kırk 
50 elli 
60 altmış 
70 yetmiş 
80 seksen 
90 doksan 
100 yüz 
101 yüz bir 
120 yüz yirmi 
200 iki yüz 
1000 bin 
1100 bin yüz 
2000 iki bin 
1.000.000 bir milyon 
2.000.000 iki milyon 
1.000.000.000 bir milyar 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
90 
Ordinal numbers 
first birinci 
second ikinci 
third üçüncü 
fourth dördüncü 
fifth beşinci 
sixth altıncı 
seventh yedinci 
eighth sekizinci 
ninth dokuzuncu 
tenth onuncu 
eleventh onbirinci 
twelfth yirminci 
twenty first yirmi birinci 
Quantities and measures 
a bottle bir şişe 
a box bir kutu 
a few bir kaç tane 
a jar  bir kavanoz 
a kilo bir kilo 
a litre bir litre 
a little biraz 
a lot çok 
a packet bir paket 
a piece bir parça 
a slice bir dilim 
about a hundred yaklaşık yüz 
centimetre santimetre 
enough yeterli 
gramme gram 
half yarım 
kilometre kilometre 
less daha az 
majority çoğunluk 
many birçok 
metre metre 
more daha 
not much/not many çok fazla değil 
percent(age) yüzde 
quantity nicelik, miktar 
quarter çeyrek 
several birçok 
some bazı 
third üçüncü, üçte 
too  dahi, de, da 
weight ağırlık 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
91 
Some useful connecting words 
also dahi, de, da 
although rağmen 
and ve 
as, since -den beri 
because çünkü 
because of yüzünden  
but ama 
either… or… ya …  ya da … 
even bile 
even though …rağmen 
finally sonunda 
first of all herşeyden önce 
from the viewpoint of bakış açısı 
however ama, bununla birlikte, ancak 
if eğer 
in order to -mek için, -mek amacıyla 
in terms of açısından, bakımından 
it is obvious açıkça, aşikâr 
moreover ayrıca, bundan başka 
neither… nor… ne … ne de … 
or yoksa 
perhaps belki 
so bu yüzden, bundan dolayı 
then sonra 
then, next ondan/daha sonra 
therefore bundan dolayı 
this is, here is burada 
whether, if -meyip ... -mediği ... , -mek veya -memek 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
92 
Time expressions 
a moment ago az önce 
after sonra 
already zaten 
always daima 
as soon as -olur -olmaz 
at night geceleyin 
at the same time aynı zamanda 
at the start başlangıçta 
before önce 
day gündüz 
day (24 hours) gün 
day off boş gün (tatil günü) 
during esnasında 
early erken 
evening akşamleyin 
every day her gün 
fortnight on beş gün 
from -den 
from time to time zaman zaman 
hour saat 
immediately derhâl 
in the afternoon öğleden sonra 
in the evening akşamleyin 
in the morning sabahleyin 
in the night geceleyin 
last night (during the night) dün gece (gece esnasında) 
last night (yesterday evening) dün gece (dün akşam) 
late geç 
later daha sonra 
midday öğle  
midnight gece yarısı 
minute dakika 
morning sabah 
night gece 
now şimdi 
on time zamanında 
once bir kez 
once, one day bir defasında, bir gün 
period süre 
since -den beri 
soon yakında 
the day after tomorrow öbür gün, yarından sonra 
the day before yesterday önceki gün, dünden önce 
the day/night before bir gün/gece önce 
the next day; following day yarın, ertesi gün, daha sonraki gün 
time zaman, vakit 
today bugün 
tomorrow yarın 
twice iki kez 
week hafta 
weekend hafta sonu 
what is the time? saat kaç? 
year/s yıl/yıllar 
yesterday dün 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
93 
Times of day 
1 a.m. sabah 1 
1 p.m. öğleden sonra 1 
nine o’clock in the evening akşam dokuz 
13.00 13.00 
at exactly 2 o’clock saat tam ikide 
at about… o’clock saat……sıralarında/sularında 
it is five past three (saat) üçü beş geçiyor 
five to three (saat) üçe beş var 
half past nine (saat) dokuz buçuk 
ten past four (saat) dördü on geçiyor 
ten to four (saat) dörde on var 
quarter to six (saat) altıya çeyrek var 
quarter past seven (saat) yediyi çeyrek geçiyor 
Days of the week 
Monday pazartesi 
Tuesday salı 
Wednesday çarşamba 
Thursday perşembe 
Friday cuma 
Saturday cumartesi 
Sunday pazar 
(on) Monday pazartesi günü 
(on) Monday morning pazartesi sabahı 
(on) Monday evening pazartesi akşamı 
on Mondays pazartesi günleri 
every Monday her pazartesi 
Months and seasons of the year 
month ay 
January ocak 
February şubat 
March mart 
April nisan 
May mayıs 
June haziran 
July temmuz 
August ağustos 
September eylül 
October ekim 
November kasım 
December aralık 
season mevsim 
autumn (in) sonbahar/güz 
spring (in) ilkbahar 
summer (in) yaz 
winter (in) kış 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
94 
Question words 
(at) what time? saat kaçta? 
from where? nereden? 
how much, how many? kaç tane, ne kadar? 
how? nasıl? 
to there? oraya mı? 
to where? nereye? 
what colour? ne renk? 
what is it like? ne gibi, neye benzer? 
what/which? ne/hangisi? 
what? ne? 
when? ne zaman 
where? nereye? 
who? kim? 
why? neden, niçin? 
Other useful expressions 
all the better daha iyi 
false (this is) sahte 
finally, ultimately sonunda, nihayet, eninde sonunda 
good luck iyi şanslar 
great! harika! 
here is/are buyurun 
how do I get (to)? (-ya/-ye) nasıl gidebilirim? 
how do you spell that? bunun harflerini söyler misin? 
I don’t know bilmiyorum 
I don’t mind farketmez 
I don’t understand anlamıyorum 
if only keşke 
I like it (onu) beğendim, beğenirim 
I’m fine; it’s OK iyiyim; her şey yolunda 
I’ve had enough yeter artık! 
in my opinion bence, fikrimce, benim fikrime göre 
in my view bana göre, benim bakış açıma göre 
it annoys me o canımı sıkıyor 
it depends ona bağlı 
it doesn’t matter sorun değil 
it makes me laugh o beni güldürür 
it’s all the same to me benim için farketmez 
of course elbette 
okay (in agreement) tamam, kabul 
once again bir kez daha 
one of the following bundan sonraki biri 
personally kişisel olarak, şahsen 
so much the better ne kadar fazla olursa o kadar iyi 
so so şöyle böyle 
sure emin 
that doesn’t interest me beni ilgilendirmiyor 
that’s enough bu kadar yeter 
there is/are vardır 
too bad, what a shame çok kötü, ne yazık/ne ayıp 
true (this is) bu gerçek 
well done! aferin! 
what does that mean? bu ne anlama geliyor?/bu ne demek? 
with pleasure memnuniyetle, zevkle 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
95 
Other useful expressions (continued) 
 
you are not allowed to yapmanıza izin yok 
you can (one can) yapabilirsin, kişiler yapabilirler 
you must (one must) yapmalısın, kişiler yapmalı 
Other high-frequency words 
as, like olarak, benzer 
end son 
everybody herkes 
everything herşey 
except -nin dışında 
figure (number) sayı 
for example örneğin, mesela 
Miss, Mrs (also Lady) Bayan, Hanım, Hanımefendi 
Mr (also Sir) Bay, Bey, Beyefendi 
number sayı 
number (e.g. phone number) numara (örn. Telefon numarası) 
opinion fikir, görüş 
reason neden, sebep, gerekçe 
someone herhangi biri 
something herhangi birşey 
that şu 
thing eşya 
time (occasion) kez, kere, defa 
type (kind of) tip, tür, çeşit 
with ile, -le, -la 
without -siz, sız, suz, süz 
Countries (including neigbouring countries) 
Albania Arnavutluk 
Armenia Ermenistan 
Australia Avustralya 
Austria Avusturya  
Azerbaijan Azerbaycan 
Belarus Beyaz Rusya 
Belgium Belçika 
Bosnia Herzogovina Bosna Hersek 
Bulgaria Bulgaristan 
Canada Kanada 
China Çin 
Cyprus Kıbrıs 
Denmark Danimarka 
Egypt Mısır 
England İngiltere 
Estonia Estonya 
Finland Finlandiya 
France Fransa 
Georgia Gürcistan 
Germany Almanya 
Great Britain Büyük Britanya 
Greece Yunanistan 
Holland Hollanda  
Hungry Macaristan 
India Hindistan 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
96 
Countries (including neigbouring countries) (continued) 
Iraq Irak 
Iran İran 
Ireland İrlanda 
Israel İsrail 
Italy İtalya 
Japan Japonya 
Kazakhstan Kazakistan 
Latvia Latviya 
Lebanon Lübnan 
Lithuania Litvanya 
Macedonia Makedonya 
Netherlands  Hollanda 
Northern Ireland Kuzey İrlanda 
Norway Norveç 
Palestine Filistin 
Poland Polonya 
Portugal Portekiz 
Romania Romanya 
Russia Rusya  
Scotland İskoçya 
Serbia Sırbistan 
Spain İspanya 
Sweden İsveç 
Switzerland İsviçre 
Syria Suriye 
Turkey Тürkiye 
Turkmenistan Türkmenistan 
Ukraine Ukrayna 
United Kingdom Birleşik Krallık  
United States of America (USA) Amerika Birleşik Devletleri (ABD) 
Uzbekistan Özbekistan 
European Union (EU) Avrupa Birliği (AB) 
Wales Galler 
Continents 
Africa Afrika 
Asia Аsya 
Australasia Avustralasya 
Europe Avrupa 
North America Kuzey Amerika 
South America Güney Amerika 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
97 
Nationalities 
Albanian Arnavut 
American Amerikalı 
Armenian Ermenistanlı 
Austrian Avusturyalı 
Azerbaijani Azerbaycanlı 
Belorussian Beyaz Rus 
Belgian Belçikalı 
Bosnian Boşnak 
British Britanyalı 
Bulgarian Bulgaristanlı 
Canadian Kanadalı 
Chinese Çinli 
Danish Danimarkalı 
Dutch Hollandalı 
Egyptian Mısırlı 
English İngiliz 
Estonian Estonyalı 
European Avrupalı 
French Fransız 
Georgian Gürcü 
German Alman 
Greek Yunanlı 
Hungarian Macar 
Indian Hintli 
Iraqi Iraklı 
Iranian İranlı 
Irish İrlandalı 
Israeli İsrailli 
Italian İtalyan 
Kazakh Kazak 
Latvian Latviyalı 
Lebanese  Lübnanlı 
Lithuanian Litvanyalı 
Macedonian Makedonyalı 
Pole (Polish) Polonyalı, Leh 
Paletinian Filistinli 
Russian Rus 
Romanian Romanyalı 
Scottish İskoç 
Serbian Sırp 
Spanish İspanyol 
Swiss İsviçreli 
Syrian Suriyeli 
Turkmen Türkmen 
Turkish Türk 
Ukrainian Ukraynalı 
Uzbek Özbek 
Welsh Galli 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
98 
Areas/mountains/seas/places 
Anatolia Anadolu 
Atatürk’s Mousoleum Anıtkabir 
east doğu 
Mount Ararat Ağrı Dağı 
north kuzey 
Pacific Ocean Pasifik Okyanusu 
poles kutuplar 
polar circle kutup dairesi 
region bölge 
Sakarya River Sakarya Irmağı 
south güney 
the Aegean Sea Ege Denizi 
the Black Sea Karadeniz 
the Bosporus Boğaziçi 
the Channel Tunnel Manş Tüneli 
the English Channel Manş Denizi 
the Mediterranean Sea Akdeniz 
the Middle East Orta Doğu 
the Marmara Sea Marmara Denizi 
the Far East Uzak Doğu 
the Taurus Mountains Toros Dağları 
Thrace Trakya 
Van Lake Van Gölü 
west batı  
Useful abbreviations and acronyms 
road cadde (Cad.) 
doctor doktor (Dr.) 
Ankara Intercity Bus Terminal Ankara Şehirlerarası Terminal İşletmesi (AŞTİ) 
Istanbul Bus Services İstanbul Elektrik Tünel Tramvay İşletmesi (İETT) 
kilometre kilometre (Km.) 
lawyer avukat (Av.) 
Turkish Airways Türk Hava Yolları (THY) 
Turkish Employment Agency Türkiye İş Kurumu (İŞKUR) 
Turkish Ministry of Education Milli Eğitim Bakanlığı (MEB) 
Turkish Radio Television Corparation Türkiye Radyo Televizyon Kurumu (TRT) 
Turkish State Railways  Türkiye Devlet Demir Yolları (TCDD) 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
99 
Social conventions 
best wishes en iyi dileklerimle 
(I’m) sorry (informal/formal) Affedersiniz, özür dilerim, kusura bakmayın  
bye! hoşça kalın! 
could you say that again, please? ne dediniz, tekrarlar mısınız lütfen?  
don’t mention it bir şey değil 
good afternoon tünaydın 
good evening iyi akşamlar 
good morning günaydın 
goodbye hoşça kalın, allahaısmarladık 
goodnight iyi geceler 
have a good journey iyi yolculuklar 
hello merhaba 
hello (on the telephone) alo (telefonda) 
help! yardım edin! 
hi! selam! 
how are you? nasılsınız 
it is time to …… zamanı geldi 
I beg your pardon? Pardon? Affedersiniz? Pardon?  
it’s a pleasure zevktir 
meet you at 6 o’clock saat 6’da buluşalım 
meeting; meeting place buluşma; buluşma yeri 
nightmare! kabus gibi, korkunç! 
no, thank you hayır, teşekkür ederim 
of course tabii, elbette  
late geç 
see you later görüşmek üzere, görüşürüz 
see you soon yakında görüşmek üzere 
see you tomorrow/on Friday yarın/ cuma günü görüşürüz 
sorry üzgünüm, affedersiniz 
thank you (very much) (çok) teşekkür ederim 
that doesn't matter/that's ok sorun/problem değil/ tamamdır 
what is (your) name? isminiz nedir? 
Language used in dialogues and messages 
address adres 
area code bölge kodu 
call me (informal/formal) bana telefon et/edin 
dial the number numarayı çevir/tuşla 
email elektronik posta/e-posta 
I’ll be right back Hemen geri geleceğim 
I’m listening Dinliyorum 
message mesaj 
mobile phone cep telefonu  
moment an 
online çevrimiçi 
on the line/speaking hatta/ konuşuyor 
please repeat that lütfen tekrarlayın 
postcode posta kodu 
receiver (telephone) (telefon) alıcısı 
sender gönderen 
stay on the line hatta kalın 
telephone telefon 
text message kısa mesaj 
tone ton, ses 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
100 
Language used in dialogues and messages (continued) 
voice mail sesli mesaj 
wait bekle(yin) 
wrong number yanlış numara 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
101 
Section 2 – topic-specific vocabulary 
Identity and culture: daily life, food and drink, including eating out 
Foundation tier 
apple elma 
banana muz 
beans fasulye 
beef dana/sığır eti 
kebab kebap 
beer bira 
bill fatura 
biscuit bisküvi 
bottle şişe 
bread ekmek 
breakfast kahvaltı 
butter tereyağı 
cabbage lahana 
café, snack bar kafeterya 
cake kek 
carrot havuç 
cheese peynir 
chicken tavuk 
chips patates kızartması, cips 
chocolate çikolata 
closed (on Mondays) kapalı (pazartesi günleri) 
cocoa kakao 
coffee kahve 
cream  krema 
cucumber salatalık 
cup fincan 
custom adet, gelenek, alışveriş 
customer müşteri 
daily günlük 
delicious leziz, lezzetli 
dessert tatlı (yemekten sonra) 
dining room yemek odası 
dish tabak 
drink içki, içecek 
egg yumurta 
enjoy your meal! afiyet olsun 
euro avro 
evening meal, dinner akşam yemeği 
everyday Her gün 
fast food çabuk/ayakta atıştırmalık yiyecek 
first courses, starters iştah açıcılar, başlangıçlar 
fish balık 
fizzy water gazlı maden suyu 
fresh taze 
food yiyecek, gıda 
fork çatal 
fruit meyve 
fruit juice meyve suyu 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
102 
Foundation tier (continued) 
glass bardak 
grapes üzüm 
hamburger hamburger 
honey bal 
hot chocolate sıcak çikolata, sütlü kakao 
ice cream dondurma 
ice-cream shop dondurmacı 
jam reçel 
knife bıçak 
lemon limon 
lemonade limonata 
lettuce  kıvırcık salata 
life hayat, yaşam 
lunch öğle yemeği 
meal yemek 
meat et 
menu yiyecek listesi, menü 
milk süt 
yoghurt drink ayran 
mineral water maden suyu 
money para 
mushroom mantar 
napkin peçete 
oil yağ 
omelette omlet 
onion soğan 
orange portakal 
packet paket 
pancakes krep 
pasta makarna 
peach şeftali 
pear armut 
peas bezelye 
pepper biber 
pineapple ananas 
pizza pizza 
pitta pide 
plate tabak 
portion porsiyon 
potato patates 
price fiyat 
raspberry ahududu, frambuaz 
restaurant restoran, lokanta 
rice pirinç, pirinç pilavı 
roll sandviç ekmeği, yuvarlak küçük ekmek 
salt tuz 
sandwich sandviç 
sausages sucuk 
service servis 
snack atıştırmalık 
soup çorba 
spoon kaşık 
strawberry çilek 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
103 
Foundation tier (continued) 
steak biftek 
still water gazsız su 
sugar şeker 
supermarket süpermarket 
supper akşam yemeği 
sweet tatlı 
sweet (tasting) (tadının) tatlı olması 
sweet course, dessert tatlı (yemekten sonra) 
table masa 
tasty lezzetli 
tea çay 
to have breakfast kahvaltı yapmak 
to have lunch öğle yemeği yemek 
to have supper akşam yemeği 
to pay ödemek 
tomato domates 
tradition gelenek 
Turkish pizza lahmacun 
vegetables sebzeler 
vitamins vitaminler 
vanilla vanilya 
waiter/waitress garson 
water su 
watermelon karpuz 
wine şarap 
yogurt yoğurt 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
104 
Higher tier 
appetite iştah 
choice seçim 
chop (e.g. lamb) pirzola 
cooked pişmiş 
cream krema 
duck ördek 
fried egg kızarmış yumurta 
garlic sarımsak 
grapefruit greyfurt 
homemade ev yapımı 
jar kavanoz 
lamb kuzu eti 
main course ana yemek 
margarine margarin 
mayonnaise mayonez 
meat parcels mantı 
medium orta 
mince kıyma 
mixed karışık 
mustard hardal 
natural, organic food doğal, organik yiyecek 
noodles şehriye 
nuts fındık 
pastrami pastırma 
pastries börek 
roll (bread) ekmek 
salami, cooked sausage salam, pişmiş sosis 
salmon somon balığı 
sauce sos 
sea food deniz ürünleri 
self-service açık büfe 
service servis, hizmet 
sideboard, dresser büfe 
slice dilim 
speciality özellik, uzmanlık 
table cloth masa örtüsü 
tarhana (traditional Turkish soup) tarhana çorbası 
tip (money) bahşiş 
to order sipariş vermek 
towel havlu 
turkey hindi 
vegetarian vejeteryan, etyemez 
vinegar sirke 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
105 
Identity and culture: what my friends and family are like 
Words relating to dress and style 
Foundation tier 
belt kemer 
blouse bluz 
boots bot 
bracelet bilezik 
cap başlık, şapka, kep 
clothes giysiler 
clothes shop giysi dükkanı 
coat/overcoat palto 
dress elbise, entari 
dressed in giyinmiş 
fashion moda 
flowers çiçekler 
glove eldiven 
hairdressers berber, kuaför 
handbag el çantası 
hat şapka 
jacket ceket 
jeans kot pantolon 
jumper kazak 
makeup makyaj 
pants pantolon, külot (erkek) 
pyjamas pijama 
ring yüzük 
rucksack sırt çantası 
scarf eşarp, atkı 
shirt gömlek 
shoes ayakkabı 
shorts şort 
size beden ölçüsü, ölçü 
skirt etek 
small küçük 
smart şık 
socks çoraplar 
sportsman sporcu adam 
sportswoman sporcu kadın 
style stil 
suit takım elbise 
sweater kazak 
swimming costume mayo 
T-shirt tişört 
tie kravat 
tracksuit eşofman 
trainers spor ayakkabı 
trousers pantolon 
umbrella şemsiye 
uniform üniforma 
vest yelek 
watch saat 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
106 
Higher tier 
brand, label marka 
cardigan hırka 
cotton  pamuklu 
fashionable modaya uygun 
heel topuk 
leather deri 
lipstick ruj 
loose (i.e. too big) bol (büyük, geniş) 
neat düzgün, düzenli 
old fashioned modası geçmiş 
perfume parfüm 
raincoat yağmurluk 
slippers terlik 
tattoo dövme 
tights kilotlu çorap 
to put on makeup makyaj yapmak 
 
Words on relations, relationships, personal and physical characteristics 
Foundation tier 
adult, grown-up yetişkin 
age yaş 
alcohol alkol 
arm, kol 
armchair koltuk 
at home evde 
at my/our house evimde/evimizde 
aunt hala 
back arka 
bald kel 
bathroom banyo 
beard sakal 
beautiful güzel 
bed yatak 
bed (linen) yatak takımı 
bedroom yatak odası 
bedside cabinet komodin 
bird kuş 
birthday doğum günü 
birthplace doğumyeri 
block (of flats) apartman 
blond/e sarışın 
body vücut 
boy erkek çocuk 
brother erkek kardeş 
brothers and sisters, siblings kardeş (kız veya erkek) 
brunette esmer 
cat kedi 
chair sandalye, iskemle 
character, personality karakter, kişilik 
child çocuk 
children çocuklar 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
107 
Foundation tier (continued) 
clothes giysiler 
comfortable (house, furniture) rahat (ev, mobilya) 
cousin kuzen 
curly kıvırcık 
curtains perdeler 
country cottage köy evi 
daily routine günlük rutin 
dad baba 
date of birth doğum günü 
daughter kız evlat 
diet diyet 
dining room yemek odası 
dog köpek 
door kapı 
ear/s kulak/lar 
energetic enerjik/ hareketli 
eyes gözler 
face yüz 
family aile 
father baba 
female kadın, bayan 
first name isim, ad 
flat; apartment daire; apartman dairesi 
foot ayak 
friend arkadaş 
furniture mobilya 
garage garaj 
garden bahçe 
girl  kız 
glasses gözlük/ler 
goldfish kırmızı balık, havuz balığı 
grandchild (f/m) torun (kız/erkek) 
grandfather, grandad büyükbaba, dede 
grandmother, grandma, granny büyükanne, nine 
grandparents dede ve nine 
guest misafir, konuk 
guy, man adam 
hair saç 
hamster hamster, küçük kemirgen bir hayvan 
hand el 
head baş 
health sağlık 
horse at 
house ev 
house (small) kulübe 
ideal ideal 
identity kişilik 
intelligent zeka, akıl 
kind kibar, çeşit 
kitchen mutfak 
lamp, light lamba, ışık 
leg bacak 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
108 
Foundation tier (continued) 
life yaşam, hayat 
living room, front room oturma odası 
male erkek, bay 
man adam 
mother anne 
mouse fare 
moustache bıyık 
mouth ağız 
mum anne 
neck boyun 
neighbour komşu 
nice, pleasant hoş, güzel 
normal normal, olağan 
nose burun 
old eski 
older daha yaşlı 
oldest (brother/sister) en büyük (ağabey/abla/kız kardeş) 
only child tek çocuk 
parents ebeveyn 
party parti 
penfriend mektup arkadaşı 
people insanlar, halk 
person kişi 
pet ev hayvanı 
picture resim 
plant bitki 
present; gift hediye 
public holiday resmi tatil 
rabbit tavşan 
refrigerator buzdolabı 
relationship ilişki 
religion din 
sign levha 
serious ciddi 
sister kız kardeş 
slim ince 
snake yılan 
sofa; settee kanepe 
son erkek evlat 
staying as a guest misafirlik 
stomach mide 
straight (hair) düz (saç) 
study (room) çalışma (odası) 
surname soyadı 
table masa 
talented yetenekli 
teenager yeniyetme, ergen 
terrace teras 
thin ince 
throat boğaz, gırtlak 
to be called (person) isimlendirilir, adlandırılır 
to be healthy, fit sağlıklı /formda olmak 
to look (e.g. angry/happy etc) görünmek (kızgın, mutlu vs.) 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
109 
Foundation tier (continued) 
tooth diş 
turtle kaplumbağa 
ugly çirkin 
uncle amca 
visit ziyaret 
wife karı, eş 
woman kadın 
young genç 
younger daha genç 
youngest en genç 
youth gençlik 
Higher tier 
acquaintance tanıdık 
alone yalnız 
argument münakaşa, tartışma 
brave, adventurous cesur, maceracı 
career kariyer 
carpet halı 
celebrity ünlü, meşhur (kişi) 
character (in film, etc) karakter (film, roman vs) 
character trait karakter özellikleri 
character, nature karakter, doğa 
charming çekici, cazibeli 
communication, contact iletişim 
crazy çılgın 
discrimination ayrımcılık 
elbow dirsek 
elderly yaşlı 
enchanted, fascinated büyülenmek 
enthusiasm coşku, heves 
example örnek 
faith (religious) inanç (dini) 
famous ünlü, tanınmış 
feeling duygu 
furnished mobilyalı 
gender, sex cinsiyet 
habit alışkanlık 
hall (in house) hol (evde) 
honest dürüst 
husband koca 
invitation davet 
irritable sinirli 
knee diz 
lazy tembel 
lively canlı 
loft çatı arası 
loyal, faithful sadık, vefalı 
married evli 
meeting toplantı 
member of the family aile üyeleri 
mirror ayna 
mood ruh hali, ruhsal durum 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
110 
Higher tier (continued)  
old age yaşlı 
old people’s home yaşlılar evi 
pensioner emekli 
place of residence yerleşim bölgesi 
racist ırkçı 
reasonable mantıklı 
relationship ilişki 
relative, relation akraba 
reliable güvenilir 
sauna  sauna 
to seem görünmek 
self (myself, yourself etc) kendi kendime/ne vs. 
selfish bencil 
sense of humour mizah anlayışı 
sensitive hassas, duyarlı, duygulu 
similar benzer 
study, office çalışma masası 
sulky face asık yüz 
survey gözden geçirmek, anket için soru sormak 
thin/slender ince, zarif 
to consider dikkate almak, hesaba katmak 
to get on (well) with iyi geçinmek 
to respect saygı duymak 
to threaten korkutmak, tehdit etmek 
understanding anlayış 
unemployed işsiz 
wages haftalık 
wanted istenen 
way of life, lifestyle yaşam biçimi 
 
Identity and culture: cultural life 
Foundation tier 
adventure film macera filmi 
aerobics aerobik 
art gallery sanat galerisi 
celebration kutlama 
comedy komedi 
contest yarışma 
drum davul 
horror film korku filmi 
instrument enstruman 
interest ilgi 
life yaşam, hayat 
lottery piyango, spor toto 
magazine dergi 
method metod 
mobile phone cep telefonu, mobil telefon 
MP3 player MP3 çalar 
music müzik 
musical (show) müzikal (gösteri) 
New Year Yeni Yıl 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
111 
Foundation tier (continued)  
news haberler 
nightclub gece kulübü 
opera opera 
orchestra orkestra 
participant katılımcı 
party parti 
photo(graph) fotoğraf 
piano piyano 
ping pong masa tenisi, pin pon 
player çalıcı/çalan (müzik aleti) 
pop music pop müzik 
programme, broadcast program, yayın 
rap rap  
reading okuma 
rock music rock müzik 
role model örnek kişi 
romantic romantik 
rugby ragbi 
saxophone saksafon 
science fiction film bilim kurgu filmi 
sculpture heykel 
series dizi film 
show (theatre etc) gösteri (tiyatro, dans vs.) 
show, performance gösteri 
skate boarding paten, kaykay 
skiing kayak 
socialising sosyalleşme 
sport spor 
sports ground spor alanı 
sporty sporcu, neşeli, gösterişli 
spy film casus, dedektif filmi 
squash duvar tenisi 
surfing sörf yapmak 
swimming yüzmek 
team takım 
television (medium) televizyon 
tennis tenis 
theme tema 
thriller gerilim 
to celebrate kutlamak 
to do sport spor yapmak 
to exercise egzersiz yapmak 
to fish/go fishing balık tutmak, balığa gitmek 
to get married evlenmek 
to swim yüzmek 
to take a dog out for a walk köpeği dolaştırmak 
to take part (in) bir şeye katılmak, dahil olmak 
toy oyuncak 
(TV) channel televizyon kanalı 
video camera video kamerası 
video/computer game video/ bilgisayar oyunu 
violin keman 
volleyball voleybol 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
112 
Higher tier 
audience seyirci 
author yazar 
boat kayık, tekne, sandal 
bowling (tenpin) bowling 
ceremony tören 
championship şampiyonluk 
Christmas tree Noel ağacı 
competition yarışma 
drama (TV etc) dram (TV etc.) 
earphones kulaklık 
entertainment eğlence 
extreme sports aşırı uçtaki sporlar 
fencing eskrim 
figure skating artistik patinaj 
genre tarz, tür, nevi 
goal amaç, hedef 
grateful minnettar 
knowledge bilgi 
league birlik, cemiyet, spor ligi 
leisure boş zaman 
melody melodi 
mountain bike dağ bisikleti 
mountaineering dağcılık 
play (theatre) oyun (piyes) 
pleasure zevk 
pocket money cep harçlığı 
prize ödül, mükâfat 
referee hakem 
review eleştiri 
riding ata binmek 
roller blading tekerlekli paten 
sailing yelkencilik 
singer şarkıcı 
soap (opera) dizi filim 
song şarkı 
speakers (people)  hoparlörer 
stage sahne 
subtitles alt yazılar 
table tennis masa tenisi 
to (be) relax(ed) dinlenmek 
to create yaratmak 
to hike, ramble uzun, çetin yürüyüş yapmak 
to occupy oneself, do bir şey yapmakla meşgul olmak 
to roller-skate tekerlekli paten yapmak 
to score a goal gol atmak 
tournament turnuva 
training eğitim, antrenman, idman 
trumpet trampet 
unforgettable unutulmaz 
viewer izleyici, seyirci 
windsurfing rüzgar sörfü 
writer yazar 
Xbox Xbox oyun konsolu 
youth club gençlik kulübü 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
113 
Identity and culture: using social media 
Foundation tier 
advantage avantaj, yarar, fayda 
blog blog, kişisel web sayfası 
chatroom sohbet odası 
computer bilgisayar 
disadvantage dezavantaj, yararsız 
disk disk 
email elektronik posta 
internet internet 
laptop dizüstü bilgisayar 
new technology yeni teknoloji 
page sayfa 
password şifre 
programme program 
risk risk, tehlike 
screen ekran 
social media sosyal medya 
technology teknoloji 
to chat online internette sohbet etmek 
to download indirmek (bilgisayar) 
to load yüklemek 
to save, to store kayıt etmek, saklamak 
to upload uzaktan yüklemek (bilgisayara) 
to use kullanmak 
use of technology teknolojinin kullanımı 
virtual gerçek olmayan, sanal 
virus virüs,  
web web 
web page web sayfası 
webcam web kamerası 
website web sitesi 
Higher tier 
connection bağlantı 
homepage anasayfa 
social network sosyal ağ 
to improve gelişmek, ilerlemek 
to intend niyet etmek, kastetmek 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
114 
Local area, holiday and travel 
Foundation tier 
accommodation yaşanacak, oturulacak mekan 
adult yetişkin 
air hava 
airport havalimanı, havaalanı 
aquarium akvaryum 
area (in town) mahalle, bölge (şehirdeki) 
art gallery sanat galerisi 
atlas atlas, harita 
balcony balkon 
bank banka 
bar bar 
barbecue mangal, ızgara, barbekü  
bath banyo yapmak 
bathroom banyo 
beach plaj 
bed yatak 
bicycle/bike bisiklet 
boat tekne 
bowling alley bovling pisti 
bridge köprü 
brochure broşür 
building bina 
bus (by bus) otobüs 
bus stop otobüs durağı 
bus/coach station otogar 
business iş 
café kafeterya 
camp kamp 
campsite kamp yeri 
capital city başkent 
car araba 
car, automobile otomobil 
cathedral katedral 
centre merkez 
chemist's eczane 
cheque; receipt çek, makbuz 
church kilise 
cinema (building) sinema 
circus sirk 
closed kapalı 
coach otobüs 
coast sahil 
concert konser 
country (i.e. nation) ülke 
countryside kır, kırlık alan, taşra 
credit card kredi kartı 
department (in a shop) (mağazada) bir bölüm 
department store her şeyi satan, büyük mağaza 
destination gidilecek yer 
direct direkt, doğrudan, dolaysız 
direction yön 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
115 
Foundation tier (continued) 
disco diskotek 
door kapı 
entrance giriş 
exit çıkış 
experience deney 
factory fabrika 
farm çiftlik 
festival festival 
flight tickets uçak biletleri 
floor (1st, 2nd) (1., 2.) kat 
form form 
ground floor giriş katı 
guest misafir 
guided tour rehberli tur 
help yardım 
historic tarihi 
holiday cottage tatil evi 
holidays tatiller 
hospital hastane 
hotel otel 
hotel (5*) 5 yıldızlı otel 
ice rink buz pisti 
information office danışma bürosu 
journey (short) kısa yolculuk 
key anahtar 
lake göl 
library kütüphane 
lift asansör 
local area yaşanan bölge/çevre 
luggage bagaj (bavul, çanta) 
map harita 
map (of town) şehir haritası 
market pazar, çarşı 
means of transport ulaşım araçları 
microwave mikrodalga 
monument anıt 
mosque camii 
motorbike motosiklet 
mountain dağ 
museum müze 
newspaper stall gazete bayii 
night club gece kulübü 
occupied/taken dolu, kullanılmakta 
office ofis, büro 
on foot yaya 
on the left solda 
on the right sağda 
open açık 
palace saray 
paper kağıt 
park park 
passenger yolcu 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
116 
Foundation tier (continued) 
passport pasaport 
passport control pasaport kontrolü 
petrol petrol 
place yer 
plane uçak 
platform peron 
police officer polis memuru 
port liman 
post office postane 
postcard kartpostal 
poster poster 
priority öncelik 
problem problem 
public halk 
public transport toplu taşıma 
radio radyo 
railway tren yolu 
region, area bölge, saha, alan 
region, district bölge 
return ticket dönüş bileti 
river nehir 
road yol 
room oda 
room (in hotel) otel odası 
rucksack sırt çantası 
running koşma 
rural kırsal, taşra 
sea deniz 
season mevsim 
shop dükkan 
shopping alışveriş 
shopping centre alışveriş merkezi 
show gösteri 
shower duş 
sight, tourist attraction, place to see turistik yer 
single ticket tek yön bileti 
snack bar, buffet (on a train) (trende) büfe, yemekli vagon 
souvenir hediyelik eşya 
sports centre spor merkezi 
square (in town) (şehir) meydanı 
stadium stadyum 
station (mainline railway) gar 
station (metro) istasyon, (metro)  
stop (bus, tram etc) durak (otobüs, tramvay etc.) 
street cadde 
suburb; outskirts of town  banliyö; şehir etekleri 
suitcase bavul, valiz 
summer cottage yazlık ev 
supermarket süpermarket 
swimming pool yüzme havuzu 
taxi taksi 
teenager genç kız, delikanlı, yeniyetme 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
117 
Foundation tier (continued) 
television set televizyon 
tennis court tenis kortu 
tent çadır 
theatre tiyatro 
ticket bilet 
ticket office gişe 
ticket; tram, bus or metro ticket bilet; tramvay, otobüs, metro bileti 
till; cash desk kasa 
to photograph fotoğraf çekmek 
toilets tuvaletler 
token (metro) jeton (metro, tren, vapur) 
tour tur 
tourism turizm 
tourist turist 
tourist information office turizm danışma bürosu 
town şehir, kasaba 
town centre şehir merkezi 
train tren 
tram tramvay 
transport taşıma 
transportation taşımacılık 
travel agency seyahat acentası 
trolleybus troleybüs 
underground railway metro tren yolu 
underground station metro istasyonu 
vacation tatil 
view (over) manzara 
village köy 
way out/exit çıkış 
welcome Hoş geldiniz 
window pencere 
winter holidays kış tatilleri 
yard, courtyard avlu 
youth hostel gençlik hosteli 
zoo hayvanat bahçesi 
Higher tier 
accident kaza 
abroad yurt dışı 
adolescent ergen, ergenlik çağında olan 
agricultural zirai, tarımsal 
air conditioning/air-con klima 
airline havayolu 
arrival varış 
ATM ATM 
baker’s shop fırın 
bank card banka kartı 
basement bodrum 
border sınır 
calm/peaceful sakin 
canal kanal 
car park otopark 
castle kale 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
118 
Higher tier (continued) 
change (coins) bozuk para 
change (replace) değiştirmek   
comfortable rahat, konforlu 
commercial (advertisement) reklam 
compartment (train) kompartman 
cooker ocak, fırın 
corner köşe 
crossroads kavşak 
departure kalkış 
diesel (fuel) dizel 
double room çift kişilik oda 
driver sürücü 
driver (professional) şoför (profesyonel) 
driving licence ehliyet 
event olay, hadise 
exhibition sergi 
ferry feribot 
fireworks havai fişekler 
flight uçuş 
forbidden to -ması yasaklanmış 
foreigner yabancı 
fountain çeşme, fıskiye, kaynak 
full (hotel etc) dolu (otel v.s.) 
games room oyun odası 
garage, service station, petrol station garaj, servis istasyonu, petrol istasyonu 
heating ısıtıcı, kalorifer 
helicopter helikopter 
hill tepe 
hire of/hiring kiralamak, kiralık 
hospitality misafirperverlik 
in advance önceden 
included içine alan, kapsayan 
industrial endüstriyel 
industry endüstri, sanayi 
inhabitant bir yerde oturan, ikamet eden kimse, sakin 
inside içinde, içerisinde 
landscape kır manzarası, peyzaj 
launderette çamaşırhane 
left-luggage office (bavul) emanet  
line (underground) metro hattı 
list liste 
litter çöp 
lively canlı, neşeli 
local yerel, yöresel, mahalli, lokal  
lorry kamyon 
lost property office kayıp eşya bürosu 
luxurious lüks, konforlu 
nature doğa, tabiat 
no parking park yapılmaz 
noise gürültü 
open-air pool açık hava havuzu 
outside dışarı, dışarda 
outside/in the open air dışarda/açık havada 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
119 
Higher tier (continued) 
package holiday tur tatili 
park park 
pavement kaldırım 
pedestrian yaya 
pedestrian area yaya sahası 
pedestrian crossing yaya geçidi 
picturesque pitoresk 
pillow yastık 
playground oyun sahası 
police station polis karakolu 
police officer polis memuru 
procession resmi geçit, alay halinde yürüme 
receipt makbuz 
reception resepsiyon, danışma 
receptionist danışma memuru, resepsiyonist 
reduction indirim 
registration kayıt 
resort tatil bölgesi 
route yol, rota, güzergah 
rush hour trafiğin en sıkışık olduğu zaman 
seat belt güvenlik kemeri 
ship gemi, vapur 
sign imza 
single room tek kişilik oda 
ski resort kayak tatil yeri 
skiing kayak yapma 
sleeping bag uyku tulumu 
sleeping car (in a train) yataklı vagon (trende) 
soap sabun 
speed hız 
speed limit hız limiti 
star yıldız 
summer camp yaz kampı 
ticket inspector kondüktör 
timetable  tarife (vapur, tren) 
to cope idare/baş etmek 
to deny yalanlamak 
to guarantee garanti etmek, güvence vermek 
to pack (cases) bavul toplamak, hazırlamak 
to nag söylenmek, dırdır etmek 
to overtake sollamak 
to send (set off) göndermek 
to spend the night geceyi geçirmek 
to stare at gözünü dikip bakmak 
to unpack (cases) bavulu boşaltmak 
to validate a ticket (e.g. train, tram) (örn. tren, uçak) biletini geçerli kılmak 
toilet paper tuvalet kağıdı 
toothbrush diş fırçası 
toothpaste diş macunu 
tower kule 
trade ticaret 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
120 
Higher tier (continued) 
traffic trafik 
traffic jam trafik sıkışıklığı 
traffic lights trafik ışıkları 
travel seyahat 
traveller yolcu, gezgin, seyahat eden kimse, seyyah 
twin-bedded room iki tek kişilik yatak 
waiting room bekleme odası 
wash basin lavabo 
 
Phrases associated with weather 
Foundation tier 
bad kötü 
climate iklim 
cloud bulut 
cloudy bulutlu 
cold soğuk 
degree (temperature) derece (ısı) 
fog, mist sis 
highest temperature en yüksek sıcaklık 
hot sıcak 
in the east doğuda 
in the north kuzeyde 
in the south güneyde 
in the west batıda 
it is chilly serin, soğuk, üşütücü 
it is freezing hava buz gibi 
it is raining yağmur yağıyor 
it is snowing kar yağıyor 
it is windy hava rüzgârlı 
lowest temperature en düşük sıcaklık 
overcast bulutlu, kapalı hava 
rain yağmur 
sky gök 
snow kar 
storm fırtına 
sun güneş 
sunny güneşli 
the sun is shining güneş parlıyor 
warm sıcak hava, ılık 
weather hava 
weather forecast hava durumu 
wind rüzgar 
Higher tier 
average temperature ortalama sıcaklık 
bright parlak 
changeable değişken 
downpour sağanak yağmur 
dry kuru 
hail dolu (halinde yağmak) 
heat sıcaklık 
high temperature yüksek derece 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
121 
Higher tier (continued) 
it is frosty soğuk dondurucu hava 
it is lightning şimşek çakıyor 
lightning şimşek çakması 
low temperature düşük sıcaklık 
misty, foggy sisli 
thunder gök gürültüsü 
to be expected beklenmek 
Asking for directions 
are you going in a car? araba ile mi gidiyorsun? 
are you going on foot? yayan/yürüyerek mi gidiyorsun? 
as far as uzağa gidebildiğince 
continue  devam et 
cross (over) karşıya geç 
far uzak 
go straight on  dümdüz git 
high street/main street ana cadde 
how do I get to? nasıl gidebilirim? 
it is 100 metres away 100 metre ilerde 
it is very close çok yakın 
not far uzak değil 
on the left solda 
on the right sağda 
straight on dümdüz 
take the first road on the left soldan birinci yola gir 
turn left sola dön 
turn right sağa dön  
Dealing with problems 
Foundation tier 
address adres 
bill fatura 
colour renk 
correct doğru 
customer müşteri 
customer service müşteri hizmetleri 
email address eposta adresi 
form form, doldurulmak üzere basılmış belge 
guarantee garanti 
part parça 
purse cüzdan 
receipt makbuz 
size ölçü, beden 
telephone number telefon numarası 
to pay ödemek 
to work, function çalışmak, işlev görmek 
wrong  yanlış 
Higher tier 
a fine ceza 
broken kırılmış 
complaint şikayet 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
122 
Higher tier (continued) 
crime suç 
crime, criminality suç, suçluluk 
customer müşteri 
customer service müşteri hizmetleri 
fault hata, kusur, kabahat 
improvement gelişme 
instructions  talimatlar, açıklamalar 
insurance sigorta 
mistake hata 
progress gelişme 
quantity miktar 
reduction indirim 
repair tamir 
theft hırsızlık 
thief Hırsız  
School 
Foundation tier 
answer yanıt, cevap 
art, drawing sanat, çizim, resim 
biology biyoloji 
board (blackboard, whiteboard etc) yazı tahtası (kara, beyaz tahta vs.) 
book kitap 
break teneffüs 
business studies işletme 
calculator hesap makinası 
calendar takvim 
canteen kantin 
chemistry kimya 
choir koro 
circle, club kulüp, kol 
class sınıf 
classroom sınıf odası 
copy kopya 
corridor koridor 
cupboard dolap 
desk sıra 
dining room yemek odası 
drama (school subject) tiyatro (dersi) 
DT (design technology) tasarım teknolojisi (dersi) 
education eğitim 
English İngilizce 
event (at school) (okulda) etkinlik 
examination sınav 
exchange değiştirme, değişim 
exercise alıştırma 
exercise book alıştırma kitabı 
experiment deney 
French Fransızca 
future plans gelecek planları 
geography coğrafya 
German Almanca 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
123 
Foundation tier (continued)  
gym spor salonu 
gymnastics jimnastik 
headteacher müdür, baş öğretmen 
history tarih 
holidays (school)  okul tatili 
homework ev ödevi 
ICT (information communication technology) bilgisayar dersi 
Italian İtalyanca 
laboratory laboratuvar 
languages diller 
Latin Latince 
lesson ders 
library kütüphane 
literature edebiyat 
lunch (adjective) öğle yemeği 
lunch break öğle tenefüsü 
maths matematik 
music müzik 
nursery anaokulu, çocuk yuvası 
PE (physical education) beden eğitimi 
pen dolma kalem 
pencil kurşun kalem 
pencil case kalem kutusu 
physics fizik 
plan  plan 
practice pratik 
progress ilerleme, gelişme 
projector projektör 
question soru 
religion, religious studies din, din dersi 
result sonuç 
rubber silgi 
rule kural 
ruler cetvel 
school okul 
school activities okul etkinlikleri 
school bag okul çantası 
school bus okul otobüsü, servis 
school day okul günü 
school group/party okul grubu/partisi 
school trip okul gezisi 
sociology sosyoloji 
Spanish İspanyolca 
sports hall, gym spor salonu 
stress gerilim, stres 
student öğrenci 
study ders çalışma, araştırma 
subject ders 
success başarı 
summer holidays yaz tatili 
team takım 
technology teknoloji 
test test 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
124 
Foundation tier (continued)  
the future gelecek 
the past geçmiş 
tie kravat 
timetable ders program 
to educate eğitmek 
to register kayıt olmak/kaydolmak 
type tip 
uniform üniforma 
year yıl 
Higher tier 
able yetenekli, kabiliyetli 
assessment değerlendirme 
attention dikkat 
ballpoint pen dolma kalem 
boarding school yatılı okul 
briefcase bavul 
clever akıllı 
circle, club grup, kulüp 
compulsory subject zorunlu ders 
core subjects ana dersler 
degree (university) diploma (üniversite) 
dictionary sözlük 
discipline disiplin, bilim dalı 
discussion tartışma 
do badly; fail an exam sınavda başarısız olmak 
drama group, acting group tiyatro grubu 
economics ekonomi 
essay makale, deneme 
exchange değiştirme 
felt tip keçeli kalem 
foreign languages yabancı diller 
fountain pen dolma kalem 
glue tutkal 
hardworking çalışkan 
headteacher  müdür, başöğretmen 
institute enstitü 
instutition kurum 
kindergarten yuva, ana okulu 
locker dolap 
mark, grade not, puan (sınavdan alınan) 
meeting toplantı 
mixed karışık 
optional (subject) seçmeli (ders) 
oral sözlü 
pad of paper kağıt destesi 
parents’ evening veli toplantısı 
permission izin 
pressure baskı 
primary school ilkokul 
private school özel okul 
project proje 
pronunciation telaffuz etme 
punishment ceza 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
125 
Higher tier (continued)  
qualification nitelik, özellik 
rule kural 
school completion certificate diploma 
school report karne 
school textbook okul kitabı 
science fen bilgisi 
scissors makas 
secondary school ortaokul 
sharpener kalemtraş 
shelf raf 
sixth form lise 
sociology sosyoloji 
sports ground spor sahası 
staff room öğretmenler odası 
state devlet 
strict sıkı kuralcı, disiplinli 
strong, good at (subject) bir (derste) başarılı, iyi 
studies incelemeler, araştırmalar, çalışmalar 
success başarı 
successful başarılı 
survey anket 
term terim 
textbook ders kitabı 
to drop a subject bir dersi bırakmak 
to pay attention dikkat etmek 
to translate tercüme etmek 
translation çeviri 
unfair haksızlık 
vocational school; technical college meslek okulu, teknik okul 
waste of time zaman kaybı 
weak, bad at (subject) (bir derste) zayıf, kötü, başarısız 
 
Future aspirations, study and work 
Foundation tier 
actor  aktör 
actress artist 
advertisement reklam 
air hostess uçak hostesi 
ambition tutku, heves, bir şeyi elde etme tutkusu 
apprentice çırak 
architect mimar 
aspiration arzu, istek, büyük amaç 
assistant asistan 
banker bankacı 
beyond (the classroom) (sınıfın) dışında 
builder inşaatçı 
business iş 
career kariyer 
cashier kasiyer 
coffee (tea/lunch) break kahve (çay/öğle) molası 
colleague iş arkadaşı, meslektaş 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
126 
Foundation tier (continued)  
company şirket 
computer  bilgisayar 
computer science bilgisayar bilimi 
cook aşçı 
degree lisans 
dentist diş doktoru 
designer tasarımcı, modelist 
doctor doktor 
dream (aspiration) hayal (arzu) 
driver şoför 
electrician elektrikçi 
employee çalışan, görevli 
engineer mühendis 
farmer çiftçi 
farmer worker çiftlik işçisi 
fashion moda 
file dosya dolabı, dosya 
fireman itfaiyeci 
folder dosya, klasör, broşür 
future gelecek 
interview görüşme (resmî) 
invention buluş 
job iş 
journalist gazeteci 
language dil 
lawyer avukat 
lecture (üniversitede) ders, konferans  
manager idareci, yönetici 
marketing pazarlama 
mechanic araba tamircisi 
member üye 
musical müzikal 
musician müzisyen 
necessity/need ihtiyaç 
nurse hemşire 
opportunity fırsat 
per hour her saat 
plan plan 
poet şair 
possibility imkan, olanak 
printer yazıcı 
profession meslek 
programmer programcı 
project proje 
reporter gazeteci 
sales assistant satış elemanı 
shop dükkan 
soldier asker 
student öğrenci 
study inceleme, araştırma, çalışma 
technician teknisyen  
telephone telefon 
to build inşa etmek 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
127 
Foundation tier (continued)  
to organise organize 
to study çalışmak 
travel agency seyahat acentası 
university üniversite 
vet veteriner 
volunteer gönüllü 
wish dilek 
work iş 
work experience iş deneyimi 
Higher tier 
aim; goal hedef 
ambition ihtiras, hırs, heves, tutku 
answerphone telesekreter 
artist sanatçı 
badly paid kötü maaş 
charity yardım derneği 
civil servant devlet memuru 
conference konferans 
database veritabanı 
dream rüya, hayal 
driver sürücü 
educational eğitimsel, eğitici 
employer patron, işveren 
employment iş verme 
enclosed ekteki, ilişikte gönderilen 
experienced deneyimli 
hard disk sabit disk 
higher education yüksek eğitim 
impression etki, izlenim 
in aid of yararına, menfaatine, yardım için 
internship doktorluk stajı, staj bursu 
interview mülakat 
job advert iş ilanı 
keyboard tuş takımı, klavye 
law (study of the subject) hukuk 
link link, bağlantı 
medicine (study of the subject) tıp 
model örnek, model, tip 
part time yarı zaman 
photo model fotomodel 
plumber su tesisatçısı 
profession meslek 
programmer programcı 
prospects ümitle beklenen, ihtimal, olasılık 
qualification nitelik, özellik, diploma 
qualified ehliyetli, diplomalı, vasıflı 
salary, wages aylık, haftalık 
signature imza 
skills hüner, marifet, beceri 
society toplum, topluluk, sosyete 
surgeon cerrah, operatör 
terms of employment iş koşulları 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
128 
Higher tier (continued) 
to do a course kurs yapmak 
to enclose iliştirmek 
unemployment işsizlik 
vacancy boş yer, boş oda, açık kadro 
voluntarily  gönüllü olarak 
voluntary work gönüllü iş 
webmail web postası 
well paid iyi maaşlı 
without pay ödemesiz 
 
International and global dimension: bringing the world together, 
environmental issues 
Foundation tier 
access to giriş, erişmek, erişim 
against -karşı 
animals hayvanlar 
campaign kampanya 
championship şampiyonluk 
charity yardım derneği 
consul konsolos 
country ülke, yurt, kır, memleket 
earth yeryüzü 
ecological ekolojik 
ecology ekoloji 
effect etki 
electricity elektrik 
energy enerji 
environment çevre 
environmental issues çevresel sorunlar 
festival festival 
for için 
forest orman 
gas gaz 
good cause iyi nedenler, hayır işi 
global küresel 
green yeşil 
hurricane fırtına 
illegal yasal olmayan 
international uluslararası 
international dimension uluslararası boyut 
legal yasal 
music festival müzik festivali 
musical event müzik olayları, etkinlikleri 
natural resources doğal kaynaklar 
population nüfus 
ocean okyanus 
oil yağ 
Olympic games olimpik oyunlar 
organisation organizasyon 
people halk, insanlar 
planet gezegen 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
129 
Foundation tier (continued)  
political politik 
politician politikacı 
politics; policy politika, siyaset 
popluation nüfus 
sporting event spor olayları 
tiger kaplan 
to die ölmek 
to live yaşamak 
to recycle dönüştürmek 
world dünya, alem 
World Cup (football) dünya kupası 
Higher tier 
advantages avantajlar, yararlar 
bear ayı 
charity yardım, hayır 
climate (adjective) iklim 
coal kömür 
disadvantages dezavantaj 
disaster felaket 
drinking water içme suyu 
drought kuraklık 
drugs ilaç, ecza, uyuşturucu madde 
earthquake deprem 
elephant fil 
environment çevre 
erosion erozyon, toprak kayması, kaybı 
field arazi, alan 
flood; flooding sel 
global warming küresel ısınma 
hunger; famine açlık; kıtlık 
international uluslararası 
island ada 
lack (of) eksik 
natural resources doğal kaynaklar 
nature doğal 
nylon (carrier bags) naylon (poşetler) 
pesticide böcek ilacı 
peace huzur 
plastic plastik 
pollution hava kirliliği 
poverty yoksulluk 
protection koruma 
recycling geri dönüşüm 
rights of man; human rights insan hakları 
rubbish çöp 
security güvenlik 
solar power güneş enerjisi 
species tür, çeşit 
sports event spor olayları 
starving açlıktan ölen 
threat tehdit, korkutma, gözdağı, tehlike 
to contaminate mikrop bulaştırma 
to pollute kirletmek, pisletmek 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
130 
Higher tier (continued) 
to preserve korumak, muhafaza etmek, saklamak 
to protect korumak 
to raise awareness bilinçlendirmek 
to save, economise korumak, tasarruf etmek  
to save, rescue saklamak, kurtarmak 
to sort/separate (e.g. rubbish)  (çöp) ayrıştırmak 
to stay in contact temasta, bağlantıda kalmak 
to survive hayatta kalmak, sağ kalmak 
to threaten tehdit etmek, gözdağı vermek, korkutmak 
volcano volkan 
war savaş 
waste products atık ürünler 
world(-wide) dünyaca 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
131 
Appendix 4: The context for the 
development of this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] and our 
ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
● reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with those 
taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
● consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including subject 
associations, academics and advisors, teachers and students to ensure this qualification is 
suitable for a UK context 
● reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in their 
documents GCSE (9 to 1) Subject Level Guidance and GCSE Subject Level Conditions and 
Requirements for Modern Foreign Languages, published in April 2016. 
 
  
 
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification Principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
● demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning and 
measuring higher-order skills 
● rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and valid 
assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in end users of the knowledge, skills 
and competencies of certified students 
● inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students develop at 
different rates and have different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
● empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills, see Appendix 5. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
132 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
May 2014 
“The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important change to the 
education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications will assist them in 
helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an ‘Expert 
Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or because of 
our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the world as diverse as 
Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification development 
process that has included: 
● extensive international comparability of subject content against the highest-performing 
jurisdictions in the world 
● benchmarking assessments against UK and overseas providers to ensure that they are at 
the right level of demand 
● establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-specific 
expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
● subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future oriented. The 
design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, meaning learner outcomes 
have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a learner’s 
success in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident that we have 
supported the development of qualifications that are outstanding for their coherence, 
thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as representing world-class best 
practice.
” 
  
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Lee Sing Kong  
Director, National Institute of Education, 
Singapore 
  
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
  
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
 
All titles correct as at May 2014 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
133 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently flagged the 
need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable them to respond with 
confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines skills, or 
competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that can be learned and 
that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform an activity or task and can be 
built upon and extended through learning.’[1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected and 
evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this process, we 
identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the most evidence-based and 
robust skills framework. We adapted the framework slightly to include the Program for 
International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT Literacy and Collaborative Problem Solving 
(CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves:[2] 
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking–definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve general 
cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy– access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and communicate. [3] 
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, oral communication, written communication, assertive 
communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, service 
orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving–establishing and maintaining shared understanding, 
taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team organisation. 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work stress, 
adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, and physical 
adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual teams, 
work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and able to acquire 
new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher education, 
as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the teaching and learning of 
this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning materials, developed with 
stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
  
 
[1] OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012) 
[2] Koenig J A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop  
(National Academies Press, 2011) 
[3] PISA – The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy (2011) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Turkish 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
134 
Appendix 6: Codes 
 
Type of code Use of code Code 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for 
performance tables is assigned a 
discount code that indicates the subject 
area to which it belongs. 
Discount codes are published by the DfE. 
Please see the GOV.UK 
website* 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework 
(RQF)codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an 
Ofqual Regulated Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) code. 
The RQF code is known as a Qualification 
Number (QN). This is the code that 
features in the DfE Section96 and on the 
LARA as being eligible for 16–18 and 
19+ funding, and is to be used for all 
qualification funding purposes. The QN 
will appear on students’ final certification 
documentation. 
The QN for this 
qualification is: 
603/2691/8 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to 
enter students for a qualification. 
Centres will need to use the entry codes 
only when claiming students’ 
qualifications. 
GCSE –1TU0 
 
Paper codes These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be 
entered for individual papers. 
Paper 1: 1TU0/01 
Paper 2: 1TU0/02 
Paper 3: 1TU0/03 
Paper 4: 1TU0/04 
*www.gov.uk/government/publications/2018-performance-tables-discount-code 
 
 
Db290922 9781446946787_GCSE2017_L12_TURKISH ISS4.DOCX.1–138/0 
 
 
About Pearson 
We are the world’s leading learning company operating in countries all around the world. We 
provide content, assessment and digital services to schools, colleges and universities, as well 
as professional and vocational education to learners to help increase their skills and lifelong 
employability prospects. We believe that wherever learning flourishes so do people.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This specification is Issue 4. We will inform centres of any changes to this issue. The latest 
issue can be found on the Pearson website: qualifications.pearson.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References to third party materials made in this specification are made in good faith. Pearson 
does not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may 
be subject to change, or any opinions expressed therein. (Materials may include textbooks, 
journals, magazines and other publications and websites.) 
 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
 
ISBN 978 1 446 94678 7 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2022 
 
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office:  80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121