Specification
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9 - 1) in Music (1MU0)
First teaching from September 2016
First certification from 2018 Issue 4
GCSE (9-1)
Music
 
  
 
 
Summary of Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) 
in Music specification Issue 4 changes  
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this 
current issue 
Page 
number 
In Qualification at a glance, Component 3 section the following has 
been updated: 
‘A CD with the music extracts will be played to all students at the 
same time and will repeat the extracts a set number of times’ to  
‘Audio files with the music extracts will be played to all students at the 
same time and will repeat the extracts a set number of times. 
6 
In Component 1: Performing the following has been updated: 
‘Centres must submit a complete and unedited recording of the live 
performance on an audio CD (finalised and playable on standard 
domestic equipment) or USB stick. Centres are requested to put the 
work of all students to be assessed onto a single CD or USB stick. The 
work of each student should be a separate track, individually labelled 
with their centre number, candidate number and title.’ to  
‘Centres must submit a complete and unedited recording of the live 
performance via the online submission platform Learner Work 
Transfer (LWT). The work of each student should be a separate track, 
individually labelled with their centre number, candidate number and 
title.’ 
15 
In Component 2: Composing the following has been updated: 
‘A complete recording of both pieces on an audio CD or USB stick 
must be submitted. Each composition for each student should be a 
separate track, individually labelled with their centre number, 
candidate number and composition title. The recording can be made 
live or be studio-produced. Centres are requested to use one 
recording format for all their students’ submissions: audio CD or USB 
stick.’ to 
‘A complete recording of both pieces must be submitted via the 
online submission platform LWT. Each composition for each student 
should be a separate track, individually labelled with their centre 
number, candidate number and composition title. The recording can 
be made live or be studio-produced.’ 
34 
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this 
current issue 
Page 
number 
In Component 3: Appraising, Assessment information section the 
following has been updated: 
‘The extracts of the pieces of music will be played on CD to all 
students taking the examination paper.’ to 
‘The provided audio files with the music extracts will be played to all 
students at the same time and will repeat the extracts a set number 
of times.’ 
52 
In Component 3: Appraising, Assessment information section the 
following has been updated: 
‘Further details for Section A include: 
eight questions requiring students to respond to extracts of music on 
CD, of which:’ to 
‘Further details for Section A include: 
eight questions requiring students to respond to extracts of music, of 
which:’ 
52 
In Component 3: Appraising, Assessment information section the 
following has been updated: 
‘the exact number of times the extracts will be heard is announced on 
the CD and printed on the examination paper’ to 
‘the exact number of times the extracts will be heard is announced on 
the audio and printed on the examination paper’ 
52 
 
Earlier issues 1-3 show previous changes. 
If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, contact us 
via our website at: qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/contact-us.html. 
 
 
 
Contents 
1 Introduction 2 
Why choose the Pearson Edexcel GCSE in Music? 2 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this qualification 3 
Qualification at a glance 4 
2 Subject content and assessment information 8 
Component 1: Performing 9 
Component 2: Composing 27 
Component 3: Appraising 43 
Assessment Objectives 55 
3 Administration and general information 56 
Entries 56 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special consideration 
and malpractice 56 
Student recruitment and progression 60 
Appendix 1: Performance Authentication Sheet 63 
Appendix 2: Composition Authentication Sheet 63 
Appendix 3: Music vocabulary list 64 
Appendix 4: Suggested wider listening 74 
Appendix 5: Command word taxonomy 75 
Appendix 6: The context for the development of this qualification 76 
Appendix 7: Transferable skills 78 
Appendix 8: Codes 80 
Appendix 9: Mark penalty tables for submissions not meeting  
the minimum assessment time 81 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 2 
1 Introduction 
Why choose the Pearson Edexcel GCSE in Music? 
We have listened to feedback from all parts of the music subject community, including 
teachers, subject associations and higher education. We have used this opportunity of 
curriculum change to redesign a qualification that reflects the demands of a truly 
modern and evolving music environment – a qualification that enables your students 
to apply themselves and gives them the skills to succeed in their chosen pathway. 
Clear and coherent structure – our qualification has a straightforward structure with 
three engaging components, assessed through practical performances, compositions 
and one externally examined paper. 
Provides a real music focus – the key content of musical elements, musical contexts 
and musical language are taught through the areas of study and set works to show 
real examples of how these are used within different types of music. 
Holistic understanding of music – students investigate, analyse and evaluate music 
and its features. Building on this, and by using practical methods, students are 
encouraged to take a more holistic view of their knowledge, performance and 
compositional skills. 
Breadth and depth – the set works enable students to conduct in-depth studies into 
different musical styles and genres, and put them in a wider context. 
Diverse musical heritage – students will learn to perform, compose and appreciate 
different types of music, developing critical and creative thinking, cultural, aesthetic 
and emotional awareness, and the ability to make music individually and as part of a 
group. 
Continuous progression – the content builds on the understanding developed at Key 
Stage 3, avoiding unnecessary repetition while also ensuring that students new to the 
subject are appropriately supported. 
Progression to AS and A Level – the content allows students to develop their 
knowledge and skills of music, enabling them to progress into the AS and A Level 
qualifications in Music. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 3 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this 
qualification 
Planning 
● Our Getting Started guide gives you an overview of the new Pearson Edexcel 
GCSE Music qualification to help you get to grips with the changes to content and 
assessment and to help you understand what these changes mean for you and 
your students. 
● We will give you an editable course planner and a scheme of work that you can 
adapt to suit your department. 
● Our mapping documents highlight the key differences between your current 
Pearson Edexcel GCSE Music specification and our new specification. 
Teaching and learning 
There will be lots of free teaching and learning support to help you deliver the new 
qualifications, including: 
● exemplars and commentaries 
● a student guide 
● materials for your options evenings. 
Preparing for exams 
We will also provide a range of resources to help you prepare your students for the 
assessments, including marked exemplars of student work with examiner 
commentaries. 
ResultsPlus 
ResutsPlus provides the most detailed analysis available of your students’ exam 
performance. It can help you identify the topics and skills where further learning 
would benefit your students. 
Get help and support 
Our subject support line and Ask the Expert will ensure you receive help and guidance 
from us and that you can share ideas and information with other teachers.  
The Music Team can be contacted by email: TeachingMusic@pearson.com and by 
telephone: 0844 463 2935. 
Learn more at qualifications.pearson.com 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 4 
Qualification at a glance 
Content and assessment overview 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music consists of one externally 
examined paper and two non-examined assessments (NEA). 
Students must submit their non-examined assessments and complete the exam in 
May/June in any single year. The first assessments for this qualification will be in 2018. 
 
Component 1: Performing (*Paper code: 1MU0/01) 
Non-examined assessment: internally marked and externally moderated 
30% of the qualification 
60 marks 
Content overview 
● Solo performing 
● Ensemble performing 
● Approaches to performing 
Assessment overview 
● Students perform for at least four minutes’ combined duration 
● Solo performance: this must be of at least one minute in duration, and may 
comprise one or more pieces 
● Ensemble performance: this must be of at least one minute in duration, and may 
comprise one or more pieces 
● Each performance will be out of 30 marks. 
● Internally marked and externally moderated. 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 5 
Component 2: Composing (*Paper code: 1MU0/02) 
Non-examined assessment: internally marked and externally moderated 
30% of the qualification 
60 marks 
Content overview 
● Developing musical ideas  
● Compositional techniques and strategies 
● Ensuring technical control and coherence 
● Methods of notating composition scores 
Assessment overview 
● Students compose two compositions, of at least three minutes’ combined 
duration 
● One composition to a brief set by Pearson, of at least one minute in duration. 
● One free composition set by the student, of at least one minute in duration. 
● Each composition will be out of 30 marks. 
● Internally marked and externally moderated. 
*See Appendix 8: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to  
this qualification. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 6 
Component 3: Appraising (*Paper code: 1MU0/03) 
Written examination: 1 hour and 45 minutes 
40% of the qualification 
80 marks 
Content overview 
● Musical elements, musical contexts and musical language. 
Areas of study: 
● Instrumental Music 1700–1820 
● Vocal Music 
● Music for Stage and Screen 
● Fusions. 
Full details of the areas of study can be found on pages 48–49. 
Assessment overview 
The paper is made up of two sections and is out of a total of 80 marks. 
Section A – Areas of study, dictation, and unfamiliar pieces (68 marks) 
● Six questions related to six of the eight set works. 
● One short melody/rhythm completion exercise. 
● One question on an unfamiliar piece (skeleton score provided) with questions on 
its musical elements, musical contexts and musical language. 
Section B – Extended response comparison between a set work and one 
unfamiliar piece (12 marks) 
● One question that asks students to compare and/or evaluate the musical 
elements, musical contexts and musical language of one set work with one 
unfamiliar piece of music. 
● Audio files with the music extracts will be played to all students at the same time 
and will repeat the extracts a set number of times. 
*See Appendix 8: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to 
this qualification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 7 
Areas of study and set works 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music contains four areas of study, with 
two set works in each. 
 
Area of study Set works 
Instrumental 
Music 
1700–1820 
● J S Bach: 3rd Movement from Brandenburg Concerto no. 5 
in D major 
● L van Beethoven: 1st Movement from Piano Sonata no. 8 
in C minor ‘Pathétique’ 
Vocal Music ● H Purcell: Music for a While 
● Queen: Killer Queen (from the album ‘Sheer Heart Attack’) 
Music for Stage 
and Screen 
● S Schwartz: Defying Gravity (from the album of the cast 
recording of Wicked) 
● J Williams: Main title/rebel blockade runner (from the 
soundtrack to Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope) 
Fusions 
 
● Afro Celt Sound System: Release (from the album 
‘Volume 2: Release’) 
● Esperanza Spalding: Samba Em Preludio (from the album 
‘Esperanza’) 
 
Full details of the exact versions of the scores and recordings for each set work will be 
made available on the Pearson website ahead of first teaching in September 2016. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 8 
2 Subject content and assessment information 
This qualification supports students in forming personal and meaningful relationships 
with music through the development of musical knowledge, understanding and skills 
including performing, composing and appraising. The qualification encourages 
students to engage critically and creatively with a wide range of music and musical 
contexts, develop an understanding of the place of music in different cultures and 
contexts, and reflect on how music is used in the expression of personal and collective 
identities. 
This qualification also supports the development of musical fluency and provides 
access to further study of music at AS and A Level. 
Qualification aims and objectives 
The aims and objectives of this qualification are to enable students to: 
● engage actively in the process of music study 
● develop performing skills individually and in groups to communicate musically with 
fluency and control of the resources used 
● develop composing skills to organise musical ideas and make use of appropriate 
resources 
● recognise links between the integrated activities of performing, composing and 
appraising and how this informs the development of music 
● broaden musical experience and interests, develop imagination and foster 
creativity 
● develop knowledge, understanding and skills needed to communicate effectively 
as musicians 
● develop awareness of a variety of instruments, styles and approaches to 
performing and composing 
● develop awareness of music technologies and their use in the creation and 
presentation of music 
● recognise contrasting genres, styles and traditions of music, and develop some 
awareness of musical chronology 
● develop as effective and independent learners with enquiring minds 
● reflect on and evaluate their own and others’ music 
● engage with and appreciate the diverse heritage of music, in order to promote 
personal, social, intellectual and cultural development. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 9 
Component 1: Performing 
Overview 
The purpose of this component is to assess students’ performing skills in both a solo 
and ensemble context. Students should be given the opportunity to rehearse and 
refine performances on their chosen instrument or voice, developing technical 
control, expression and interpretative skills. 
This component will encourage students to develop creative thinking, aesthetic 
sensitivity, critical awareness, self-confidence, self-motivation and their own musical 
interests and skills. This includes the ability to make music individually and in groups, 
and perform with control, using phrasing and dynamics appropriate to their chosen 
styles and moods of music. 
The areas of content covered are: 
● solo performing 
● ensemble performing 
● approaches to performing. 
Students must perform: 
● solo performance: this must be of at least one minute in duration, and may 
comprise one or more pieces 
● ensemble performance: this must be of at least one minute in duration, and may 
comprise one or more pieces. 
● total performance time across both performances must be a minimum of four 
minutes of music.  
Content 
Students will have to perform a solo and an ensemble performance. These must be 
different pieces of music for each performance. The following content explains what 
must be learned for each type of performance. It explains the possible approaches 
that can be applied to each student’s performance as is desired and appropriate.  
The music vocabulary list in Appendix 3 details the musical elements, musical contexts 
and musical language that students should know and use as appropriate depending 
on the choice of instrument and piece in their performances. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 10 
Students will be required to demonstrate the ability to: 
● make use of musical elements, techniques and resources to interpret and 
communicate musical ideas with technical control and expression. This must be 
achieved by one or more of the following means: playing or singing music, 
improvising, or realising music using music technology 
● perform music with control, making expressive use of phrasing and dynamics 
appropriate to the style and mood of the music 
● students will be assessed on their skills demonstrated during a live, unedited,  
uninterrupted performance. Recordings of performances (using any instruments 
and/or technology) may not be edited afterwards 
● for this component, students can use any instrument for their solo and/or 
ensemble pieces, including those that make use of music technology (e.g. electric 
guitar). 
Solo performances 
A solo performance is considered to be a piece in which the student’s part plays a 
significant or leading role, its contribution to the music is distinctive and clearly 
recognisable in its individuality. The performance may be on any instrument or voice 
in any style or genre. 
Music that was written with an accompaniment must be performed with that 
accompaniment. The accompaniment should not be altered to double the solo line. 
The usual accompaniment for a solo performance will be by one other performer on a 
contrasting instrument. For instance, a singer, flautist or trombonist may be 
accompanied by a pianist, a jazz saxophonist may be accompanied by a double bass 
player. However, students are able to perform with a larger ensemble where there is a 
clear solo part throughout and where the music was originally written for these 
instrumental and/or vocal forces. 
Performances accompanied by backing tracks are acceptable but the part to be 
assessed must not be audible as part of the backing track. 
Ensemble performances 
An ensemble performance must consist of two or more performers, playing 
undoubled and simultaneously sounding, independent parts (for at least one minute), 
with or without additional backing or accompaniment as appropriate. 
When performing their ensemble, students should, in addition to accuracy and other 
essentials of effective performance described above, pay attention to balance and the 
reaction and adjustment to other parts. These are specifically assessed in assessment  
grids 2 and 3. 
A solo with an accompanist is not acceptable as an ensemble unless the student being 
assessed is the accompanist.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 11 
Backing tracks may be used to accompany an ensemble performance but would not 
count towards a live instrumental part. The part to be assessed must not be audible 
as part of the backing track. 
Approaches to performing 
All students should listen to how established performers communicate. They should 
appraise their use of articulation, phrasing and dynamics in the light of these 
performances and reflect this when shaping their interpretation of their chosen 
music. All students should know and understand the appropriate musical vocabulary 
and terminology related to their performances. 
For both their solo and ensemble performances, students will need to understand the 
following as appropriate for their chosen performance. 
● Performing from a score. A score can mean staff notation or written instructions 
for the playing of a piece of music. Students should learn the importance of 
attention to intonation, tuning, and accuracy of pitch and rhythm when performing 
from a score. They should work on their instrumental tone and technique, and 
ensure that they observe all performance directions for phrasing, articulation, 
dynamics and tempo. They should also recognise the importance of fluency and 
ensure that the overall outcome is effective in terms of communication, 
interpretation and style. 
● When performing from a score, students should understand the contextual 
influences affecting the composition of the pieces they are performing, including 
the composer’s intentions regarding the venue and nature of the performance, 
and any important cultural influences relating to the composition of the piece. 
● Students who choose to improvise should learn to play the music accurately and 
go on to exploit and develop its potential. They should pay attention to intonation, 
tuning, coherence and to structure generally. They should work on their 
instrumental tone and technique and demonstrate their ability to shape the music 
effectively. They should also recognise the importance of fluency and ensure that 
the overall outcome is effective in terms of communication, interpretation and 
style, for example with jazz music. 
● Performance of a live part over a pre-recorded/sequenced backing track. If 
choosing this approach, students must play the live part, and it is only this live part 
that will be assessed during their performance. This final part must be performed 
in real time. Students are not permitted to edit their sequenced recordings after 
their live performances.  
● For rapping (similar to vocal performances) students should demonstrate clarity of 
diction, secure breath control, tonal contrast and some extended vocal techniques. 
Students choosing to beatbox should create a variety of contrasting timbres and 
demonstrate effective control of rhythm. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 12 
● Students may choose to perform by the oral tradition that does not fall under solo 
improvisation or traditional performances. In this context, oral tradition means 
material and tradition transmitted orally from one generation to another, often 
taking the form of folktales, ballads, songs, or chants. 
● Students may perform their own compositions when supported by a score with 
sufficient performance detail to assess the accuracy of pitch and rhythm. 
Musical elements 
Depending on the choice of instrument(s) and/or voice(s), and the piece of music 
performed, students should use the appropriate musical elements in their 
performance. 
The musical elements are listed below: 
● organisation of pitch 
● tonality 
● structure 
● sonority 
● texture 
● tempo, metre and rhythm 
● dynamics. 
Musical contexts 
Students should take into account the effect of the purpose and intention of their 
piece of music, and the effect of audience, time and place when performing their 
pieces. Students should perform their music with control, expressing the music as 
appropriate to its style and mood. 
Musical language 
Depending on the choice of instrument(s) and/or voice(s), and the piece of music, 
students should be able to read and play music using the appropriate musical 
language. 
Different types of musical language are listed below: 
● reading and writing of staff notation 
● major and minor chords and associated chord symbols 
● recognising and accurately using appropriate musical vocabulary and terminology 
related to the areas of study. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 13 
Performing using music technology 
Students may perform using music technology. Music technology may involve the use 
of synthesisers, virtual instruments and amplified instruments, such as guitars using 
pedals (including loop pedals), audio samples, and other processors.  
Students will be assessed on their ability to perform a live solo line, which may (or 
may not) include playing over a pre-recorded/sequenced backing track (which may or 
may not have been created by the student themselves). This pre-recorded/sequenced 
backing track is not assessed.  
Examples of how to play the live solo line might include by electric guitar or 
synthesiser, with live use of effects and processes.  
Assessment information 
● First assessment: 2018. 
● This component consists of 60 marks. 
● Students must perform as a soloist and as part of an ensemble. Each performance 
must last a minimum of one minute, with a combined duration of at least four 
minutes. Each performance can consist of one or more pieces.  
● For performances that do not meet the total minimum time requirement, the total 
performance mark will be reduced proportionally according to how many seconds 
the combined performance is less than four minutes. This will be applied by 
Pearson during the moderation process. Please see Appendix 9: Mark penalty tables 
for submissions not meeting the minimum assessment time.  
● The final performances will be carried out under controlled conditions. 
● Performance recordings must be submitted at the end of the course by 15 May. 
● Centres must ensure that the performances submitted are valid for the series in 
which they are submitted. 
Students will perform as a soloist and as part of an ensemble: 
● Solo performance: students will perform a minimum of one solo piece (of at least 
one minute) of their own choice in any style or genre, with or without 
accompaniment as appropriate to the style of the music 
● Ensemble performance: students will perform a minimum of one piece as part of 
an ensemble (of at least one minute) in any style or genre. The student’s part must 
not be doubled by any other member of the ensemble.  
The same music may not be used for solo performance and ensemble performance. 
The combined duration of the two performances must be at least four minutes.  
More than one student may be assessed in the course of a single ensemble 
performance. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 14 
Performance task setting, taking and assessment 
Task setting 
Students should choose the performances they want to perform with the support of 
their teacher. 
Each performance should be of sufficient length and complexity to give the performer 
adequate opportunity to demonstrate their abilities. The teacher should ensure that 
the level of demand is appropriate to allow the student to present a personal and 
meaningful response. 
Teachers should ensure that the performances are relevant and appropriate to the 
student’s course of learning. Students should have the opportunity to choose sources/ 
interpretations/texts as appropriate. 
If the student accompanies themselves, for example by singing and playing an 
instrument, then the role to be assessed should be agreed beforehand between the 
teacher and student. 
Task taking 
Students must perform a minimum of one solo piece (of at least one minute) and a 
minimum of one ensemble piece (of at least one minute). The combined duration of 
the two performances must be at least four minutes in length. 
Performances can be worked on at any point but must be recorded and assessed in 
the academic year in which the student expects to be awarded the qualification.  
Guided maximum performance times 
There is no maximum time limit to students’ combined performance. Excessively long 
submissions may be self-penalising.  
The guided maximum time for the combined performance (both solo and ensemble) 
is six minutes. Performances exceeding the maximum time will still be marked. 
Performance preparation 
Students can undertake preparatory work outside the classroom, for example 
research and performance practice. 
Feedback 
Teachers may help students to understand rubrics, assessment criteria and controls. 
Teachers may also help students with their performance choices, styles and 
techniques. Any additional feedback must be recorded on the Performance 
Authentication Sheet, please see Appendix 1. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 15 
Resources 
Students must have equal access to IT resources. Students should have access to a 
range of resources/texts to enable them to make choices as required for their tasks. 
Performance assessment 
Authenticity 
Students’ performances must be recorded live, unedited, without interruptions and 
without the teacher giving guidance. If students wish to re-record a performance, they 
must re-record the whole performance (either solo or ensemble), and not just part of 
it. The teacher must be present during the recordings. Recordings of performances 
(using any instruments and/or technology) must not be edited afterwards. 
If performing more than one piece of music as part of their solo and/or ensemble 
performances, the pieces of music must be performed and recorded together. 
Items for submission for moderation 
1. Recording 
Centres must submit a complete and unedited recording of the live performance via 
the online submission platform Learner Work Transfer (LWT). The work of each 
student should be a separate track, individually labelled with their centre number, 
candidate number and title. 
2. Score 
Where a written score or lead sheet exists, this must be submitted with the recording 
of the performance. If a piece has been learnt aurally, a professional reference 
recording may be submitted in addition.  
If a written score or lead sheet does not exist, appropriate reference material must be 
submitted (a professional reference recording, written commentary, stimulus for 
improvised performances, track sheets, tables or diagrams).  
Notated music must be provided for all performances from a score. This music must 
contain all the information necessary to assess the accuracy of the performance, for 
example, a guitar tab score with no indication of rhythm is unacceptable: scores 
should use conventional staff notation. Deviations from the score in jazz/rock and 
musical theatre numbers will generally be accepted where they are considered to be 
stylistically convincing. 
For performances from a score/lead sheet, photocopies of the music must be 
submitted with the recording. Only the part performed needs to be submitted, for 
example just the clarinet part in a piece for clarinet with piano accompaniment. 
Original copies should not be supplied. Photocopies will be destroyed by Pearson at 
the end of the examination period.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 16 
For realising music using music technology, a detailed commentary and/or a 
professional reference recording must be submitted alongside a written score/lead 
sheet (if one exists). For sequenced performances, only the recording of the live track 
will be assessed. This track must be indicated when submitting.  
These scores/lead sheets and/or reference materials should include as much detail as 
possible to allow the teacher and moderator to make a fair and accurate judgement 
on the quality and accuracy of the performance. The scores/lead sheets and/or 
reference materials are not assessed and receive no marks.  
Performances that are not accompanied by acceptable scores/lead sheets/reference 
materials cannot be assessed. 
3. Performance Authentication Sheet 
The Performance Authentication Sheet (PAS) must be completed by the teacher, and 
signed by the student and teacher, authenticating that the work is the student’s own. 
Please see Appendix 1.  
4. Submissions not meeting minimum time requirement 
The combined performance time of both performances must be at least four minutes.  
Students submitting combined performances of less than four minutes in length 
should be marked against the assessment criteria on the following pages. 
Centres will be required to notify us of any students who do not meet the minimum 
time requirement of four minutes.  
For performances that do not meet the minimum time requirement, the total 
performance mark will be reduced proportionally according to how many seconds the 
combined performance time is less than four minutes. This will be applied by Pearson 
during the moderation process. Please see Appendix 9: Mark penalty tables for 
assessments that do not meet the minimum assessment time. 
If during the moderation process inaccuracies in the performance times are 
discovered, the moderator may request the rest of the cohort to verify the correct 
timings. 
Failure to accurately record the performance times may result in staff/centre 
malpractice. For further information about this, please see the Administration and 
general information section in this specification. 
Gaps between pieces and tuning do not count towards the performance time.  
If students wish to re-record a performance before submission, they must re-record 
the whole performance (either solo or ensemble), and not just part of it. The teacher 
must be present during the recordings. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 17 
Marking, standardisation and moderation 
Teachers should mark the performances using the assessment criteria on the 
following pages. Teachers may annotate students’ work but should also include any 
comments on the Performance authentication sheet to justify the marks awarded. Only 
the pieces performed are to be assessed. The score and/or written commentaries are 
not assessed and receive no marks.  
Additional marks will also be applied to each performance based on the difficulty of 
the piece performed. Teachers should decide on the difficulty of the piece played and 
follow the instructions on page 19 for applying the difficulty levels grid to each solo 
and ensemble performance. 
Where marking has been carried out by more than one teacher in a centre, there 
must be a process of internal standardisation carried out to ensure that there is a 
consistent application of the assessment criteria. 
Marks awarded by the centre will be subject to external moderation by Pearson. 
Moderation will ensure consistency with national standards. Pearson will notify 
centres of the students whose work has been selected for moderation. This sample 
will take cohort size into account. 
If the moderation indicates that centre assessment does not reflect national 
standards, an adjustment will be made to students’ final marks to compensate. 
For up-to-date advice on teacher involvement and administration of non-examination 
assessments, please refer to the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ) document 
Instructions for conducting non-examination assessments (new GCE and GCSE 
specifications) available on the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk
 
Performance assessment criteria 
Teachers must mark students’ performances using the three assessment criteria grids 
on the following pages to give a mark out of 24, and there are also a further 6 marks 
available for the difficulty of the piece (totalling 30 marks per piece). 
For the performing component, students can use any instrument for their solo and 
ensemble performances, including those that make use of music technology (e.g. 
electric guitar). 
Performance is assessed against AO1: Perform with technical control, expression and 
interpretation.  
Performance assessment grid 1: Technical control – Technique assesses the students’ 
technical control of the instrument. 
Performance assessment grid 2: Expression and interpretation assesses the students’ 
ability to communicate a musically convincing performance. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 18 
Performance assessment grid 3: Technical control (accuracy) and expression and 
interpretation (fluency) assesses the students’ ability to use technical control to play 
the piece accurately, and their ability to use expression and interpretation to play the 
piece fluently. 
These criteria have been developed to assess students’ skills in technical control, 
expression, and interpretation. They are to be used to assess both their solo and 
ensemble performances. All performances are able to be assessed using the criteria 
on the following pages, including realising music using technology. For ensemble 
performances, students are to be assessed on their role throughout the performance 
and grids 2 and 3 have criteria in italics on which ensemble performances must be 
assessed.  
Where the word ‘instrument’ is mentioned this includes voice.  
For the performance being assessed, teachers should use their professional 
judgement to establish in which level of quality of the music performed is.  Where 
instruments other than those listed in the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in 
Music Difficulty levels booklet are presented (such as non-GME instruments, e.g. sitar) 
the performance assessment criteria should be applied at a comparable level of 
demand with GME instruments. 
The marks for each performance will be out a total of 30 marks and will carry equal 
weighting as part of this component, even if they are of different lengths. 
Teachers should decide on the difficulty of the pieces performed and follow the 
instructions on pages 24–26 for applying the difficulty levels grid to each solo and 
ensemble performance. 
Teachers should mark the performances against each of the three grids and then 
apply the difficulty levels grid in order to get a total mark out of 30 for each 
performance (solo and ensemble). The totals from each (solo out of 30 and  
ensemble out of 30) should be added together to give the total marks for this 
component out of 60. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 19 
Performance assessment grid 1: Technical control – Technique  
In this grid, marks are awarded for the technical control of the instrument, for 
example, coordination between the hands, or of the bow/fingers; breath control; 
diction, pedalling; registration; intonation; tone quality; use of filters and effects and 
control of musical sources. 
This will include making use of musical elements as appropriate to the requirements 
of the instrument(s) and piece performed. For ensemble performances, this grid 
assesses only the student’s individual control of their instrument.  
For performances up to difficulty level 2 please see the wording in italics in the grid 
below.  
 
Level Mark Technique 
 0 No rewardable material  
Level 1 1–2 ● The performance overall demonstrates poor technical 
control, as heard in poor coordination, breath control, diction, 
and/or pedalling. 
● The demands of the music are beyond the current ability of 
the performer. 
● The handling of sonority is poor, as heard in a dull, thin, 
coarse tone quality across the range and/or poor intonation 
throughout and/or poor use of filters and effects. 
If the difficulty of the music performed is pre-difficulty level 1 the 
mark awarded in this grid cannot exceed this level. 
Level 2 3–4 ● The performance demonstrates limited technical control, as 
heard in limited coordination, breath control, diction, and/or 
pedalling. 
● There are a few places where the demands of the music are 
beyond the current ability of the performer. 
● The handling of sonority is limited, as heard in a dull, thin, 
coarse tone quality in places and/or limited intonation in 
places and/or limited use of filters and effects. 
If the difficulty of the music performed is at difficulty level 1 the 
mark awarded in this grid cannot exceed this level. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 20 
Level Mark Technique 
Level 3 5–6 ● The performance demonstrates basic technical control, as 
heard in basic coordination, breath control, diction, and/or 
pedalling. 
● There are one or two moments where the demands of the 
piece are beyond the current ability of the performer. 
● The handling of sonority is good, as heard in consistently 
good tone quality except at the extremities of the pitch range 
or at moments of technical difficulty and/or good intonation 
and/or good use of filters and effects. 
If the difficulty of the music performed is at difficulty level 2 the 
mark awarded in this grid cannot exceed this level. 
Level 4 7–8 ● The performance demonstrates convincing technical control, 
as heard in convincing coordination, breath control, diction, 
and/or pedalling. 
● The demands of the music are within the ability of the 
performer. 
● The handling of sonority is convincing, as heard in very good 
tone quality across the pitch range (satisfying, interesting and 
even as the music demands), including, where appropriate, 
very good and sensitive tonal contrast throughout and/or 
very good intonation and/or very good use of filters and 
effects. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 21 
Performance assessment grid 2: Expression and interpretation 
In this grid, marks are awarded for communicating a musically convincing 
performance through the use of musical elements as appropriate to the piece 
performed. The text in italics is to be applied to ensemble performances. 
 
Level Mark Expression and interpretation 
 0 No rewardable material 
Level 1 1–2 ● Inappropriate or inconsistent tempo throughout.  
● Little or no appropriate dynamic contrast, and little or no 
attention given to phrasing and articulation.  
● The performance communicates poorly.  
● In ensemble performances there is little awareness of 
balance. 
Level 2 3–4 ● An unsuitable or inconsistent tempo in places.  
● Limited use of dynamics, phrasing and articulation to shape 
the performance.  
● The performance struggles to communicate and may sound 
mechanical. 
● In ensemble performances there is occasional awareness of 
balance. 
Level 3 5–6 ● The use of tempo is usually appropriate and consistent 
● Some use of dynamics, phrasing and articulation to shape 
the performance, but several opportunities, notated or 
otherwise, are missed 
● The performance demonstrates some involvement with the 
music. 
● In ensemble performances there is a good awareness of 
balance throughout 
Level 4 7–8 ● The use of tempo is appropriate and consistent throughout.  
● Appropriate use of dynamics, phrasing and articulation to 
shape the performance.  
● The performance communicates very well, with no more 
than one or two less successful moments.  
● In ensemble performances there is excellent awareness of 
balance throughout.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 22 
Performance assessment grid 3: Technical control (accuracy) and 
expression and interpretation (fluency) 
In this grid, marks are awarded for the technical control (accuracy), and the 
expression and interpretation (fluency) of the performance, as appropriate to the 
chosen instrument(s) and piece, including making use of musical elements as 
appropriate. The text in italics is to be applied to improvised and/or ensemble 
performances as appropriate. 
 
Level Mark Accuracy and fluency 
 0 No rewardable material. 
Level 1 
 
1–2 ● The performance has several noticeable/obtrusive errors in 
pitch and/or rhythm that impact on its success overall.  
● Coherence and fluency are frequently compromised by 
breakdowns and/or omissions.  
● Improvised performances demonstrate little accuracy when 
performing the stimulus and little development of this 
material. The improvisation will lack coherence and contrast. 
● In ensemble performances there is evidence of difficulty in 
reacting and adjusting to other parts. 
Level 2 
 
3–4 ● The performance has noticeable/obtrusive errors or 
omissions in pitch and/or rhythm, that have little or no impact 
on its success overall.  
● There are moments where coherence is lost, with some 
hesitation and/or omission, but the performance is still 
reasonably fluent for the majority of piece.  
● Improvised performances demonstrate some accuracy when 
performing the stimulus, with limited development of the 
stimulus. The improvisation sounds repetitive, predictable 
and/or formulaic. 
● In ensemble performances there is occasional difficulty in 
reacting and adjusting to other parts. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 23 
Level Mark Accuracy and fluency 
Level 3 
 
5–6 ● The performance has no more than one or two noticeable/ 
obtrusive errors or omissions in pitch and/or rhythm, that 
have minimal impact on its success overall.  
● The performance is mostly coherent and fluent despite the 
occasional hesitation and/or omission.  
● Improvised performances demonstrate a mostly accurate 
performance and show some development of the stimulus. 
The improvisation attempts to create variety but may rely 
heavily on repetition, and be predictable and/or formulaic in 
places. 
● In ensemble performances there is generally good reaction 
and, where appropriate, adjustment to other parts. 
Level 4 
 
7–8 ● The performance is largely accurate with no more than one or 
two minor errors in pitch and/or rhythm. These errors have 
no impact on its success overall.  
● The performance is coherent and fluent despite the 
occasional slight hesitation and/or omission 
● Improvised performances demonstrate an accurate 
performance of the stimulus, and produce an interesting 
realisation of the stimulus. The improvisation is coherent, well 
balanced and effective throughout. 
● In ensemble performances a consistently responsive reaction, 
and where appropriate, adjustment to other parts is evident.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 24 
Difficulty levels grid 
Depending on how difficult the piece of music performed is, the marks for its difficulty 
should be applied using this grid. The difficulty level of selected pieces of music can be 
found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music Difficulty levels booklet, 
on the Pearson website. These can be used as indicators of the demand of pieces of 
music and should inform the teacher’s judgement in assessing how difficult the pieces 
performed by the students are. This booklet shows how levels of difficulty can be 
applied to all instruments for all performances in an accurate and consistent way. 
For this GCSE Music qualification, pieces identified as level 4 are identified as 
‘standard’; above this (level 5 and above) pieces are ‘more difficult’ and below this 
(levels 1-3) they are ‘less difficult’. Students selecting pieces of music up to difficulty 
level 2, should be advised that to do so will mean that they are only able to access 
specific levels and marks in assessment grid 1 (Technique). Pieces at pre-difficulty 
level 1 are restricted to level 1 of the assessment grid. Pieces at difficulty level 1 are 
restricted to level 2 of the assessment grid and pieces at difficulty level 2 are restricted 
to level 3 of the assessment grid. Pieces at difficulty level 3 and above can access the 
complete grid.  
Specific examples of difficulty levels for ensemble performances are not provided in 
the booklet. In all cases the difficulty level for ensemble performances must be 
decided by directly comparing the student’s part with the examples for solo 
performance provided and looking for an equivalent level. 
Where instruments other than those listed in the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE  
(9–1) in Music Difficulty levels booklet are presented (such as non-GME instruments,  
e.g. sitar), its difficulty level should be assessed at a comparable level of demand with 
GME instruments. 
Where there is no tradition of graded examinations for the instrument presented, the 
difficulty level should be assessed at a comparable demand. For example: 
Beatboxing will be less difficult if it involves a simple rhythmic idea maintained with 
basic drum-kit sounds at a steady beat. To achieve standard level it would need two or 
more of the following: 
● Fills with alternative sounds 
● Syncopated rhythmic ideas 
● Dynamic contrasts 
● A fast tempo 
● A piece with contrasting sections. 
More difficult pieces will be fast, include syncopation, make use of effects such as 
echo or reverb, and include a wide range of imaginative sounds, including mimicry of 
standard instruments and scratching effects. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 25 
Rapping will be less difficult if it has a single simple rhythmic idea, a steady beat and 
simple rhymes. To achieve standard level it would need two or more of the following: 
● A sung hook 
● Syncopated rhythms, including breaks 
●  Dynamic contrasts 
●  A fast tempo making greater demands of articulation 
●  A piece with contrasting sections. 
More difficult pieces will always be fast, requiring control of articulation, and make use 
of syncopation. They will always have a sung hook. 
When performing a live solo line over a pre-recorded/sequenced backing track, the 
level of difficulty is assessed on the live part performed only.  
When assessing students’ performances, teachers must take the raw mark (the total 
from the three performance assessment grids out of 24 marks) and decide which level 
of difficulty the piece performed was. The number in the corresponding difficulty level 
column will provide the total mark (out of 30) for the performance.  
This approach should be used to obtain the marks for both students’ solo and 
ensemble performances. These marks will be combined to produce a final total mark 
out of 60 for this component. 
If a student has chosen to perform more than one piece of music for either their solo 
or ensemble performance, the teacher assessing must apply a difficulty level to the 
whole performance based on an average, although taking into consideration the 
relative length of pieces where these lengths are unbalanced. 
 
Raw mark Less difficult Standard More difficult 
1 1 1 2 
2 2 3 3 
3 3 4 5 
4 4 5 6 
5 5 6 8 
6 6 8 9 
7 7 9 11 
8 8 10 12 
9 9 11 14 
10 10 13 15 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 26 
Raw mark Less difficult Standard More difficult 
11 11 14 17 
12 12 15 18 
13 13 16 20 
14 14 18 21 
15 15 19 23 
16 16 20 24 
17 17 21 26 
18 18 23 27 
19 19 24 29 
20 20 25 30 
21 21 26 30 
22 22 28 30 
23 23 29 30 
24 24 30 30 
Security and backups 
It is the centre’s responsibility to keep the work that students have submitted for 
assessment secure. 
Secure storage is defined as a securely-locked cabinet or cupboard. Where students 
are producing work, secure storage is defined as a classroom studio or workshop that 
is locked or supervised from the end of one session to the start of the next. 
For materials stored electronically, centres are strongly advised to utilise firewall 
protection and virus-checking software, and to employ an effective backup strategy, 
so that an up-to-date archive of students’ evidence is maintained. 
Further information 
For up-to-date advice on teacher involvement and administration of non-examination 
assessments, please refer to the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ) document 
Instructions for conducting non-examination assessments (new GCE and GCSE 
specifications) available on the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 27 
Component 2: Composing 
Overview 
The purpose of this component is to assess students’ skills in composing music and 
enables them to appreciate the process of creating music. Students will be introduced 
to the technical and creative skills required by a composer. 
Composing is the creative process by which most of the music we experience came 
into being. Students will be encouraged to explore a range of compositional starting 
points and investigate a range of elements, techniques and resources for developing 
and manipulating ideas – and turning them into completed pieces of music. 
Students can also explore the skills needed to compose music for different 
instrumental and/or vocal forces. 
Students must submit two compositions, of a combined duration of at least three 
minutes: 
● one in response to a brief set by Pearson, of at least one minute in duration 
● one free composition set by the student, of at least one minute in duration 
● students do not have to perform the music that they have composed. 
Content 
Students should be given a wide range of opportunities to develop their composition 
skills. Students should take into account the effect of the purpose and intention of 
their pieces of music, and the effect of audience, time and place when composing 
their pieces. 
Students will be required to demonstrate the ability to: 
● make use of musical elements, techniques and resources to create and develop 
musical ideas with technical control and coherence; freely as the composer 
chooses, and responding to a brief or commission supplied by others 
● compose music that develops musical ideas, uses conventions, and explores the 
potential of musical structures and resources.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 28 
The composition skills to study include: 
● Developing musical ideas: 
o developing musical ideas in the form of compositions and/or arrangements. 
● Compositional techniques and strategies: 
o how to write for instrument(s) and/or voice(s) and/or technology: efficient, 
sensitive and idiomatic handling of appropriate timbres and textures 
o how to develop musical ideas within chosen forms and structures: 
understanding the principles of rhythmic, melodic and harmonic construction 
and the working of form(s) and structure(s) appropriate to the composition 
undertaken. 
● Ensuring technical control and coherence: 
o working to a set brief: developing the necessary technical skills to meet the 
requirements of the brief and relating it to its intended audience and occasion. 
● Methods of notating composition scores, including: 
o staff notation 
o graphic notation 
o written accounts. 
In order to compose in a particular style or genre, it is essential to study examples of 
music in some detail. This will enable students to recognise and use appropriate 
musical vocabulary, chord symbols and rhythmic notation relevant to their 
compositions. Much of the listening and appraising work will involve analysis of the 
set works and these could be used as models for composing in those particular forms 
and styles. 
Composing using music technology 
Students may compose their pieces of music using music technology. This may involve 
the use of a Digital Audio Workstation (DAW) to compose, edit and process sequenced 
compositions using live recordings, audio samples and MIDI materials. It may also 
involve the use of synthesisers, virtual instruments and amplified instruments, such as 
guitars using pedals (including loop pedals) and other processors. 
Musical elements 
Depending on the choice of instrument(s) and/or voice(s), and the composition, 
students should use the appropriate musical elements in their composition. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 29 
The musical elements are listed below: 
● organisation of pitch 
● tonality 
● structure 
● sonority 
● texture 
● tempo, metre and rhythm 
● dynamics. 
Musical contexts 
Students should take into account the effect of the purpose and intention of their 
composition, and the effect of audience, time and place when composing their pieces. 
Students should compose their music with control, expressing the music as 
appropriate to its style and mood. 
Musical language 
Depending on the choice of instrument(s) and/or voice(s), and the composition, 
students should be able to compose music using the appropriate musical language. 
The different types of musical language are listed below: 
● reading and writing of staff notation 
● major and minor chords and associated chord symbols 
● recognising and accurately using appropriate musical vocabulary and terminology 
related to the areas of study. 
The composition briefs 
Briefs will be released on the 1st of September for assessment in the following exam 
series. The briefs will relate to each of the areas of study. The general themes of the 
briefs are listed below. Each brief will relate to a specific audience and/or occasion. 
Students must compose to their chosen brief based on one of the areas of study. 
The composition may be for any instrument or voice, or combination of instruments 
and/or voices, and in any style, subject to the requirements of the selected 
composition brief.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 30 
Brief 1 – Instrumental Music 1700-1820 
Students should study instrumental forms which facilitate the development and 
extension of an opening melody such as binary form, ternary, rondo, theme and 
variations and fantasia. They should practise harmonising and developing given 
melodies using the techniques of repetition, variation, extension and motivic working 
to sustain a piece with a varied and creative musical outcome. 
Students may work in any style, subject to the brief. 
Students will be required to develop a given melodic phrase into a piece for one 
instrument and accompaniment. 
Brief 2 – Vocal Music 
Students should investigate the relationship between the structure of vocal pieces 
and the structure of texts by studying a variety of song forms (for example da capo, 
strophic, verse/chorus) and word settings. They should investigate the handling of 
instrumental accompaniments and/or backings. 
Students may work in any style, subject to the brief. 
Students will be required to set words to music for voice and accompaniment. 
Brief 3 – Music for Stage and Screen 
Students should study the techniques of underscoring moving images and composing 
incidental music for the stage to produce a satisfying and flowing succession of 
musical moods and atmospheres. They should learn how to enhance visual or 
dramatic action in which the narrative and sequencing may not follow conventional 
forms and structures. If they choose to compose a show song they should learn how 
music, lyrics, and if appropriate, dance, combine to produce a theatrical result.  
Students may work in any style, subject to the brief. 
Students will be required to compose a musical soundtrack in response to a given 
scenario. 
Brief 4 – Fusions 
Students should learn how harmony, melody, rhythm and instrumentation combine 
to create a characteristic stylistic ‘feel’ in the music. They should gain practice in the 
handling of these elements to create music in a range of styles and stylistic influences. 
Students will be required to compose a piece based on two set musical styles or 
traditions. 
The composition briefs will make compositional demands in terms of the treatment of 
ideas, techniques and structures but between them will be sufficiently open-ended to 
allow students the freedom to work in any style or genre or for any instrument. 
Students should be aware of the specific assessment criteria against which the 
compositions will be marked. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 31 
Free composition 
Students will produce one composition that is free, i.e. not related to a set brief. They 
should use their imagination and skills to compose a piece of music. They can draw 
inspiration or starting points from the set works and suggested wider listening, as well 
as their own interests and the world around them. They should consider the role of 
the audience and/or occasion in their composition. 
The piece composed by the students may be for any instrument or voice, or 
combination of instruments and/or voices, and in any style. 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: 2018. 
● This component consists of 60 marks. 
● Students must submit two compositions, of a combined duration of at least three 
minutes. One in response to a brief set by Pearson, of at least one minute in 
duration, and one free composition set by the student, of at least one minute in 
duration. 
● For compositions that do not meet the total minimum time requirement, the total 
composition mark will be reduced proportionally according to how many seconds 
the combined composition is less than three minutes. This will be applied by 
Pearson during the moderation process. Please see Appendix 9: Mark penalty tables 
for submissions not meeting the minimum assessment time. 
● Four briefs will be published on the Pearson website on the 1st September each 
year, from September 2017.  
● The composing may take place over multiple sessions. 
● Compositions must be submitted at the end of the course by 15 May. 
● Centres must ensure that compositions submitted are valid for the series in which 
they are submitted. 
● Students must complete a minimum of five hours of their composing, including the 
final write-up and recording, in a classroom setting under teacher supervision 
● Students do not have to perform the pieces of music that they have composed. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 32 
Composition task setting, taking and assessment 
Task setting 
Students should choose the composition brief from those released by Pearson each 
year, and decide their free composition with the support of their teacher. 
Group compositions where the music is the work of more than one student are not 
acceptable. 
Each composition must be at least one minute in duration. The two compositions 
combined should be a minimum of at least three minutes in duration. 
Set brief compositions must be worked on and assessed in the academic year in 
which the student expects to be awarded the qualification. Free compositions can be 
worked on at any point, but must be recorded and assessed in the academic year in 
which the student expects to be awarded the qualification. 
Guided maximum composition times 
There is no maximum time limit to students’ combined composition. Excessively long 
submissions may be self-penalising.  
The guided maximum time for the combined composition (both set brief and free 
composition) is five minutes. Compositions exceeding the maximum time will still be 
marked. 
Task taking 
Students must submit two compositions, of a combined duration of at least three 
minutes: 
● one in response to a brief set by Pearson, of at least one minute in duration 
● one free composition set by the student, of at least one minute in duration. 
Collaboration 
Students may work together on their research but group compositions are not 
allowed. 
While research and development may be carried out by the student in or out of the 
centre, the final composition and score or account must be completed in the centre 
under teacher supervision. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 33 
Controlled conditions 
Students must work on their compositions under controlled conditions for at least five 
hours. This must include the final write-up of their compositions, and can include any 
research and development time. The final write-up is defined as the time when the 
final recording and score or commentary of the piece is produced.  
As composition is a creative process that cannot be confined to the classroom, 
students will be allowed to research and generate initial ideas outside of the 
classroom and teacher supervision. However to ensure the composition is the 
student’s own unaided, personal and independent work, teachers must monitor and 
authenticate preparatory work (development of composition ideas, for example this 
may involve listening to other music, mulling over a brief, experimenting with suitable 
melodies or rhythmic ideas on guitar or piano, working out rough drafts) prior to the 
commencement of the composition recording period. Students will be allowed to 
bring in stimulus and ideas but need to develop ideas within a classroom setting and 
complete the final recording and write-up under controlled conditions.  
Teachers should inspect the preparatory material, and be satisfied that they are the 
student’s own work, checking them against the student’s previous work and 
expectations of them. 
Teacher guidance during this period must be restricted to: the availability and 
suitability of sources and materials, the prevention of plagiarism and ensuring the 
work is conducted in accordance with specification requirements and procedures. 
Feedback 
Teachers may help students to understand rubrics, assessment criteria and controls. 
Teachers must not provide students with solutions. Any additional feedback must be 
recorded on the Composition Authentication Sheet, please see Appendix 2. 
Resources 
Students must have equal access to IT resources. Students should have access to a 
range of resources/interpretations/texts to enable them to make choices as required 
for their tasks. 
Composition recording 
Recording the composition 
Compositions and arrangements may be realised through conventional instruments 
or music technology. The quality of the recording of the performance will not be 
assessed. Only the actual composition itself will be assessed.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 34 
Items for submission for moderation 
1. Score 
A detailed notated score appropriate to the style of music must be submitted for each 
composition. This can be submitted on manuscript paper or as a printout. The score 
may be handwritten or printed. This must be produced by the student. 
‘Score’ refers to any of the following: a full score in conventional staff notation; a lead 
sheet or chord chart; track sheets; written account, tables or diagrams. 
The purpose of the score is to justify the intentions of the piece of music that has 
been composed, so that it may be easily replicated by another performer. It should 
include all necessary and appropriate musical vocabulary.  
Students not enclosing a traditional notation score must submit a written account 
instead (no more than 500 words). This piece of writing should give a detailed 
description of the composition and its purpose and meaning. It should refer to the 
musical content throughout. 
Written accounts must contain similar information to that found in a score: details of 
performance indications and the composer’s intentions, including the appropriate and 
necessary musical vocabulary. A good account containing sufficient information for a 
realisation of the composer’s intentions is acceptable for any style of music.  
Whatever format or combination of formats is chosen, the presentation must be 
sufficiently clear and detailed enough for the moderator to be able to assess the 
composition or arrangement. 
The recording and the score will be used together to assess the composition. The 
presentation of the score will not carry marks, but students should ensure that it is of 
sufficient clarity to be read and understood by a third party.  
2. Recording 
A complete recording of both pieces must be submitted via the online submission 
platform LWT. Each composition for each student should be a separate track, 
individually labelled with their centre number, candidate number and composition 
title. The recording can be made live or be studio-produced. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 35 
3. Composition Authentication Sheet 
The Composition Authentication Sheet (CAS) must be completed by the teacher, and 
signed by the student and teacher, authenticating that the work is the student’s own. 
Please see Appendix 2.  
4. Submissions not meeting minimum time requirement 
The combined composition time of both compositions must be at least three minutes.  
Students submitting combined compositions of less than three minutes in length 
should be marked against the assessment criteria on the following pages. 
Centres will be required to notify us of any students who do not meet the minimum 
time requirement of three minutes.  
For compositions that do not meet the minimum time requirement, the total 
composition mark will be reduced proportionally according to how many seconds the 
combined composition time is less than three minutes. This will be applied by Pearson 
during the moderation process. Please see Appendix 9: Mark penalty tables for 
submissions not meeting the minimum assessment time. 
If, during the moderation process, inaccuracies in the composition times are 
discovered, the moderator may request the rest of the cohort to verify the correct 
timings. 
Failure to accurately record the composition times may result in staff/centre 
malpractice. For further information about this, please see the Administration and 
general information section in this specification. 
Gaps between pieces and tuning do not count towards the composition time. 
Marking, standardisation and moderation 
Teachers should mark the assignment using the assessment criteria on the following 
pages. Teachers may annotate students’ work but should also include any comments 
on the Composition Authentication Sheet to justify the marks awarded. 
Where marking has been carried out by more than one teacher in a centre, there 
must be a process of internal standardisation carried out to ensure that there is a 
consistent application of the assessment criteria. 
Marks awarded by the centre will be subject to external moderation by Pearson. 
Moderation will ensure consistency with national standards. Pearson will notify 
centres of the students whose work has been selected for moderation. This sample 
will take cohort size into account. 
If the moderation indicates that centre assessment does not reflect national 
standards, an adjustment will be made to students’ final marks to compensate. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 36 
For up-to-date advice on teacher involvement and administration of non-examination 
assessments, please refer to the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ) document 
Instructions for conducting non-examination assessments (new GCE and GCSE 
specifications) available on the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk 
Composition assessment criteria 
Teachers must mark students’ compositions using the three assessment criteria grids 
on the following pages to give a mark out of 30. 
These criteria have been developed to assess students’ skills in developing musical 
ideas, demonstrating technical control and composing with musical coherence. They 
are to be used to assess both the Pearson set brief and free composition. 
Where the word ‘instrument’ is mentioned this includes voice.  
For the composition being assessed, teachers should use their professional 
judgement to establish in which level of quality of the music composed is.  
The compositions are equally weighted and will be marked equally, even if the two 
compositions are of significantly different lengths. 
Teachers should mark the compositions against each grid in order to get a total mark 
out of 30 for each composition (Pearson set brief and free composition). The totals 
from each composition piece should be added together to give the total marks for this 
component out of 60. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 37 
Composition assessment grid 1: Developing musical ideas 
These marks are awarded for the development of musical ideas and use of musical 
elements as appropriate, the management of stylistic characteristics and conventions, 
and the response to the brief if appropriate, and the effectiveness with which the 
piece meets its intended purpose and/or audience.  
 
Level Mark Developing musical ideas 
 0 No rewardable material 
Level 1 1–2 ● Musical ideas are limited, undeveloped and have little 
relevance to the intended purpose and/or audience. 
● Characteristics and conventions for the chosen genre/style 
have not been observed or are seriously misjudged. 
● For brief-set composition only: unimaginative and 
inappropriate response to the brief. 
Level 2 3–4 ● Musical ideas are somewhat developed, with some relevance 
to the intended purpose and/or audience, but with some 
obtrusive misjudgements that compromise the effectiveness 
of the piece. 
● There is an attempt to develop and manage appropriate 
stylistic characteristics and conventions for the chosen 
genre/style but these are unconvincing for the most part and 
maintained inconsistently. 
● For brief-set composition only: the piece meets the brief in 
some respects but lacks sophistication and/or detail. 
Level 3 5–6 ● Musical ideas are developed and extended, with relevance to 
the intended purpose and/or audience but there are one or 
two obvious misjudgements and/or inconsistencies. 
● Stylistic characteristics and conventions for the chosen 
genre/style have been selected appropriately and are 
maintained inconsistently in parts but misjudgements do not 
detract seriously from the overall impression. 
● For brief-set composition only: the piece meets the brief and 
its intended audience and occasion although the approach is 
perhaps a little functional. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 38 
Level Mark Developing musical ideas 
Level 4 7–8 ● Musical ideas are developed and extended effectively, with 
good relevance to the intended purpose and/or audience for 
the most part. 
● Stylistic characteristics and conventions for the chosen 
genre/style have been selected appropriately and maintained 
convincingly for some of the piece despite one or two minor 
misjudgements. 
● For brief-set composition only: creative response to the brief 
with some sense of audience and occasion. 
Level 5 9–10 ● Musical ideas are developed and extended successfully and 
with assurance, meeting the intended purpose and/or 
audience appropriately. 
● Stylistic characteristics and conventions for the chosen 
genre/style have been selected appropriately and handled 
convincingly throughout. 
● For brief-set composition only: imaginative response to the 
brief with a well-developed sense of audience and occasion. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 39 
Composition assessment grid 2: Demonstrating technical control 
These marks are awarded for control of the appropriate musical elements, of devices 
and conventions appropriate to the chosen style and/or genre, and of the control of 
the chosen instrument(s). 
 
Level Mark Demonstrating technical control 
 0 No rewardable material 
Level 1 1–2 ● The control of appropriate musical elements is insecure, with 
many obtrusive misjudgements that seriously compromise 
the effectiveness of the piece. 
● The instrumental and/or vocal forces are handled un-
idiomatically, possibly with passages that cannot be 
played/sung. 
● Textures are narrow in scope and unvaried. 
Level 2 3–4 ● The control of appropriate musical elements is insecure and 
marred by obvious and/or frequent misjudgements. 
● The handling of instrumental and/or vocal forces is functional 
and basic although the parts are mainly playable/singable. 
● The handling of textures may be misjudged and/or unvaried. 
Level 3 5–6 ● The control of appropriate musical elements is mostly secure 
although there may be some obvious inconsistencies and/or 
misjudgements. 
● There is some attempt to write idiomatically for the 
instrumental and/or vocal forces but they may lack 
exploitation in parts. 
● There are no serious misjudgements in the handling of 
textures but they may lack variety. 
Level 4 7–8 ● The control of appropriate musical elements is secure, and 
any misjudgements are not enough to have a serious impact 
on the success of the piece. 
● The instrumental and/or vocal forces show some contrast and 
exploitation. 
● Textures are varied and clear as appropriate to the style. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 40 
Level Mark Demonstrating technical control 
Level 5 9–10 ● The control of appropriate musical elements is secure 
throughout, and any misjudgements are marginal and few, if 
any. 
● The instrumental and/or vocal forces are handled 
idiomatically and exploited imaginatively. 
● Textures are varied, complex, and/or clear as appropriate to 
the style. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 41 
Composition assessment grid 3: Composing with musical coherence 
These marks are awarded for the use and combination of appropriate musical 
elements to achieve musical coherence and fluency.  
 
Level Mark Composing with musical coherence 
 0 No rewardable material 
Level 1 1–2 ● Little sense of structure, design or balance between the 
sections. 
● Limited sense of fluency or contrast in the piece. 
● The piece may be incomplete or missing significant 
passages. 
Level 2 3–4 ● An attempt at basic, balanced structures but perhaps 
repetitive, predictable or showing too great a diversity of 
ideas. 
● Fluency and contrast will be attempted but unconvincing in 
parts. 
● There are attempts made at achieving a sense of direction in 
the piece. 
Level 3 5–6 ● The piece demonstrates a satisfactory use of basic 
structures but these may be formulaic or standard forms. 
● Fluency and contrast will be maintained for the most part. 
● There is a sense of direction in the piece. 
Level 4 7–8 ● The piece demonstrates some sense of wholeness and 
balance between the sections. 
● There is good sense of fluency and contrast. 
● There is a good sense of direction overall. 
Level 5 9–10 ● A sense of coherence and wholeness is achieved 
throughout. 
● There is a consistent sense of fluency and contrast 
throughout. 
● There is a convincing sense of direction overall. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 42 
Security and backups 
It is the centre’s responsibility to ensure that the composition briefs are kept secure 
until released to students. 
It is also the centre’s responsibility to keep the work that students have submitted for 
assessment secure. Secure storage is defined as a securely-locked cabinet or 
cupboard. 
The rules on storage also apply to electronic data. For example, centres should collect 
memory sticks for secure storage between sessions or restrict student access to 
specific areas of the centre’s IT network. 
For materials stored electronically, centres are strongly advised to utilise firewall 
protection and virus-checking software, and to employ an effective backup strategy, 
so that an up-to-date archive of students’ evidence is maintained. 
Further information 
For up-to-date advice on teacher involvement and administration of non-examination 
assessments, please refer to the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ) document 
Instructions for conducting non-examination assessments (new GCE and GCSE 
specifications) available on the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 43 
Component 3: Appraising 
Overview 
The purpose of this component is to assess students’ listening and appraising skills 
through the study of music across a variety of styles and genres. The content is 
grouped into four areas of study, each of which contains two set works. 
This component gives students the opportunity to reflect on, analyse and evaluate 
music in aural and/or written form. To achieve these objectives students need to use 
their knowledge and understanding of musical elements, musical contexts and 
musical language to make critical judgements about the repertoire and context of 
music within the areas of study. These critical judgements will require the use of 
attentive listening, aural perception and specific music vocabulary associated with a 
particular style or genre. These areas of study also provide opportunities for students 
to demonstrate their contextual understanding of music when performing and 
composing. 
Students will learn the content of musical elements, musical contexts and musical 
language through four compulsory areas of study. The areas of study and set works 
are: 
 
Area of study Set works 
Instrumental 
Music 
1700–1820 
● J S Bach: 3rd Movement from Brandenburg Concerto no. 5 
in D major 
● L van Beethoven: 1st Movement from Piano Sonata no. 8 in 
C minor ‘Pathétique’ 
Vocal Music 
 
● H Purcell: Music for a While 
● Queen: Killer Queen (from the album ‘Sheer Heart Attack’) 
Music for Stage 
and Screen 
● S Schwartz: Defying Gravity (from the album of the cast 
recording of Wicked) 
● J Williams: Main title/rebel blockade runner (from the 
soundtrack to Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope) 
Fusions 
 
● Afro Celt Sound System: Release (from the album 
‘Volume 2: Release’) 
● Esperanza Spalding: Samba Em Preludio (from the album 
‘Esperanza’) 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 44 
There are two set works in each area of study, and these will allow students to 
develop their knowledge and understanding of musical elements, musical contexts 
and musical language through the context of these pieces. Students should also study 
a range of pieces beyond these set works. The suggested wider listening pieces for 
each area of study (see Appendix 4: Suggested wider listening) provide students with 
breadth, enabling them to place their knowledge of musical elements, musical 
contexts and musical language in a wider context, and apply their knowledge and 
understanding to more pieces of music. The suggested wider listening will help 
students to relate their learning to other pieces of music, but its study is not 
compulsory. Teachers can identify and teach other pieces of music to support their 
students’ learning. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 45 
Content 
Knowledge and understanding 
Students need to learn about the following in order to critically appraise pieces of 
music through the contexts of areas of study: 
● form and structure of the music 
● appropriate musical vocabulary for each work 
● stylistic features of the music, for example the Baroque features to be found in the 
music 
● conventions used in different times and places 
● how music relates to the context in which it was created 
● how to express and justify their opinions and preferences. 
Students need to demonstrate their knowledge and understanding of musical 
elements, musical contexts and musical language in relation to music that they have 
studied and to unfamiliar music for each of the areas of study. 
Musical elements 
This includes: 
● organisation of pitch (melodically and harmonically), including simple chord 
progressions, for example perfect and imperfect cadences, and basic melodic 
devices 
● tonality, including major, minor and basic modulations within the music, for 
example tonic, dominant 
● structure; organisation of musical material, including simple structure, for example 
verse and chorus, call and response, binary and theme and variations 
● sonority, including recognition of a range of instrumental and vocal timbres and 
articulation, for example legato and staccato 
● texture, how musical lines (parts) fit together, including simple textural 
combinations, for example unison, chordal and solo 
● tempo, metre and rhythm, including pulse, simple time, compound time, and basic 
rhythmic devices, for example dotted rhythms  
● dynamics; basic dynamic devices, for example crescendo and diminuendo. 
These musical elements can be applied to many different types of music but may not 
be applicable to every single area of study or set work to the same degree or extent.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 46 
The use of the musical elements above should be used to understand how, as 
appropriate to each area of study and set work: 
● to identify how instrumentation is used in different combinations (identifying 
instruments and groups of instruments) 
● the instrumentation is used to good effect, including playing techniques etc 
associated with a particular instrument or group 
● to identify musical and melodic devices (ornamentation, ostinati, riffs, use of 
imitation, pedal point and sequence) 
● to identify rhythmic devices and features (syncopation, swung rhythms, dotted 
rhythms and triplets) 
● to identify and discriminate between major, minor, modal, pentatonic, and 
chromatic tonalities 
● texture is used, including how the music exploits textural contrasts with reference 
to monophony, homophony, polyphony, heterophony etc 
● musical devices are used, such as ostinato/riff, sequence, repetition, pedals and 
drones 
● harmony and chord patterns are used in the music 
● the effects of music (e.g wah wah, flanger, continuo – see Appendix 3 for more 
examples). 
Musical contexts 
This includes: 
● the effect of purpose and intention (for example of the composer, performer, 
commissioner) on how music is created, developed and performed in different 
historical, social and cultural contexts 
● the effect of audience, time and place (for example venue, occasion) on how music 
is created, developed and performed in different historical, social and cultural 
contexts. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 47 
Musical language 
This includes: 
● reading and writing of staff notation, including treble-clef and bass-clef note 
names, rhythmic notation in simple time, key signatures to four sharps and four 
flats 
● major and minor chords and associated chord symbols, including traditional and 
contemporary notation as appropriate, for example IV or G7 
● recognising and accurately using appropriate musical vocabulary and terminology 
related to the areas of study, for example slide, repeats and stepwise 
● recognising and accurately using appropriate terminology related to scores (e.g. 
continuo) 
Students should have an understanding of key stylistic features and be able to use 
appropriate music language and terminology in their answers. For example, students 
should be able to describe a repetitive melody in a classical piece as an ‘ostinato’ but 
also to use the correct term of ‘riff’ when describing the same feature in a piece of 
popular music. When describing musical textures, the description of ‘thick’ or ‘thin’ is 
not appropriate in the description of a homophonic or polyphonic passage. Students 
should understand the appropriate and correct musical vocabulary to use when 
appraising each of the set works. 
The Music vocabulary list in Appendix 3 lists vocabulary and terminology that supports 
the learning of musical elements, musical contexts and musical language. The list 
indicates the level and scope of technical language expected from students at this 
level. The list is not exhaustive. The words listed may appear in the examination paper 
and should be used in students’ answers where appropriate. 
Some of the study of the set works will also involve identifying key musical themes, 
chord patterns and rhythms. Examination questions every year will feature musical 
dictation which could be completing some notes on staff notation/guitar tablature, or 
identifying a particular rhythm or completing a chord sequence. It is, therefore, 
important that students study the various types of notation used in the eight set 
works. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 48 
Areas of study 
Students will learn the musical elements, musical contexts and musical language in 
depth through four compulsory areas of study. 
The areas of study are: 
● Instrumental Music 1700–1820 
● Vocal Music 
● Music for Stage and Screen 
● Fusions. 
These areas of study enable students’ listening and appraising to understand music 
across a variety of styles and genres. Each area of study includes two set works that 
should be studied in detail.  
These set works will enable students to develop their knowledge and understanding 
of musical elements, musical contexts and musical language in depth, and within the 
context of the area of study. Teachers should enable students to draw connections 
and links between the set works within each area of study and also explore the 
connections with the other areas of study. 
For each area of study, students are expected to use appropriate terminology and 
vocabulary associated with the genres, styles and features of the area of study. 
Examples of the words expected to be known and understood by students for use in 
the examination are found in Appendix 3: Music Vocabulary List on page 64. 
Area of Study 1 – Instrumental Music 1700-1820 
The pieces selected as set works provide a good representation of instrumental music 
from the period 1700–1820. The Bach Brandenburg Concerto no. 5, 3rd movement 
includes a study of fugue in a Gigue dance movement. General features of Baroque 
music can be analysed in this piece. The Beethoven Piano Sonata no. 8 in C minor is 
chosen as an example of solo instrumental music. It is a dramatic romantic work in 
sonata form. 
The suggested wider listening works provide a good background and context to the 
set pieces. The Handel Concerto Grosso complements the Bach work and the Vivaldi 
Winter from the Four Seasons provides further study of the solo concerto form. The 
Classical piano sonata movements by Mozart and Haydn provide a good historical 
introduction to the piano sonata as a genre and prepare for the extended Beethoven 
sonata movement. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 49 
Area of Study 2 – Vocal Music 
This is a large topic area and the set works represent both ends of the time frame 
from the Baroque setting by Purcell of ‘Music for a While’ to the twentieth-century 
Queen song ‘Killer Queen’. However, the principle remains the same: they are both 
settings of words for solo voice with an accompaniment. 
This diversity of musical styles is present too in the selection of suggested wider 
listening pieces. Some Handel and Bach solo arias are juxtaposed with Beach Boys 
and ABBA songs. There are opportunities to widen the selection to include solo songs 
from the Classical and Romantic eras too. 
Area of Study 3 – Music for Stage and Screen 
This is a varied topic and the two set works are representative works from the musical 
and film music genres. The song ‘Defying Gravity’ from Wicked presents opportunities 
to study this popular piece of West End musical theatre. The Star Wars films are well 
known and the study of the main theme from Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope will 
give an understanding of how film music is composed as sound to picture. 
The four pieces of suggested wider listening provide further examples of both the 
musical and film music. These pieces provide more background to the topic and 
enhance the study of the set works. 
Area of Study 4 – Fusion 
The emphasis here is on how two or more musical cultures are combined to create a 
fusion. Some fusions have become genres in their own right such as Bhangra and 
Salsa. The core understanding is for students to examine how the separate musical 
elements are treated in a fusion work. The two set works provide contrast. The Afro 
Celt Sound System: ‘Release’ and ‘Samba Em Preludio’ by Esperanza Spalding are 
designed to explore how fusions create new, popular styles. 
The suggested wider listening pieces cover African, Celtic, Afro-Cuban Jazz and Latin 
American styles, showcasing the variety and uniqueness of different fusion styles. 
Set works 
It is recommended that students familiarise themselves with each set work as a 
whole, before learning to identify important musical elements and aspects of 
continuity and change between works. 
Understanding of the musical elements, musical contexts and musical language will 
help to identify the historical, social and cultural contexts, and illuminate elements of 
continuity and change between the works. 
Students need to learn how to write perceptively about music, in particular 
comparing, contrasting, assessing, evaluating and commenting as appropriate. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 50 
The eight set works have been chosen to be representative of typical pieces from their 
areas of study. These pieces should be studied and analysed so that the students 
have a good understanding of the stylistic features and conventions of each piece. 
Students should be encouraged to express their ideas about the set works using 
appropriate and correct musical vocabulary. 
The areas of study and set works are: 
 
Area of study Set works 
Instrumental 
Music 
1700–1820 
● J S Bach: 3rd Movement from Brandenburg Concerto no. 5 
in D major  
● L van Beethoven: 1st Movement from Piano Sonata no. 8 
in C minor ‘Pathétique’ 
Vocal Music 
 
● H Purcell: Music for a While 
● Queen: Killer Queen (from the album ‘Sheer Heart Attack’) 
Music for Stage 
and Screen 
 
● S Schwartz: Defying Gravity (from the album of the cast 
recording of Wicked) 
● J Williams: Main title/rebel blockade runner (from the 
soundtrack to Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope) 
Fusions 
 
● Afro Celt Sound System: Release (from the album 
‘Volume 2: Release’) 
● Esperanza Spalding: Samba Em Preludio (from the album 
‘Esperanza’) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 51 
Suggested wider listening and unfamiliar pieces 
Students should listen to and be able to appraise unfamiliar pieces of music as part of 
this component. The examples of suggested wider listening in Appendix 4: Suggested 
wider listening (and other pieces) are provided to support students’ preparation for 
appraising unfamiliar pieces of music. 
Unfamiliar pieces of music are neither set works nor suggested wider listening. 
Unfamiliar music will have similar stylistic characteristics to the set works. Studying 
other pieces of music (suggested wider listening and others) will provide breadth to 
support learning these stylistic characteristics. 
Students should apply their appraising skills and knowledge of musical elements, 
musical contexts and musical language to these pieces of unfamiliar music in the 
examination. They should learn how to listen perceptively to unfamiliar music, 
developing their skills of aural analysis. In particular they should be able to place the 
music in a wider context and chronology (which could include identifying the genre, 
composer and date of composition), recognise chords and keys, and complete simple 
aural dictation tasks. 
The pieces given as suggested wider listening for each area of study are designed to 
provide further examples of music from that period or musical tradition and provide 
breadth as well as depth to each area of study. These works provide a useful 
framework for a wider study of the set works. Their purpose is to show the common 
features of the set works in other music, so that each set work is not just seen in 
isolation. These pieces of suggested wider listening do not need to be examined in as 
much depth as the set works. 
The suggested wider listening is not compulsory to study. Teachers may use the 
pieces listed in Appendix 4: Suggested wider listening or they may make their own 
selection of pieces of music to supplement the areas of study. 
Assessment information 
● This is an externally set and assessed examination 
● First assessment: May/June 2018. 
● This component consists of 80 marks. 
● The assessment is 1 hour and 45 minutes. 
● The assessment consists of nine questions. 
● Students must answer all questions. 
● The paper will include multiple-choice, short open, and extended writing 
questions. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 52 
● There are two sections in the examination: 
o Section A: 68 marks 
o Section B: 12 marks 
● The provided audio files with the music extracts will be played to all students at the 
same time and will repeat the extracts a set number of times. 
Section A 
Students will be assessed on their ability to identify aurally the key musical features in 
some of the set works from the areas of study. They should understand the context 
within which the set works were composed and their place within the area of study as 
a whole. 
Students will also be expected to express and justify opinions on the set work extracts 
and complete short musical dictation and staff notation questions. 
Further details for Section A include: 
● eight questions requiring students to respond to extracts of music, of which: 
o six questions will be based on extracts of the set works 
o one question will be on musical dictation. This will be worth 6–10 marks 
o one question will be on an unfamiliar piece (closely related to a set work) with 
an accompanying skeleton score. This will be worth 8 marks 
● the exact number of times the extracts will be heard is announced on the audio 
and printed on the examination paper 
● students will be given reading time at the start of each question and time to 
complete their answers at the end of each question 
● a range of question types, including multiple choice, melody/rhythm completion, 
grid completion, one-word response, short response and free response questions 
will be used as appropriate to the extracts 
● the 68-mark total for this section will be divided as appropriate between the eight 
questions: the questions will not necessarily be of equal weighting. 
● The question on an unfamiliar piece of music will relate to one of the set works 
(but not a set work). Its purpose is for students to draw links from their study of 
the set works to the music heard as an unfamiliar extract. For example, it might be 
that following the study of the Star Wars music, another extract in a similar style 
will be used, although not necessarily by the same composer or from the same 
film track. A short skeleton score will be provided to help the student follow the 
music and provide reference points. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 53 
Section B 
In Section B, students will be asked to compare in detail an extract of one of the set 
works with an extract from an unfamiliar listening piece (related to one of the set 
works). Students will hear the pieces and see the scores. This question will be worth 
12 marks. 
The question will be an extended response assessed for the quality of musical 
knowledge and understanding demonstrated as well as the quality of the evaluation 
and conclusion. This question will focus on the stylistic features of the music and will 
draw on the students' knowledge from the study of the set works. Students should be 
prepared to demonstrate that they are able to demonstrate their knowledge and 
understanding of, and evaluate, musical elements, musical contexts and musical 
language. Questions may include any of the following: 
● how the musical elements (pitch, tonality, structure, sonority, texture, tempo, 
metre, rhythm, and dynamics) have been used by the composer/performer 
● how the instruments and groups of instruments are used 
● how any other key musical elements have been used in the pieces 
● how the two pieces compare together to meet a purpose, audience or other factor 
● placing the music in its musical, historical, social and cultural context 
● expressing and justifying opinions on the pieces in question. 
The essay question will involve comparing one of the set works with an unfamiliar 
piece. There will be scores accompanying this question for both extracts of music. The 
question will be focused on an evaluation of certain stylistic aspects of the music. This 
will be extended writing in which the student will show how they can apply their 
knowledge in a comparison exercise. This may include making evaluative and critical 
judgements on the pieces as well as making stylistic connections between the two 
pieces. 
Credit will be given if other music is referred to in students’ answers – this could be 
from the suggested wider listening pieces or any other relevant works studied by the 
student. 
Students will need to know how the works fit within the context of other pieces 
written in similar genres around the same time. 
Students should be encouraged to express their ideas about music using accurate 
musical vocabulary. 
Students must not bring any materials into the examination. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 54 
Sample Assessment Materials 
A sample paper and mark scheme for this component can be found in the Pearson 
Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) 
document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 55 
Assessment Objectives 
 
Students must: % in 
GCSE 
AO1 Perform with technical control, expression and 
interpretation 
30 
AO2 Compose and develop musical ideas with technical control 
and coherence 
30 
AO3 Demonstrate and apply musical knowledge 20 
AO4 Use appraising skills to make evaluative and critical 
judgements about music 
20 
Total 100% 
 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
Component Assessment Objectives Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives AO1 % AO2 % AO3 % AO4 % 
Component 1: Performing 30 0 0 0 30 
Component 2: Composing 0 30 0 0 30 
Component 3: Appraising 0 0 20 20 40 
Total for GCSE 30 30 20 20 100% 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 56 
3 Administration and general information 
Entries 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for this qualification can be 
found in our UK Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations 
officers and is available on our website: qualifications.pearson.com 
Discount code and performance tables 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more than one GCSE, or other 
Level 2 qualifications with the same discount code, will have only the grade for their 
'first entry' counted for the purpose of the school and college performance tables 
(please see Appendix 8: Codes). For further information about what constitutes 'first 
entry' and full details of how this policy is applied, please refer to the DfE website: 
www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-education
 
Students should be advised that if they take two GCSEs with the same discount code, 
schools and colleges they wish to progress to are likely to take the view that this 
achievement is equivalent to only one GCSE. The same view may be taken if students 
take two GCSEs or other Level 2 qualifications that have different discount codes but 
have significant overlap of content. Students or their advisers who have any doubts 
about their subject combinations should check with the institution they wish to 
progress to before embarking on their programmes. 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special 
consideration and malpractice 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality policy requires all students 
to have equal opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our 
qualifications to be awarded in a way that is fair to every student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the Equality Act 2010) are 
not, when they are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in 
comparison to students who do not share that characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification 
and that this achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their 
peers. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 57 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be available in English. All student work must be 
in English. 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with 
special educational needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to: 
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the 
assessment. 
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an 
individual student with a disability, without affecting the integrity of the assessment. 
Access arrangements are the principal way in which awarding bodies comply with the 
duty under the Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students 
will then know what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for 
assessment. 
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable 
adjustments where a person with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage 
in undertaking an assessment. The awarding organisation is required to take 
reasonable steps to overcome that disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be unique to that individual and 
therefore might not be in the list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of 
factors, which will include: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other 
students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding 
organisation, timeframes or affects the security or integrity of the assessment. This is 
because the adjustment is not ‘reasonable’. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 58 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student's mark or grade 
to reflect temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the 
examination/assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a 
material effect on a student’s ability to take an assessment or demonstrate their level 
of attainment in an assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to apply for access 
arrangements and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and 
special consideration, please refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk. 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that compromises or seeks to 
compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in controlled assessments discovered before the candidate has 
signed the declaration of authentication form does not need to be reported to 
Pearson. 
Candidate malpractice found in controlled assessments after the declaration of 
authenticity has been signed, and in examinations must be reported to Pearson on a 
JCQ Form M1 (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice).  
The form should be emailed to candidatemalpractice@pearson.com. Please provide 
as much information and supporting documentation as possible. Note that the final 
decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report candidate malpractice constitutes staff or centre malpractice. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 59 
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and 
maladministration of our qualifications. As with candidate malpractice, staff and 
centre malpractice is any act that compromises or seeks to compromise the process 
of assessment or undermines the integrity of the qualifications or the validity of 
results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported 
immediately, before any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson on a 
JCQ Form M2(a) (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice).  
The form, supporting documentation and as much information as possible should be 
emailed to pqsmalpractice@pearson.com. Note that the final decision regarding 
appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the 
document General and Vocational Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations 
and Assessments Policies and Procedures, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-
office/malpractice. 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to comply with the 
requirements of Ofqual's General Conditions of Recognition. 
This GCSE qualification will be graded and certificated on a nine-grade scale from 9 to 
1 using the total subject mark where 9 is the highest grade. Individual components 
are not graded. 
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum judged by Pearson to be 
of sufficient standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U 
result. 
The first certification opportunity for this qualification will be 2018. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 60 
Student recruitment and progression 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this qualification. 
Progression 
Students can progress from this qualification to:  
● further study of music at AS and A Level and to study of AS and A Level Music 
Technology 
● vocational courses such as the Pearson BTEC National in Music and Music 
Technology 
● apprenticeships or other training 
● employment in a related sector.  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 61 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Performance Authentication Sheet 63 
Appendix 2: Composition Authentication Sheet 63 
Appendix 3: Music vocabulary list 64 
Appendix 4: Suggested wider listening 74 
Appendix 5: Command word taxonomy 75 
Appendix 6: The context for the development of this qualification 76 
Appendix 7: Transferable skills 78 
Appendix 8: Codes 80 
Appendix 9: Mark penalty tables for submissions not meeting the  
minimum assessment time 81 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 62 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 63 
Appendix 1: Performance Authentication Sheet  
The Performance Authentication Sheet (PAS) must be completed by the teacher, and 
signed by the student and teacher, authenticating that the work is the student’s own. 
The form includes space to record the teacher/assessor’s marks, the duration of the 
work and any comments on each of the performances.  
Please download the form from our website. 
 
Appendix 2: Composition Authentication Sheet 
The Composition Authentication Sheet (CAS) must be completed by the teacher, and 
signed by the student and teacher, authenticating that the work is the student’s own. 
The form includes space to record the teacher/assessor’s marks, the duration of the 
work and any comments on each of the compositions.  
Please download the form from our website.   
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 64 
Appendix 3: Music vocabulary list 
This music vocabulary list gives the vocabulary and terminology that support the 
learning of musical elements, context and language. These words define the musical 
elements, musical contexts and musical language that students will require to know 
and understand when performing, composing and appraising pieces of music. 
The list indicates the level and scope of technical language expected from students 
at this level. The list is not exhaustive. The words listed may appear in the 
examination paper and students should therefore know and understand them. The 
musical elements are in bold. 
Various words and expressions commonly used in performing, composing and 
appraising music are not included. These include, for example, names of note values 
(crotchet, minim, etc.) and common performance directions (allegro, crescendo, 
rall/entando, etc). 
For words and terms not defined below, and/or for further amplification, please 
refer to The Harvard Dictionary of Music (4th edition, editor D. M. Randel, Harvard 
University Press, 2003) and/or The Rhinegold Dictionary of Music in Sound by D. 
Bowman (Rhinegold Education, 2002). 
Students will be expected to recognise the sounds of all commonly-used orchestral, 
keyboard and ‘popular’ instruments (such as electric guitar), and types of voice. Most 
of these may be heard in the eight set works.  
 
Word Definition 
Musical elements 
Organisation of 
pitch (melodically 
and harmonically) 
‘Pitch’ refers to how high or low sounds are 
Arpeggio An arpeggio has the notes of a chord played in succession 
rather than together, strictly in continuously ascending or 
descending order. The term ‘broken chord’ is sometimes 
used as a synonym (the notes of the chord thus broken 
often occurring in any order) 
Cadence The chords that conclude a musical phrase. Cadences are of 
four main types: perfect, with chords V‒I; imperfect, with I 
(or other non-dominant chord) and V; plagal, with chords 
IV‒I; interrupted, usually with V‒VI. (See ‘Roman numerals’ 
below) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 65 
Word Definition 
Bass (line) The lowest part in the musical texture, which often 
determines or generates the harmony. A Baroque ‘figured 
bass’ has numerals underneath to indicate the chords to be 
‘realised’ by the continuo keyboard player. A ‘murky’ bass 
has a pattern of broken octaves (as in parts of Beethoven’s 
Pathétique sonata) 
Chord The simultaneous sounding together of two or more notes. 
Often used to refer to the triads in major and minor keys 
Conjunct Synonym for ‘stepwise’ (see below)  
Disjunct Opposite of conjunct (or its synonym ‘stepwise’) 
Dissonance In traditional harmony a dissonance is a note that does not 
belong to a common chord or triad – strict rules usually 
govern its approach and its resolution back to a non-
dissonant note (i.e. a ‘consonance’)  
Chord sequence A series of chords, usually repeated (e.g. in a 12-bar blues) 
Drone Especially in non-classical genres, the extended sustaining 
or repeating of a note or a harmonic interval (notably a 
perfect 5th) 
Fanfare A flourish for brass instruments (frequently with 
percussion) for ceremonial or celebratory effect, or simply 
any short passage for brass in an orchestral work 
Ground bass A repeating phrase in the bass (a type of ‘ostinato’), 
especially in some Baroque pieces, notably by Purcell 
Harmony Successions of chords (or sometimes refers to single 
chords) 
Interval The distance between two neighbouring notes or two heard 
simultaneously. Most intervals are stated as ordinal 
numbers (2nds, 3rds, etc.) with an adjective expressing their 
major, minor, diminished or augmented character 
Leap A melodic movement to a note further than a tone or 
semitone away from the previous note. Opposite of ‘step’ 
Melody A melody (or ‘melodic line’) is a succession of single sounds 
– most frequently an individual strand or part within a fuller 
musical texture. A melody is usually ‘tuneful’ or otherwise 
prominent or memorable 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 66 
Word Definition 
Melodic device A compositional method applying to a single melodic line 
rather than to the complete texture (for example melodic 
sequence)  
Monotone Use of the same pitch repeatedly in a melodic part 
Ornamentation The process of elaborating or decorating musical material 
(particularly a melody). Includes conventional ornaments 
such as trills and turns 
Ostinato A short musical pattern repeated throughout a section or 
complete piece 
Pedal (or pedal 
point) 
A note (usually in the bass, and generally either the tonic or 
dominant of the key) which is sustained or repeated while 
chords change, often resulting in dissonance 
Riff Similar to ostinato, but applied to popular styles of music  
Roman numerals Roman numerals (from I to VII) are used to label chords in 
traditional harmony according to which degree of the scale 
is used as the root. Thus in C major, the chord D F A (with 
root D) is II 
Scale A succession of pitches in stepwise order usually extending 
for an octave (e.g. C D E F G A B C is a (major) scale) 
Sequence Repetition of a melody (or an harmonic progression) but at 
different pitch level(s) rather than at the same pitch 
Stepwise Where a melody moves by steps (by tones and/or 
semitones) and not by leaps (of a 3rd or more) 
Theme A melody (or occasionally some other form of musical 
material) on which part or all of a piece is based 
Tonality The relationship of notes within a scale or mode to a 
principal note (the tonic or final). A wider term than key but 
often used synonymously with it 
Atonal Absence of tonality or key  
Chromatic Chromatic notes are those progressing by semitones, 
especially to a tone having the same letter name, e.g. C to C 
sharp 
Dominant (key) The key a perfect 5th higher than the tonic (‘home’) key of a 
piece (e.g. D major in a G major piece)  
Key A form of tonality based on major and minor scales 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 67 
Word Definition 
Major Based on major scales, with a major 3rd between scale 
degrees 1 and 3.  
Minor Based on minor scales, with a minor 3rd between scale 
degrees 1 and 3  
Modal Tonality based on modes (precursors of modern scales ‒ of 
several types, each with a different series of tones and 
semitones) 
Modulation Change of key 
Pentatonic Based on a five-note scale (often equivalent to scale 
degrees 1, 2, 3, 5, 6 of a major scale, or 1, 3, 4, 5, (flat) 7 of a 
minor scale) 
Relative 
minor/major 
Major keys and their relative minors have the same key 
signature (e.g. F major and D minor). Minor keys and their 
relative majors have the same key signature (e.g. E minor 
and G major) 
Form, structure The overall shape of a composition (e.g. binary. ternary, 
rondo). ‘Form’ and ‘structure’ are largely synonymous 
Binary A form with two sections (often referred to as A and B), each 
usually repeated. The A section usually modulates from the 
tonic to dominant or relative major. The B section returns to 
the tonic, usually via other keys 
Introduction An opening passage or section which clearly prepares for 
(or introduces) the first main idea (e.g. in a song where the 
piano has an introduction before the singer begins) 
Phrase A short passage of music to some extent comparable to a 
phrase in speaking or writing. Many phrases are two or four 
bars long  
Rondo A form comprising several statements of a main section 
interspersed with contrasting episodes. The simplest rondo 
structure was ABACA, where A is the recurring section, and 
B and C are the episodes 
Sonata form A large-scale form which evolved in the Classical period. It 
combines elements of binary form, and ternary form (in 
having exposition, development and recapitulation) 
Ternary A form with three sections (often referred to as A B A). The 
opening section is repeated (exactly or varied), section B 
providing pronounced contrast 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 68 
Word Definition 
Strophic A strophic song has the same (or similar) music for each 
stanza of the poem being set. (A song in which some or all 
stanzas are set differently is ‘through-composed’) 
Sonority The nature and quality of musical sounds 
Articulation The degree to which a note is separated from the note that 
follows it (ranging from minimal (legato) to much greater 
(staccato or staccatissimo) 
Timbre The particular tone colour of an instrument or voice 
Texture The number of parts in a piece of music and how they relate 
to one another. Several types of texture are listed below 
Accompaniment Musical background to a principal part or parts (e.g. piano 
accompanying a solo singer) 
Continuo (or Basso 
continuo) 
The bass line in many Baroque orchestral, choral and 
chamber works. Most commonly played by low string 
instruments (with or without bassoons) and with a chord-
playing instrument (notably harpsichord, organ or lute) to 
complete the harmony by realising the figured bass 
Heterophony Where two or more parts play the same melodic line 
simultaneously, but there are small variations between 
them. The adjective is ‘heterophonic’ 
Homophony A widely-used type of texture consisting of a melody part 
and other subsidiary (accompanying) parts. The adjective is 
‘homophonic’ 
Monophony Music in which only one note is heard at a time – a single 
melodic line. The adjective is ‘monophonic’ 
Polyphony In one sense any texture with two or more parts, but 
commonly used as a synonym for ‘counterpoint’ where 
there are two or more simultaneous and largely 
independent melody lines. The adjective is ‘polyphonic’ 
Two-part Music for two ‘parts’ (i.e. for two melodic lines, and 
therefore with two notes sounding simultaneously except 
where one or both rest). ‘Three-part’ and ‘four-part’ music 
have three and four parts respectively 
Imitation Two or more parts share the same melodic idea (not 
necessarily in full, exactly or at the same pitch). Each new 
part enters separately, the preceding one continuing with 
shared or new material 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 69 
Word Definition 
Tempo, metre and 
rhythm 
‘Tempo’ is the speed of the music, (which may be, for 
example, slow, quick, or lively). ‘Metre’, often indicated by a 
time signature, concerns the pattern and number of strong 
and weak beats (e.g. 2/4 metre has two crotchets per bar, 
the first ‘strong’, the second ‘weak’). ‘Rhythm’ refers more 
broadly to the relationship between sounds and the 
passage of time, and often concerns conventional 
groupings (e.g. ‘dotted rhythms’, as defined below). 
Beat Most music has a regular beat rather as most people have a 
regular pulse. Small numbers of beats are generally 
grouped into bars. Some beats, notably the first of a bar, 
are ‘strong’ or ‘accented’, others, notably the last, are ‘weak’ 
or ‘unaccented’. Some rhythms come ‘off the beat’: further, 
see ‘syncopation’  
Dotted rhythm The term ‘dotted rhythm’ is usually applied to a pair of 
notes consisting of a dotted note and a shorter note (the 
two making up a complete beat or number of beats), or to 
several successive such pairs of notes 
Duration In rhythmic terms, the length of a note 
Shuffle A rhythm based on the shuffle dance step, characteristically 
featuring alternately long and short notes (within triplet 
groupings) 
Swing A jazz style that incorporates swung rhythms 
Swung rhythm Two notes of the same value (usually quavers) are played 
with the first lengthened and the second correspondingly 
shortened (as often in jazz) 
Syncopation A ‘strong’ or stressed note occurs on a part of a bar or beat 
that would normally be ‘weak’ or unstressed 
Triplets Three notes of equal value taking the time normally 
occupied by two notes of the same written value (or by one 
undotted note of the next highest value) 
Dynamics The volume of musical sound(s), and also the symbols used 
in a score to indicate volume (e.g. f and p) 
Accent Notes may be given special prominence by the addition of 
accent marks (e.g. › )  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 70 
Word Definition 
Performance matters 
Solo A complete piece (or a section) for one player or singer with 
no accompaniment, or for one player or singer with 
accompaniment 
Tone (quality) The quality of a performer’s sound (which may be termed 
rich, rounded, thin, etc.) 
Forces The instrument(s) and/or voice(s) that perform the music 
Ensemble Defined, for purposes of GCSE performance, in the ‘Content’ 
section of Component 1: Performing  
Double (verb) Doubling occurs where one performer consistently plays or 
sings the same notes as another – strictly speaking at the 
same octave, but duplication at the octave may be involved 
Double stopping Where two (or more) notes are played together on an 
orchestral string instrument (two or more strings being 
‘stopped’ simultaneously). 
Glissando A slide between adjacent notes of a chromatic or diatonic 
scale. The terms glissando and portamento are to some 
extent interchangeable, but a portamento involves 
movements smaller than a semitone (such as a singer can 
achieve but a pianist cannot) 
Hammer on A guitar technique used to facilitate fast playing by avoiding 
the need to pick every note 
Harmonics Each sound combines a fundamental and a series of much 
less clearly heard higher pitches called harmonics. With 
stringed instruments these can be sounded by lightly 
touching a string at particular points (rather than by normal 
‘stopping’)  
Improvisation A piece composed as it is performed, although frequently 
based on a pre-conceived ‘stimulus’ such as a melodic 
theme or chord scheme 
Melisma(tic) A melisma is a group of notes used to set just one syllable 
of text. The adjective is ‘melismatic’. Where each syllable has 
one note, the style is ‘syllabic’ 
Pull off A guitar technique: a string is plucked by ‘pulling’ the string 
off the fingerboard with a finger used to fret the note 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 71 
Word Definition 
Range The distance between the lowest and highest notes in a 
single melodic part. (A soprano part working between 
middle C and the C above has a range – or ‘compass’ – of an 
octave) 
Tessitura The most widely used part of a vocal or instrumental part’s 
range 
Wah wah The Wah wah (or Harmon) mute, as used with trumpets and 
trombones. The name is onomatopoeic – the resulting 
sound can be rather like ‘wah wah’. The same result can be 
obtained via music technology as a studio effect 
Phrasing The correct observance of divisions between whole phrases 
and sometimes shorter groups of notes (often to accord 
with a composer’s phrase markings)  
Pizzicato Where the string(s) of a stringed instrument are plucked 
rather than bowed. The direction ‘pizzicato’ in the score is 
cancelled by ‘arco’, meaning ‘[with] the bow’ 
Professional 
reference recording 
A recording of a piece submitted for Component 1 in lieu of 
a score – with the performance and the recording of 
professional standard  
Realisation Defined in specification under Component 1, Content  
Sequenced 
compositions 
Compositions produced mainly or entirely via electronic 
sequencing software 
Skeleton score  A kind of notational summary – a visual aid for students in 
appraising examinations. It usually shows most or all of a 
single leading part rather than the complete texture  
Tablature Notation other than staff notation with letters, numbers or 
other conventional signs – today used particularly by 
guitarists 
Tremolo 
(tremolando) 
Rapid repetition of a single note or of notes a 3rd or more 
apart 
Lyrics Words to which a song is set (applies to music in popular 
styles) 
‘Words’, ‘Text’ or 
‘Poem’ 
Words to which a song is set (applies to music in Western 
Classical styles) 
Word painting Word painting occurs when a composer deliberately 
illustrates a word or phrase with a matching musical image 
(e.g. by having rising notes for ‘ascending’) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 72 
 
Word Definition 
Historical periods, styles and genres 
Baroque Music in the Western Classical Tradition from c1600‒c1750.  
Cantata A work (sacred or secular, and particularly associated with 
the Baroque period) in several movements for singer(s) and 
instruments 
classical (with  
lower-case c) 
Describes music from the Western Classical Tradition 
generally (Baroque, Classical, Romantic, etc.). ‘Classical’ with 
upper-case C can refer to Music in the Western Classical 
Tradition from c1750‒c1820 
(Solo) concerto A work for soloist and orchestra, usually in three 
movements 
Concerto grosso A type of concerto favoured in the Baroque period, 
commonly with three soloists and orchestra 
Fusion The blending of more than one musical style or culture to 
create a new ‘fused’ sound (e.g. Afro-Cuban) 
Genre A type of piece (e.g. opera, rock, concerto) 
Gigue The term covers both a fast Baroque dance and pieces 
suggestive of that dance (rather than necessarily intended 
for use in the dance). A gigue is normally in compound 
metre (such as 12/8) 
Jazz Originally a fusion of African and North American styles. A 
number of varieties of jazz have developed over time, 
including New Orleans, swing, bebop 
March Originally a march was for soldiers to march to – usually in 
4/4 time, with regular and often repetitive rhythms. Now 
used for any piece of similar character designed, for 
example, for ceremonial or processional use   
Musical theatre Musical theatre integrates songs, spoken dialogue, acting, 
and dance, within a popular idiom. ‘Musicals’ are extended 
pieces of musical theatre from which favourite songs are 
often performed separately 
Oral tradition Music learnt by listening and repeating, and passed on 
orally 
Prelude Especially in the Baroque period, an ‘introductory’ piece 
preceding (an)other piece(s). Later preludes are often just 
short stand-alone pieces 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 73 
Word Definition 
Rock Emerged in the 1950s as ‘rock and roll’, and subsequently 
developed into a range of different popular styles 
Samba A dance characteristic of Brazil, but with its roots in Africa. 
Usually quick, with frequent use of the syncopated rhythm 
semiquaver-quaver-semiquaver  
Sonata A fairly extended composition, usually in three or four 
movements, with one or more (particularly the first) in 
sonata form. Many sonatas are for solo piano 
Suite A group of pieces, all or some of which are usually in 
Baroque or Classical dance styles 
Terms for music technology 
Chorus effect An effect used to simulate the small variations of pitch and 
timing experienced when several performers play or sing 
the same part 
Flanger A flanger is an effects unit that creates ‘flanging’, an audio 
effect which involves mixing together two identical signals, 
one of them delayed by a small, gradually changing amount 
Multi-track 
recording 
Recording different audio channels to separate ‘tracks’ (one 
by one or simultaneously) for greater ease and 
effectiveness of processing than when all information is 
stored on a single track 
Over-dubbing Adding more recorded sounds to a previously-made 
recording, with the intention of enhancing it 
Pitch shift Where the original pitch of a sound is raised or lowered, 
often by means of an effects unit called a ‘pitch shifter’ 
Re-take A new recording of a section or piece intended to replace a 
previous unsatisfactory one  
(Studio) effects Methods of artificially creating sounds, or of modifying or 
enhancing recorded sounds, through use of music 
technology  
Track (1) An individual song, piece or movement on a recording 
(e.g. on a CD). (2) A path on a magnetic recording tape (or a 
computerised recording system) that receives or contains 
information from a single audio channel 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 74 
Appendix 4: Suggested wider listening 
The following pieces of suggested wider listening music provide examples of music 
from each area of study for component 3. They are not compulsory to study. 
These pieces can support students in understanding the music from the areas of 
study in a wider context and in appraising pieces of unfamiliar music. 
Area of study Suggested wider listening 
Instrumental Music 
1700–1820 
● G F Handel: Concerto Grosso op 6 no. 5, second 
movement 
● A Vivaldi: ‘Winter’ from the Four Seasons concerti 
● W A Mozart: Piano Sonata in C major K.545, first 
movement 
● F J Haydn: Piano sonata in C major ‘English Sonata’ Hob 
50, third movement 
Vocal Music ● G F Handel: ‘The Trumpet Shall Sound’ (bass), ‘Rejoice 
Greatly’ (soprano) and ‘Every Valley’ (tenor) from 
Messiah  
● J S Bach: ‘Weichet nur, betrubte Schatten’ and ‘Sehet in 
Zufriedenheit’ from wedding Cantata 
● Beach Boys: ‘God only Knows’ from Pet Sounds 
● Alicia Keys: ‘If I ain’t got you’ and ‘Dragon Days’ from 
The Diary of Alicia Keys 
Music for Stage and 
Screen 
● Tim Minchin: ‘Naughty’ from Matilda 
● Marc Shaiman: ‘Mama, I’m a Big Girl Now’ from 
Hairspray 
● Deborah Lurie: ‘The Pier’, ‘Walk on the Beach’ and ‘Dear 
John Letter’, from Dear John 
● Howard Shore: ‘The Prophecy’, ‘Concerning Hobbits’, 
‘The Bridge of Khazad-dum’ and ‘The Breaking of the 
Fellowship’ from The Lord of the Rings the Fellowship 
of the Ring 
Fusions ● Capercaillie: Beautiful Wasteland 
● Demet Akalin: ‘Pirlanta’ and ‘Ders Olsun’ from Pirlanta 
● Buena Vista Social Club: Buena Vista Social Club 
● Dizzy Gillespie y Machito: Afro-Cuban Jazz Moods 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 75 
Appendix 5: Command word taxonomy 
The following words are the command words that will appear in examination papers, 
and their definitions. 
 
Command word Definition  
State, give, name, 
identify, list 
Give one or more points. Recall or find factual information 
Complete Dictation questions, for example, to fill in blanks on a score 
Describe Give points which may or may not be linked 
When linked there will be a correct order 
Explain Give points that are linked to a justification or extension 
Compare Make points about the similarities and differences 
Make relative judgements 
Analyse Examine, dissect musical elements in detail 
Focus on individual musical elements and how they 
combine to create an effect/achieve a purpose 
Evaluate Make judgements against parameters 
Draw conclusions 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 76 
Appendix 6: The context for the development of 
this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] 
and our ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
● reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with 
those taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
● consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including higher 
education academics, teachers and employers to ensure this qualification is 
suitable for a UK context 
● reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in 
their documents: GCSE (9 to 1)/GCE Qualification Level Conditions and Requirements,  
GCSE Subject Level Conditions and Requirements for Music, published in March 2015, 
and GCSE Subject Level Guidance for Music, published in March 2015. 
 
 
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification Principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
• demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning and measuring higher-order 
skills 
• rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and valid assessment tasks and 
processes, and generating confidence in end users of the knowledge, skills and competencies of certified students 
• inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students develop at different rates and have 
different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
• empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills, see Appendix 7. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 77 
  
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
May 2014   
“ The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important change to the 
education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications will assist them in helping 
their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an ‘Expert 
Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or because of our 
experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the world as diverse as 
Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification development 
process that has included: 
• Extensive international comparability of subject content against the highest-performing 
jurisdictions in the world 
• Benchmarking assessments against UK and overseas providers to ensure that they are at 
the right level of demand 
• Establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-specific 
expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
• Subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future oriented. The 
design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, meaning learner outcomes 
have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a learner’s success 
in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident that we have supported the 
development of qualifications that are outstanding for their coherence, thoroughness and 
attention to detail and can be regarded as representing world-class best practice. 
”  
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Lee Sing Kong  
Director, National Institute of Education, 
Singapore 
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, Switzerland 
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
 
All titles correct as at May 2014 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 78 
Appendix 7: Transferable skills 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently 
flagged the need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable 
them to respond with confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the 
world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines skills, 
or competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that can be 
learned and that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform an 
activity or task and can be built upon and extended through learning.’ 
[1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected and 
evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this 
process, we identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the most 
evidence-based and robust skills framework. We adapted the framework slightly to 
include the Program for International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT Literacy and 
Collaborative Problem Solving (CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves: [2]  
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve 
general cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and communicate. [3]  
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, oral communication, written communication, 
assertive communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, service 
orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared 
understanding, taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team 
organisation. 
 
[1]  OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012) 
[2]  Koenig J A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop (National Academies Press, 2011) 
[3]  PISA – The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy (2011) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 79 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work 
stress, adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, 
and physical adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual 
teams, work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and 
able to acquire new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher 
education, as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the 
teaching and learning of this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning 
materials, developed with stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 80 
Appendix 8: Codes 
Type of code Use of code Code 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for 
performance tables is assigned a 
discount code indicating the subject area 
to which it belongs. 
Discount codes are published by DfE.  
Please see the 
GOV.UK website* 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework 
(RQF) codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an 
Ofqual Regulated Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) code. 
The RQF code is known as a Qualification 
Number (QN). This is the code that 
features in the DfE Section 96 and on the 
LARA as being eligible for 16–18 and 19+ 
funding, and is to be used for all 
qualification funding purposes. The QN 
will appear on students’ final certification 
documentation. 
The QN for this 
qualification is: 
601/8204/0 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to 
enter students for a qualification. 
Centres will need to use the entry codes 
only when claiming students’ 
qualifications. 
GCSE – 1MU0 
 
Component 
codes 
These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be 
entered for individual components. 
Component 1: 
1MU0/01 
Component 2: 
1MU0/02 
Component 3: 
1MU0/03 
*www.gov.uk/government/publications/2018-performance-tables-discount-codes 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 81 
Appendix 9: Mark penalty tables for submissions 
not meeting the minimum assessment time  
Component 1: Performance  
The minimum assessment time is four minutes. The following table will be applied by 
Pearson during the moderation period for any work that is below the minimum 
assessment time. 
For Pearson use only. 
Total time of the performances 
(minutes and seconds) 
Percentage applied to final mark 
3:45 to 3:59 93.75%  
3:30 to 3:44 87.50%  
3:15 to 3:29 81.25%  
3:00 to 3:14 75.00%  
2:45 to 2:59 68.75%  
2:30 to 2:44 62.50%  
2:15 to 2:29 56.25%  
2:00 to 2:14 50.00%  
1:45 to 1:59 43.75% 
1:30 to 1:44 37.50%   
1:15 to 1:29 31.25% 
1:00 to 1:14 25.00% 
0:45 to 0:59 18.75% 
0:30 to 0:44 12.50% 
0:15 to 0:29 6.25% 
0:00 to 0:14 0.00% 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Music –  
Specification – Issue 4 – December 2021 © Pearson Education Limited 2021 82 
Component 2: Composition  
The minimum assessment time is three minutes. The following table will be applied 
by Pearson during the moderation period for any work that is below the minimum 
assessment time. 
For Pearson use only. 
Total time of the compositions 
(minutes and seconds) 
Percentage applied to final mark 
2:45 to 2:59 91.67%  
2:30 to 2:44 83.33%  
2:15 to 2:29 75.00%  
2:00 to 2:14 66.67%  
1:45 to 1:59 58.33%  
1:30 to 1:44 50.00%  
1:15 to 1:29 41.67% 
1:00 to 1:14 33.33% 
0:45 to 0:59 25.00% 
0:30 to 0:44 16.67% 
0:15 to 0:29 8.33% 
0:00 to 0:14 0.00% 
 
DB02/12/21 9781446926116_GCSE 2016_L12_MUSIC_ISS4.DOCX.1–88/0 
 
 
Edexcel, BTEC and LCCI qualifications 
Edexcel, BTEC and LCCI qualifications are awarded by Pearson, the UK’s largest awarding body offering 
academic and vocational qualifications that are globally recognised and benchmarked. For further 
information, please visit our qualifications website at qualifications.pearson.com. Alternatively, you can 
get in touch with us using the details on our contact us page at qualifications.pearson.com/contactus 
 
About Pearson 
Pearson is the world's leading learning company, with 22,500 employees in more than 70 countries 
working to help people of all ages to make measurable progress in their lives through learning. We put 
the learner at the centre of everything we do, because wherever learning flourishes, so do people. Find 
out more about how we can help you and your learners at qualifications.pearson.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References to third party material made in this specification are made in good faith. Pearson does not 
endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may be subject to change, or 
any opinions expressed therein. (Material may include textbooks, journals, magazines and other publications 
and websites.) 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
 
ISBN 978 1 446 92611 6 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2021 
 
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office:  80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121