This dra/f_t   qualiﬁ  cation has not yet been accredited by Ofqual. It is published to enable teachers to have early sight of our 
proposed approach to Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9 - 1) in Music (1MU0). Further changes may be required 
and no assurance can be given at this time that the proposed qualiﬁ  cation will be made available in its current form, or 
that it will be accredited in time for ﬁ  rst teaching in September 2016 and ﬁ  rst award in 2018.
Speciﬁ  cation
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9 - 1) in Portuguese (1PG0)
First teaching from September 2018
First certiﬁ  cation from June 2020
GCSE (9-1)
Portuguese
Issue 4
 
 
Summary of Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2  
GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese specification 
Issue 4 changes  
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this current issue Page 
number 
Removal of Subject Advisor name: 
‘Our subject advisor service and online community’ 
3 
Update to Foundation tier paper timing: 
‘Foundation tier: 1 hour 20 minutes…’ 
6 and 38 
Clarification of question titles appearing in English added: 
‘The instructions to students are in Gujarati. The question titles appear in English.’ 
38 
Update to Foundation tier Assessment Information for Paper 4, bullet point 5: 
‘Question 2 has two options from which students have to select one. This question 
assesses students on their ability to note down key points and convey information. 
Students must use the formal register.’ 
39 
Reference to ‘GCE AS’ removed in the following sentence: 
This qualification offers a suitable progression route to GCE A level in Gujarati.  
68 
 
If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, contact us via our 
website at: qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/contact-us.html. 
 
 
Contents 
1 Introduction 2 
Why choose Edexcel GCSE Portuguese? 2 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this qualification 3 
Qualification at a glance 4 
2 Subject content 7 
Themes and topics 8 
Paper 1: Listening and understanding in Portuguese 10 
Paper 2: Speaking in Portuguese 12 
Paper 3: Reading and understanding in Portuguese 36 
Paper 4: Writing in Portuguese 38 
Assessment Objectives 63 
3 Administration and general information 64 
Entries 64 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special consideration and 
malpractice 64 
Student recruitment and progression 67 
Appendix 1: Candidate speaking examination record form 
(CS2) 71 
Appendix 2: Grammar list 72 
Appendix 3: Vocabulary list 79 
Appendix 4: The context for the development of this 
qualification 135 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 137 
Appendix 6: Codes 138 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
2 
1 Introduction 
Why choose Edexcel GCSE Portuguese? 
We believe languages should be accessible for all students. Our new Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese has been developed to help students of all abilities 
progress and develop a passion for languages, through culturally engaging content. 
We’ve listened to feedback from the languages community and have developed an engaging 
and inspirational course of study that will enable your students to manipulate and use the 
target language effectively, independently and creatively, so that they have a solid basis 
from which to progress to A Level or employment. 
Engaging and popular topics 
Our specification includes both familiar and new topics that you have told us you like and 
that motivate your students. 
Manageable content 
Our content has been structured across five themes. This flexible programme of study allows 
time for a focused revision period at the end of the course. 
Content and assessments that provide an engaging real-world focus 
The authentic situations and stimuli enable students to see language in context and learn 
about the culture of the target language country. Our assessments allow for spontaneity and 
test grammar as well as providing plenty of opportunities for students to apply their 
knowledge independently, creatively and in authentic situations. 
Straightforward assessments that are accessible to all students 
Special care has been taken to ensure that all our papers are designed to be clear and 
concise and, where appropriate, questions feature scaffolding to help all students’ progress 
through the assessments confidently. Reading and listening papers are structured so that 
questions set in the target language are in a separate section from those questions requiring 
responses in English. Both papers are also structured so that they are progressive in their 
level of demand with the most demanding question being the final question in the paper. 
Translation tasks are progressive in their level of difficulty and are of appropriate demand at 
each tier. 
Carefully selected texts 
We have worked closely with teachers and expert practitioners to ensure we include 
interesting and relevant texts at the right level for students at each tier and that will 
encourage the use of a wide range of texts in the classroom. 
Clear and precise assessment criteria 
Our mark schemes have been trialled with sample student answers to ensure they reward 
students appropriately and that it is clear what is expected of students at each band. 
Continuous progression 
Our content builds on the understanding developed at prior language learning experience at 
Key Stage 3 while also ensuring that students new to the subject are appropriately 
supported, and provides a firm foundation for students to make a smooth transition to 
A Level.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
3 
Supporting you in planning and implementing 
this qualification 
Planning 
● To support you in delivering this specification, our Getting Started Guide, available on 
our website, gives you an overview of the new GCSE qualification. 
● We will give you an editable course planner and scheme of work that you can adapt to 
suit your department. 
Teaching and learning 
There are lots of free teaching and learning support to help you deliver the new qualification, 
including: 
● a guide to questions in the target language 
● student guide 
● online and face-to-face training events. 
Preparing for exams 
We also provide a range of resources to help you prepare your students for the assessments, 
including: 
● marked exemplars of student work with examiner commentaries 
ResultsPlus 
ResultsPlus provides the most detailed analysis available of your students’ exam 
performance. It can help you identify the topics and skills where further learning would 
benefit your students. 
Get help and support 
Our subject advisor service and online community will ensure you receive help and guidance 
from us and that you can share ideas and information with other teachers. You can sign up 
to receive e-newsletters to keep up to date with qualification updates and product and 
service news. 
Learn more at qualifications.pearson.com 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
4 
Qualification at a glance 
Content and assessment overview 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese consists of four externally 
examined papers based on the following skills: listening, speaking, reading and writing. 
Students must complete their speaking assessment in April/May and all other assessments in 
May/June in any single year. 
Each paper is available at Foundation tier or Higher tier. Students must be entered for a 
single tier across all papers. 
The use of dictionaries is not permitted. For Paper 2 this includes during the 
preparation time. 
 
Paper 1: Listening and understanding in Portuguese (*Paper code: 1PG0/1F and 1H) 
Written examination 
Foundation tier: 35 minutes, including 5 minutes’ reading time; 50 marks 
Higher tier: 45 minutes, including 5 minutes’ reading time; 50 marks 
25% of the total qualification 
Content overview 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes and topics. 
Assessment overview 
Students are assessed on their understanding of standard spoken Portuguese by one or more 
speakers in a range of public and social settings. Students will respond to multiple-response 
and short-answer open-response questions based on a recording featuring male and female 
Portuguese speakers. 
Students must answer all questions in both sections. 
There is no requirement for students to produce written responses in Portuguese. 
Foundation tier 
● Section A is set in English. The instructions to students are in English. 
● Section B is set in Portuguese. The instructions to students are in Portuguese. 
Higher tier 
● Section A is set in Portuguese. The instructions to students are in Portuguese. 
● Section B is set in English. The instructions to students are in English. 
The listening audio files are available on our website. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
5 
 
Paper 2: Speaking in Portuguese (*Paper code: 1PG0/2F and 2H) 
Internally conducted and externally assessed 
Foundation tier: 7–9 minutes plus 12 minutes’ preparation time; 70 marks 
Higher tier: 10–12 minutes plus 12 minutes’ preparation time; 70 marks 
25% of the total qualification 
Content overview 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes and topics. 
Assessment overview 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate and interact effectively through 
speaking in Portuguese for different purposes and in different settings. 
There are three tasks which must be conducted in the following order: 
● Task 1 – a role play based on one topic that is allocated by Pearson 
● Task 2 – questions based on a picture stimulus based on one topic that is allocated by 
Pearson 
● Task 3 – conversation based on two themes. The first theme is based on the topic chosen by 
the student in advance of the assessment. The second theme is allocated by Pearson. 
The assessments are conducted by teachers in one session within a prescribed assessment 
window, the recordings are then submitted to Pearson for external marking. 
 
Paper 3: Reading and understanding in Portuguese (*Paper code: 1PG0/3F and 3H) 
Written examination 
Foundation tier: 45 minutes; 50 marks 
Higher tier: 1 hour; 50 marks 
25% of the total qualification 
Content overview 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes and topics. 
Assessment overview 
Students are assessed on their understanding of written Portuguese across a range of different 
types of texts, including advertisements, emails, letters, articles and literary texts. Students 
are required to respond to multiple-response and short-answer questions based on these texts. 
Students must answer all questions in each of the three sections: 
● Section A is set in English. The instructions to students are in English 
● Section B is set in Portuguese. The instructions to students are in Portuguese 
● Section C includes a translation passage from Portuguese into English with instructions in 
English. 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
6 
 
Paper 4: Writing in Portuguese (*Paper code: 1PG0/4F and 4H) 
Written examination 
Foundation tier: 1 hour 15 minutes; 60 marks 
Higher tier: 1 hour 20 minutes; 60 marks 
25% of the total qualification 
Content overview 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes and topics. 
Assessment overview 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate effectively through writing in Portuguese 
for different purposes and audiences. Students are required to produce responses of varying 
lengths and types to express ideas and opinions in Portuguese. The instructions to students are 
in Portuguese. Word counts are specified for each question. Students must answer all 
questions. 
Foundation tier – three open-response questions and one translation into Portuguese. 
Higher tier – two open-response questions and one translation into Portuguese. 
 
*See Appendix 6: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to this 
qualification. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
7 
2 Subject content 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese allows students to develop 
their ability to communicate with Portuguese native speakers in both speech and writing. 
Students will study a variety of contexts relevant to their age and interests and will also 
develop a greater awareness of the culture of Portuguese-speaking communities and 
countries. These contexts are listed under Themes and topics. 
Students will need to develop and use their knowledge and understanding of Portuguese 
grammar progressively through their course of study. Grammar requirements are given in 
the grammar list (see Appendix 2: Grammar list). 
To help students build on their range of vocabulary, a list is provided of words that students 
are expected to use and understand (see Appendix 3: Vocabulary list). These lists are not 
exhaustive but are intended as a guide; students at both tiers will be required to understand 
and respond to familiar words (appropriate to the tier) that are not on the lists. 
Qualification aims and objectives 
The aims and objectives of this qualification are to enable students to: 
● develop their ability to communicate confidently and coherently with native speakers in 
speech and writing, conveying what they want to say with increasing accuracy 
● express and develop thoughts and ideas spontaneously and fluently 
● listen to and understand clearly articulated, standard speech at near normal speed 
● deepen their knowledge about how language works and enrich their vocabulary in order 
for them to increase their independent use and understanding of extended language in a 
wide range of contexts 
● acquire new knowledge, skills and ways of thinking through the ability to understand and 
respond to a rich range of authentic spoken and written material, adapted and abridged, 
as appropriate, including literary texts 
● develop awareness and understanding of the culture and identity of the countries and 
communities where the language is spoken 
● be encouraged to make appropriate links to other areas of the curriculum to enable 
bilingual and deeper learning, where the language may become a medium for constructing 
and applying knowledge 
● develop language-learning skills both for immediate use and to prepare them for further 
language study and use in school, higher education or employment 
● develop language strategies, including repair strategies. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
8 
Themes and topics 
Questions across all four language skills are set in common contexts, addressing a range of 
relevant contemporary and cultural themes. They are organised into five themes, each 
broken down into topics and sub-topics. 
The five themes are: 
1. Identity and culture 
2. Local area, holiday, travel 
3. School 
4. Future aspirations, study and work 
5. International and global dimension. 
All themes and topics must be studied in the context of both the students’ home 
country and that of countries and communities where Portuguese is spoken. 
For listening and reading assessments, the majority of contexts are based on the culture  
and countries where the assessed language is spoken. Students may also refer to the culture 
of the assessed language country/countries or communities in the speaking and writing 
papers. It is, therefore, important that students are exposed to materials relating to  
Portuguese-speaking countries throughout the course. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
9 
Each topic has been highlighted in bold. 
All topics must be studied in the context of both the students’ home country and 
that of countries and communities where Portuguese is spoken. 
 
Theme 1: Identity and culture 
● Who am I?: relationships; when I was younger; what my friends and family are like; 
what makes a good friend; interests; socialising with friends and family; role models 
● Daily life: customs and everyday life; food and drink; shopping; social media and 
technology (use of, advantages and disadvantages) 
● Cultural life: celebrations and festivals; reading; music; sport; film and television 
 
Theme 2: Local area, holiday and travel 
● Holidays: preferences; experiences; destinations 
● Travel and tourist transactions: travel and accommodation; asking for help and 
dealing with problems; directions; eating out; shopping 
● Town, region and country: weather; places to see; things to do 
 
Theme 3: School 
● What school is like: school types; school day; subjects; rules and pressures;  
celebrating success 
● School activities: school trips; events and exchanges 
 
Theme 4: Future aspirations, study and work 
● Using languages beyond the classroom: forming relationships; travel; employment 
● Ambitions: further study; volunteering; training 
● Work: jobs; careers and professions 
 
Theme 5: International and global dimension 
● Bringing the world together: sports events; music events; campaigns and 
good causes 
● Environmental issues: being ‘green’; access to natural resources 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
10 
Paper 1: Listening and understanding in Portuguese 
Content 
Students are assessed on their understanding of standard spoken Portuguese in a variety of 
scenarios. 
Students will need to:  
● identify the overall message, key points, details and opinions 
● deduce meaning from a variety of spoken texts 
● recognise the relationship between past, present and future events 
● recognise and respond to key information, important themes and ideas in spoken text, 
including authentic sources, adapted and abridged, as appropriate 
● be able to answer questions, extract information, evaluate and draw conclusions. 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes (see Themes and 
topics). 
Students are presented with recorded scenarios involving one or more speakers in public and 
social settings. Recordings include authentic sources and are based on the themes. Recorded 
material features both male and female voices and represents different age groups. 
Students should be given the opportunity to become accustomed to hearing the Portuguese 
language spoken in a range of styles and registers. 
Recordings for individual questions within the assessment vary in length, including both short 
and longer spoken passages, using both familiar language and, where appropriate, more 
complex language and abstract material, as appropriate to the tier. 
To prepare students adequately for this assessment, teachers should present and exploit a 
range of vocabulary relevant to each theme listed and build on the Key Stage 3 Programme 
of Study, where appropriate. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
11 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2020. 
● The assessment is out of 50 marks. 
● Students must be allocated five minutes in which to read through the paper before the 
first extract of the recording starts. This gives students an opportunity to familiarise 
themselves with the length and the layout of the paper and to read the questions before 
hearing the first extract. 
● Students will listen to the recording featuring Portuguese-language speakers who will 
speak at a rate appropriate to the expected level of student understanding. 
● Each passage is recorded twice, with pauses following the second hearing to allow each 
student sufficient time to write or note their response to each question (or part of a 
question) and to read the next question before the related extract is played. 
● Recordings will be issued as digital sound files accessed via a secure download. 
● Each question is set in a context drawn from the topics. The assessment tasks will feature 
general content that is familiar and accessible to all students. 
● Students must answer all questions in both sections.  
● Foundation tier 
o 35 minutes is given for the assessment, including 5 minutes’ reading time. 
o Section A contains 12 questions set in English. Question types comprise both multiple-
response and short-answer open-response questions. The instructions to students are 
in English. 
o Section B contains two questions set in Portuguese. The question type is multiple-
response. The instructions to students are in Portuguese. 
● Higher tier 
o 45 minutes is given for the assessment, including 5 minutes’ reading time. 
o Section A contains two questions set in Portuguese. The question type is multiple-
response. The instructions to students are in Portuguese. 
o Section B contains eight questions set in English. Question types comprise both 
multiple-response and short-answer open-response questions. The instructions to 
students are in English. 
● Four of the questions will be common to both tiers. 
● For both tiers, there is no requirement for students to produce written responses in 
Portuguese. 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and mark scheme for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
12 
Paper 2: Speaking in Portuguese 
Content 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate and interact effectively through 
speaking in Portuguese for different purposes. 
Students will need to: 
● convey information and narrate events coherently and confidently, using and adapting 
language for different purposes 
● speak spontaneously, responding to unpredictable questions, points of view or situations, 
sustaining communication by using rephrasing or repair strategies, as appropriate 
● use a range of vocabulary and grammatical structures accurately, including some more 
complex forms, with reference to past, present and future events 
● make creative and more complex use of the language, as appropriate, to express and 
justify their own thoughts and points of view 
● use accurate pronunciation and intonation in order to be understood by a native speaker, 
however they will be able to access the highest marks available for each task without a 
‘perfect’ command of Portuguese. 
These are assessed through a series of three consecutive tasks. 
Task 1 – Role play 
The role play is an interaction requiring the student to ask and answer questions, to 
exchange information and to use different registers (see definition of registers beneath the 
Role play mark grid within the marking guidance section of the specification). The role play 
relates to either formal or informal scenarios, in turn inviting the student to use either formal 
or informal language relevant to the scenario. Each role play stimulus card includes an 
instruction to the student on whether to use language appropriate for a formal or informal 
conversation. 
All role plays are marked for communication only. 
The role plays are set and provided by Pearson at the time of assessment together with  
a sequencing grid and instructions. For an example, please see the Pearson Edexcel  
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document – 
Paper 2: Speaking in Portuguese, General instructions to the teacher section. 
Scenarios require an exchange of information. Some scenarios are transactional in nature. 
The scenarios are based on any of the topics from themes 1 to 4 (listed on page 9), i.e. not 
on the theme International and global dimension, as this theme lends itself better to the 
picture-based task and the conversation. 
Task 2 – Picture-based task 
The assessment scenario is based on any of the topics (listed on page 9). The topic is 
allocated by Pearson at the time of assessment together with a sequencing grid and 
instructions. For an example, please see the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in 
Portuguese Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document – Paper 2: Speaking in 
Portuguese, General instructions to the teacher section. 
This assessment allows students to: 
● describe and narrate events 
● give information 
● express, justify and exchange opinions. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
13 
Students are required to refer to past, present and future events in this assessment at both 
Foundation and Higher tiers, using different timeframes. 
Task 3 – Conversation 
The conversation allows students to cover all of the requirements outlined in the Content 
section on page 12, including conveying information, giving points of view, developing and 
initiating conversation and discussion and producing extended sequences of speech. 
The conversation is based on any two themes (see Themes and topics) and is in two parts. 
For the first part of the conversation, the student selects one topic from one theme in 
advance of the assessment. The choice of topic must be agreed between the student and the 
teacher and must be selected no later than two weeks before the assessment takes place. 
This part of the conversation task starts with this first topic and then may move on to other 
topics within the same theme. 
The second part of the conversation must be on a different theme. This will be prescribed by 
Pearson through instructions on a sequencing grid. For an example, please see the Pearson 
Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) 
document – Paper 2: Speaking in Portuguese, General instructions to the teacher section. 
This part of the conversation may focus on one or more topics from within the selected 
theme (see page 9). 
Students are required to refer to past, present and future events in this assessment, using a 
range of tenses and timeframes. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
14 
Assessment information 
General information  
● First assessment: April/May 2020. 
● The entire assessment must be conducted in Portuguese. 
● Students complete three tasks. 
o Task 1 – a role play based on one topic. This is allocated by Pearson at the time of 
assessment. 
o Task 2 – a task containing a picture and questions drawn from one topic. This is 
allocated by Pearson at the time of assessment. 
o Task 3 – conversation based on two themes. The first theme is based on the topic 
chosen by the student in advance of the assessment. The second theme is selected by 
the teacher from a choice of two themes allocated by Pearson. 
Each role play stimulus card includes an instruction to the student on whether to use 
language appropriate for a formal or informal conversation. 
At the time of assessment, Pearson will issue a prescribed order per student for their role 
play, picture-based task and two themes for the second part of the conversation. The 
teacher does not choose the order of the cards. Pearson will provide instructions on 
sequencing and a sequencing grid. For an example, please see the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document – 
Paper 2: Speaking in Portuguese, General instructions to the teacher section. 
This grid has been designed to help ensure that each student covers a broad range of 
themes from this specification. 
● Assessments are conducted by centres within a five-week assessment period in April and 
May in any single year. Dates for the assessment period will be confirmed in the UK 
Information Manual at the start of each academic year. The assessment period will not 
always be continuous or be the same period each year, for example it will need to 
accommodate the Easter break which changes each year. 
● The assessment materials provided by Pearson for all tasks may be accessed by the 
teacher no more than three working days before the prescribed five week assessment 
period. This is to enable the teacher to prepare for the assessment. The assessment 
materials in this pack must not be removed from the centre premises.   
● Assessments are conducted by teachers in one session within a prescribed assessment 
window and then submitted to Pearson for external marking. 
● Students are presented with instructions in English but must communicate entirely in 
Portuguese for the duration of the assessment. 
● Complete, unedited recordings of all assessments must be submitted to Pearson via the 
online Learner Work Transfer (LWT) portal. 
● Each question is set in a context drawn from the topics. The assessment tasks will feature 
general content that is familiar and accessible to all students. 
● Students must be permitted 12 minutes’ preparation time to consider the questions and 
stimulus cards for Tasks 1 and 2. 
● Students are assessed on the quality of responses rather than length of assessment, 
however the assessment times are different to reflect the demand of each tier. 
● All assessments are marked against assessment criteria, please see Marking Guidance for 
Paper 2. 
● Centres must have procedures in place to verify the identity of all students at the time of 
the assessment and confirm this on the Candidate speaking examination record form 
(CS2) (see Appendix 1). Centres are required to submit to Pearson one completed CS2 
form for all students for each tier. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
15 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted during the preparation time or during the 
assessment. 
Foundation tier assessment time and marks 
● The total assessment for the three tasks is 7 to 9 minutes plus 12 minutes’ preparation 
time. 
● The assessment is worth 70 marks. 
● The assessment consists of the following three tasks, which must be conducted in the 
following order: 
o Task 1 – one role play recommended to last between one to one-and-a-half minutes for 
10 marks 
o Task 2 – one picture-based task recommended to last between two-and-a-half to three 
minutes for 24 marks 
o Task 3 – a conversation recommended to last between three-and-a-half to 
four-and-a-half minutes for 36 marks. 
Higher tier assessment time and marks 
● The total assessment for the three tasks is 10 to 12 minutes plus 12 minutes’ preparation 
time. 
● The assessment is worth 70 marks. 
● The assessment consists of the following three tasks, which must be conducted in the 
following order: 
o Task 1 – one role play recommended to last between two to two-and-a-half minutes for 
10 marks 
o Task 2 – one picture-based task recommended to last between three to  
three-and-a-half minutes for 24 marks 
o Task 3 – a conversation recommended to last between five to six minutes for 36 marks. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
16 
Preparation time 
Students are allocated 12 minutes’ preparation time, under supervised conditions, 
immediately prior to the assessment for Tasks 1 and 2. The purpose is to consider the 
questions and stimulus for the role play and picture-based scenarios allocated. 
Students are permitted to make notes (up to a maximum of one side of A4 for both Tasks 1 
and 2) during this period and they can refer to them during the role play and picture-based 
assessment, but not during the conversation task. Students must return their notes to the 
teacher before commencing Task 3 (conversation). 
The notes should be for reference only and students must not read out whole, prepared 
sentences in answer to questions. 
Any notes made during the preparation time must be kept securely by the centre until the 
end of October in the year the assessment is completed, after which time they should be 
securely destroyed. 
Students cannot have access to a dictionary, or any other resource, during the preparation 
time. 
Task 1 – Role play 
Pearson will set and provide ten different sets of role plays for each tier. Each role play 
consists of two cards – one for the teacher and one for the student. 
Teacher cards 
The teacher cards contain instructions on how to conduct the role play and the exact 
questions to ask. 
Each role play opens with an introduction from the teacher who then asks the first question. 
Candidate cards 
The candidate cards include prompts as a guide and highlight where the candidate needs to 
ask a question (indicated by the symbol ‘?’), and where an unpredictable question is posed 
to them by the teacher (indicated by the symbol ‘!’). 
Students have access to this during their preparation time to help in preparing for the 
assessment. 
Each candidate card contains instructions in English and the task is in Portuguese. The 
context of the role play is provided in both sections. Candidates must read both sections fully 
to support understanding of each bullet point. 
At Foundation tier, the candidate cards contain five bullet points, eliciting five utterances. 
Students need to ask one question and respond to one unpredictable question. Students are 
required to speak only in the present tense or they may use a conditional tense where it is 
more natural to do so. 
At Higher tier, the candidate cards contain five bullet points, eliciting five utterances. 
Students need to ask two questions and respond to one unpredictable question. For four of 
the prompts, students are required to speak in the present tense or they may use a 
conditional tense if it is more natural to do so. They must respond to one question set in a 
past tense. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
17 
Task 2 – Picture-based task 
Pearson will provide ten different sets of picture-based tasks for each tier. Each task consists 
of two cards – one for the teacher and one for the student. 
Teacher cards 
The teacher cards contain instructions on how to conduct this task and the five questions to 
ask the student. Teachers are allowed to repeat questions and use set prompts to enable 
students to give a developed response. They are not allowed to deviate from the set 
prompts. 
Each task opens with the teacher asking the first question, which is based on the picture. 
The first question is directly based on the picture; the remaining questions extend beyond 
the picture, but are based on the overall topic from which the picture is drawn, inviting an 
exchange of views or opinions. 
Candidate cards 
At Foundation tier, students are provided with a picture and five bullets in Portuguese to help 
in preparing for the five questions that will be asked during the assessment. Students are 
allowed to ask for questions to be repeated. 
Students have access to this during their preparation time. 
At Higher tier, students are provided with a picture and five bullets in Portuguese to help in 
preparing for the five questions that will be asked during the assessment. The final bullet is 
marked by the symbol ‘!’ to denote one unpredictable question. Students are allowed to ask 
for questions to be repeated. 
Students have access to this during their preparation time. 
Task 3 – Conversation 
The first part of the conversation opens with the topic chosen by the student. The student 
may choose to focus on any aspect(s) of the topic as each has a number of different 
features. For example, a student who has selected the topic What school is like may: 
● choose to focus on ‘school types’ and ‘rules and pressures’, or 
● choose to focus only on ‘rules and pressures’. 
To enable them to make a confident start, the teacher should allow the student to state their 
chosen aspect(s) from their nominated topic and to talk about this aspect/these aspects for 
up to one minute. 
The teacher continues the conversation on the chosen topic and then may move on to other 
topics within the same theme, if necessary, to ensure that students use the recommended 
time for this task most effectively. 
The second part of the conversation is based on a different theme allocated by Pearson and 
covers any of the topics across that single theme. 
Teachers must ensure that an equal amount of time is allocated to both parts of the 
conversation. 
Throughout the conversation, in order to facilitate a genuine and spontaneous interaction, 
the nature of questions from the teacher should enable students to: 
● answer questions freely, in turn allowing them to produce extended sequences of speech 
● develop conversations and discussions 
● give and justify own thoughts and opinions 
● refer to past, present and future events. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
18 
Administration and general information about the conduct of the 
speaking assessment 
Preparation time and notes for Tasks 1 and 2 only 
● The notes made during the preparation time should be a reference only, and students 
should not read out whole, prepared sentences. 
● The preparation time must be supervised. It can take place either in the examination 
room with the teacher or outside of the room with an invigilator. 
● Students are not permitted to write on the candidate cards. 
● Students must return their notes and candidate cards to the teacher at the end of the 
second task (picture-based task). 
● Any notes made during the preparation time must be kept securely by the centre until the 
end of October in the year the assessment is completed, after which time they should be 
securely destroyed. 
● Students cannot have access to a dictionary, or any other resource, during the preparation 
time. 
Sample assessment materials 
Sample candidate and teacher cards for the role-play and picture-based tasks and 
accompanying marking guidance and assessment criteria can be found in the Pearson 
Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) 
document. 
Marking guidance and assessment criteria are also provided in this document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
19 
Marking guidance for Paper 2: Speaking in Portuguese 
This marking guidance is for the use of Pearson-appointed external examiners. The guidance 
has been included for teacher reference to aid understanding of how the assessment criteria 
will be applied. 
General guidance on using levels-based mark schemes 
Step 1 Decide on a band 
● The examiner will first of all consider the answer as a whole and then decide which descriptors 
most closely match the answer and place it in that band. The descriptors for each band 
indicate the different features that will be seen in the student’s answer for that band. 
● When assigning a band they will look at the overall quality of the answer and not focus 
disproportionately on small and specific parts of the answer where the student has not 
performed quite as well as the rest. If the answer covers different aspects of different 
bands of the mark scheme they will use a ‘best fit’ approach for defining the band and 
then use the variability of the response to help decide the mark within the band, for 
example if the response is predominantly band 5–8 with a small amount of band 9–12 
material, it would be placed in band 5–8 but be awarded a mark near the top of the band 
because of the band 9–12 content. 
Step 2 Decide on a mark 
● Once they have decided on a band they will then need to decide on a mark within the 
band. 
● They will decide on the mark to award based on the quality of the answer; they will award 
a mark towards the top or bottom of that band depending on how the student has 
evidenced each of the descriptor bullet points. 
● They will modify the mark based on how securely the trait descriptors are met at that band. 
● They will need to go back through the answer as they apply the mark scheme to clarify 
points and assure themselves that the band and the mark are appropriate. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
20 
Assessment criteria for the Foundation tier – Part 1 
Role play – Foundation tier (10 marks) 
For this task, students’ work is marked by Pearson using the following assessment criteria. 
The mark grid is applied once to each individual response to the prompts. There is a 
maximum of 2 marks for each of the five prompts on the role-play cards. 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable communication; highly ambiguous OR pronunciation prevents 
communication 
1 Partially clear/ambiguous OR partially appropriate within the context of the 
role play; pronunciation may affect clarity of communication 
2 Clearly communicated; appropriate within the context of the role play; 
unambiguous; pronunciation supports clear communication 
 
Exemplification of how to apply the role-play mark grid can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Additional guidance 
Appropriate: relevant response related to the prompt, uses appropriate register for the 
scenario.  
Informal register: includes language that students would use with friends and people of a 
similar age; informal greetings, endearments and forms of address.  
Formal register: includes language that students would use with adults, for example 
teachers, employers, customers, officials, in a formal context. It includes avoidance of slang, 
over-familiar language, exaggeration and endearments. It also includes the use of formal 
greetings and forms of address where appropriate. 
In order to guarantee consistency and clarity for students of European Portuguese and 
Brazilian Portuguese, when using the second person singular form of address, você with a 
verb conjugated in the third person singular is accepted in both formal and informal 
contexts. However, tu with a verb conjugated in the second person singular is only 
acceptable in informal contexts. 
Partially clear/pronunciation may affect clarity of communication: makes speech 
difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is eventually understood)/forces the 
listener to strain to understand what is meant. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
21 
Assessment criteria for the Foundation tier – Part 2 
Picture-based task – Foundation tier (24 marks) 
There are two mark grids to be applied to this task: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
Picture-based task: communication and content – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–4 ● Limited response to set questions, likely to consist of single-word answers 
● Minimal success in adapting language to describe, narrate, inform using 
individual words/phrases; sometimes unable to respond 
● A straightforward opinion may be expressed but without justification 
● Pronunciation and intonation are inconsistently intelligible with inaccuracies that 
lead to frequent impairment in communication 
5–8 ● Responds briefly to set questions, there is much hesitation and continuous 
prompting needed 
● Some limited success in adapting language, to describe, narrate and inform in 
response to the set questions; may occasionally be unable to respond 
● Straightforward, brief opinions are given but without justification 
● Pronunciation and intonation are mostly intelligible but inaccuracies lead to 
some impairment in communication 
9–12 ● Responds to set questions with some development, some hesitation and some 
prompting necessary 
● Some effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform in 
response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions with occasional, brief justification 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, occasionally inaccuracies affect 
clarity of communication 
13–16 ● Responds to set questions with frequently developed responses, occasional 
hesitation, occasional prompting necessary 
● Frequently effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform in 
response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions and gives justification with some development 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, inaccuracies are minimal and have 
no impact on clarity of communication 
Additional guidance 
Adaptation of/adapting language to describe, narrate and inform: adapts language to 
achieve different purposes in the language; students may adapt language more effectively 
for one purpose than another, for example they may use language effectively to inform but 
less effectively to narrate. 
Straightforward opinions and justification are those that form part of a 
minimum/standard/predictable response. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
22 
Picture-based task: linguistic knowledge and accuracy – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Limited accuracy when responding to set questions; minimal success when 
referring to past, present and future events 
● Individual words and phrases are coherent when responding to set questions; 
high frequency of errors prevent meaning throughout most of the conversation 
3–4 ● Occasionally accurate grammatical structures when responding to set 
questions; occasional success when referring to present events, limited success 
when referring to future or past events, much ambiguity 
● Some coherent phrases and sentences within responses to set questions; 
regular errors prevent coherent overall speech and frequently prevent meaning 
5–6 ● Some accurate grammatical structures, including some successful references to 
past, present and future events in response to the set questions, some 
ambiguity 
● Responses are partially coherent, errors occur that sometimes hinder clarity of 
communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
7–8 ● Generally accurate grammatical structures, generally successful references to 
past, present and future events in response to the set questions, occasional 
ambiguity 
● Responses are generally coherent although errors occur that occasionally hinder 
clarity of communication 
Additional guidance 
Errors: the mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on 
clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the listener from the content of what is being said. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make speech difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force listeners to strain to understand what is meant, 
for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the possessive 
adjective  
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the listener from the content of what is 
being said. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
23 
Assessment criteria for the Foundation tier – Part 3 
Conversation – Foundation tier (36 marks) 
There are three mark grids to be applied to this task: 
● communication and content 
● interaction and spontaneity 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
Conversation: communication and content – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Communicates limited information relevant to the topics and questions 
● Uses language to express limited, straightforward ideas and thoughts; 
occasional straightforward opinion expressed without justification 
● Uses limited, familiar vocabulary and expression with much repetition; 
communication is disjointed and frequently breaks down because of restricted 
range of vocabulary 
● Pronunciation and intonation are inconsistently intelligible with inaccuracies that 
lead to frequent impairment in communication 
4–6 ● Communicates brief information relevant to the topics and questions 
● Uses language to produce straightforward ideas and thoughts; expresses 
straightforward opinions with limited justification 
● Uses repetitive, familiar vocabulary and expression; communication is often 
constrained and occasionally breaks down because of restricted range of 
vocabulary 
● Pronunciation and intonation are mostly intelligible but inaccuracies lead to 
some impairment in communication 
7–9 ● Communicates information relevant to the topics and questions, with 
occasionally extended sequences of speech 
● Uses language to produce straightforward ideas, thoughts and opinions with 
occasional justification 
● Uses a limited variety of mainly straightforward vocabulary, communication for 
some purposes is constrained because of restricted range of vocabulary 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, occasionally inaccuracies affect 
clarity of communication 
10–12 ● Communicates information relevant to the topics and questions, with some 
extended sequences of speech 
● Occasionally uses language creatively to express some individual thoughts, 
ideas and opinions, some of which are justified 
● Occasional variety in use of vocabulary, including some examples of uncommon 
language with some variation of expression, fulfils 
most purposes 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, inaccuracies are minimal and have 
no impact on clarity of communication 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
24 
Additional guidance 
Uses language creatively – examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● manipulating language, including familiar, high-frequency and simple language, to 
respond to unfamiliar/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to 
maintain interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, 
to convince. 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view which go 
beyond the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
Straightforward ideas, thoughts and opinions are those that give the 
minimum/standard/predictable response. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
25 
Conversation: interaction and spontaneity – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Basic exchange where only some questions are responded to; answers rely on 
rehearsed language that is frequently irrelevant to the question 
● Short, undeveloped responses, many incomplete 
● Isolated examples of ability to sustain communication, pace is slow and hesitant 
throughout 
4–6 ● Responds with limited spontaneity; answers rely on rehearsed language that is 
occasionally irrelevant to the question 
● Short responses, any development depends on teacher prompting 
● Limited ability to sustain communication, pace is mostly slow and hesitant 
7–9 ● Occasionally able to respond spontaneously with some examples of natural 
interaction although often stilted 
● Occasionally able to initiate and develop responses independently but regular 
prompting needed 
● Occasionally able to sustain communication, using rephrasing/repair strategies 
if necessary to continue the flow; frequent hesitation 
10–12 ● Responds spontaneously to some questions, interacting naturally for parts of 
the conversation 
● Sometimes able to initiate and develop the conversation independently, some 
prompting needed 
● Sometimes able to sustain communication, using rephrasing/repair strategies if 
necessary to continue the flow; some hesitation 
 
Additional guidance 
Rephrasing/repair strategies: strategies that aid communication and allow the 
conversation to be sustained, for example rephrasing, circumlocution, adjusting the 
message, asking for clarification/repetition, repair strategies such as self-correction; these 
strategies enable students to deliver the message when exact vocabulary or expressions are 
not known. 
Responds/responding spontaneously: gives a relevant, impromptu response based on 
what they have heard. 
Rehearsed language: language learned by heart, which may not give a relevant, 
impromptu response based on what has been heard (not spontaneous). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
26 
Conversation: linguistic knowledge and accuracy – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Uses straightforward, individual words/phrases; limited evidence of language 
manipulation 
● Limited accuracy, minimal success when referring to past, present and future 
events 
● Individual words and phrases are coherent; high frequency of errors prevent 
meaning throughout much of the conversation 
4–6 ● Uses straightforward, repetitive, grammatical structures 
● Occasionally accurate grammatical structures, occasional success when 
referring to present events, limited success when referring to future or past 
events, much ambiguity 
● Some coherent phrases and sentences; regular errors prevent coherent overall 
speech and frequently prevent meaning 
7–9 ● Manipulates a limited variety of mainly straightforward grammatical structures, 
minimal use of complex structures 
● Some accurate grammatical structures, some successful references to past, 
present and future events, some ambiguity 
● Sequences of coherent speech although errors occur that often hinder clarity of 
communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
10–12 ● Manipulates grammatical structures with occasional variation, complex 
structures used but repetitive 
● Generally accurate grammatical structures, generally successful references to 
past, present and future events 
● Generally coherent speech although errors occur that sometimes hinder clarity 
of communication 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be:  
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language. 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
 
Errors: the mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on 
clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the listener from the content of what is being said. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
27 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make speech difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force listeners to strain to understand what is meant, 
for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the possessive 
adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the listener from the content of what is 
being said. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
28 
Assessment criteria for the Higher tier – Part 1 
Role play – Higher tier (10 marks) 
For this task, students’ work is marked by Pearson using the following assessment criteria. 
The mark grid is applied once to each individual response to the prompts. There is a 
maximum of 2 marks for each of the five prompts on the role-play cards. 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable communication; highly ambiguous OR pronunciation prevents 
communication 
1 Partially clear/ambiguous OR partially appropriate within the context of the role 
play; pronunciation may affect clarity of communication 
2 Clearly communicated; appropriate within the context of the role play; 
unambiguous; pronunciation supports clear communication 
 
Exemplification of how to apply the role-play mark grid can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Additional guidance 
Appropriate: relevant response related to the prompt, uses appropriate register for the 
scenario.  
Informal register: includes language that students would use with friends and people of a 
similar age; informal greetings, endearments and forms of address.  
Formal register: includes language that students would use with adults, for example 
teachers, employers, customers, officials, in a formal context. It includes avoidance of slang, 
over-familiar language, exaggeration and endearments. It also includes the use of formal 
greetings and forms of address where appropriate. 
In order to guarantee consistency and clarity for students of European Portuguese and 
Brazilian Portuguese, when using the second person singular form of address, você with a 
verb conjugated in the third person singular is accepted in both formal and informal 
contexts. However, tu with a verb conjugated in the second person singular is only 
acceptable in informal contexts. 
Partially clear/pronunciation may affect clarity of communication: makes speech 
difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is eventually understood)/forces the 
listener to strain to understand what is meant. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
29 
Assessment criteria for the Higher tier – Part 2 
Picture-based task – Higher tier (24 marks) 
There are two mark grids to be applied to this task: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
Picture-based task: communication and content – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–4 ● Responds to set questions with some development, some hesitation and some 
prompting necessary 
● Some effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform in 
response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions with occasional, brief justification 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, occasionally inaccuracies affect 
clarity of communication 
5–8 ● Responds to set questions with frequently developed responses, occasional 
hesitation, occasional prompting necessary 
● Frequently effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform in 
response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions and gives justification with some development 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, inaccuracies are minimal and have 
no impact on clarity of communication 
9–12 ● Responds to set questions with mostly developed and fluent responses, minimal 
hesitation and minimal prompting necessary 
● Predominantly effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform, 
in response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions effectively and gives justification which is mostly developed  
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible and predominantly accurate  
13–16 ● Responds to the set questions with consistently fluent and developed responses 
● Consistently effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform, in 
response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions with ease and gives fully-developed justification 
● Pronunciation and intonation are consistently accurate and intelligible 
Additional guidance 
Adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform: adapts language to achieve 
different purposes in the language; students may adapt language more effectively for one 
purpose than another, for example they may use language effectively to inform but less 
effectively to narrate. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
30 
Picture-based task: linguistic knowledge and accuracy – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Some accurate grammatical structures, including some successful references to 
past, present and future events in response to the set questions, some 
ambiguity 
● Responses are partially coherent, errors occur that sometimes hinder clarity of 
communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Generally accurate grammatical structures, generally successful references to 
past, present and future events in response to the 
set questions, occasional ambiguity 
● Responses are generally coherent although errors occur that occasionally hinder 
clarity of communication 
5–6 ● Predominantly accurate grammatical structures, mostly successful references to 
past, present and future events in response to the set questions 
● Responses are predominantly coherent, errors occur but they rarely hinder 
clarity of communication 
7–8 ● Consistently accurate grammatical structures, successful references to past, 
present and future events in response to the set questions 
● Responses are coherent, any errors do not hinder the clarity of the 
communication 
Additional guidance 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free speech in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the listener from the content of what is being said. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make speech difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force listeners to strain to understand what is meant, 
for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the possessive 
adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the listener from the content of what is 
being said. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
31 
Assessment criteria for the Higher tier – Part 3 
Conversation – Higher tier (36 marks) 
There are three mark grids to be applied to this task: 
● communication and content 
● interaction and spontaneity 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
Conversation: communication and content – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Communicates information relevant to the topics and questions, with 
occasionally extended sequences of speech 
● Uses language to produce straightforward ideas, thoughts and opinions with 
occasional justification 
● Uses a limited variety of mainly straightforward vocabulary, communication for 
some purposes is constrained because of restricted range of vocabulary 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, occasionally inaccuracies affect 
clarity of communication 
4–6 ● Communicates information relevant to the topics and questions, with some 
extended sequences of speech 
● Occasionally uses language creatively to express some individual thoughts, 
ideas and opinions, some of which are justified 
● Occasional variety in use of vocabulary, including some examples of uncommon 
language with some variation of expression, fulfils most purposes 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, inaccuracies are minimal and have 
no impact on clarity of communication 
7–9 ● Communicates detailed information relevant to the topics and questions, 
usually with extended sequences of speech 
● Frequently uses language creatively to express and justify a variety of 
individual thoughts, ideas and opinions 
● Uses a variety of vocabulary, including frequent use of uncommon language, to 
regularly vary expression for different purposes 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible and predominantly accurate  
10–12 ● Communicates detailed information relevant to the topics and questions, 
consistently extended sequences of speech 
● Consistently uses language creatively to express and justify a wide variety of 
individual thoughts, ideas and opinions 
● Consistently uses a wide variety of vocabulary, including uncommon language, 
to consistently vary expression for different purposes 
● Pronunciation and intonation are consistently accurate and intelligible 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
32 
Additional guidance 
Uses language creatively: examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● manipulating language, including familiar, high-frequency and simple language, to 
respond to unfamiliar/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to maintain 
interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, to 
convince. 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view that go beyond 
the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
Straightforward ideas, thoughts and opinions are those that give the 
minimum/standard/predictable response. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
33 
Conversation: interaction and spontaneity – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Occasionally able to respond spontaneously with some examples of natural 
interaction although often stilted 
● Occasionally able to initiate and develop responses independently but regular 
prompting needed 
● Occasionally able to sustain communication, using rephrasing/repair strategies 
if necessary to continue the flow; frequent hesitation 
4–6 ● Responds spontaneously to some questions, interacting naturally for parts of 
the conversation 
● Sometimes able to initiate and develop the conversation independently, some 
prompting needed 
● Sometimes able to sustain communication, using rephrasing/repair strategies if 
necessary to continue the flow; some hesitation 
7–9 ● Responds to most questions spontaneously, resulting in mostly natural 
interaction 
● Mostly able to initiate and develop the conversation independently 
● Able to sustain communication throughout most of the conversation, using 
rephrasing/repair strategies if necessary to continue the flow, occasional 
hesitation 
10–12 ● Responds spontaneously and with ease to questions, resulting in natural 
interaction 
● Consistently able to initiate and develop the conversation independently 
● Able to sustain communication throughout, using rephrasing/repair strategies if 
necessary to continue the flow 
Additional guidance 
Respond(s) spontaneously: gives a relevant, impromptu response based on what they 
have heard. 
Rephrasing/repair strategies are strategies that aid communication and allow the 
conversation to be sustained, for example rephrasing, circumlocution, adjusting the 
message, asking for clarification/repetition, repair strategies such as self-correction; these 
strategies enable students to deliver the message when exact vocabulary or expressions are 
not known. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
34 
Conversation: linguistic knowledge and accuracy – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Manipulates a limited variety of mainly straightforward grammatical structures, 
minimal use of complex structures 
● Some accurate grammatical structures, some successful references to past, 
present and future events, some ambiguity 
● Sequences of coherent speech although errors occur that often hinder clarity of 
communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
4–6 ● Manipulates grammatical structures with occasional variation, complex 
structures used but repetitive 
● Generally accurate grammatical structures, generally successful references to 
past, present and future events 
● Generally coherent speech although errors occur that sometimes hinder clarity 
of communication 
7–9 ● Manipulates a variety of grammatical structures, some variety of complex 
structures 
● Predominantly accurate grammatical structures, mostly successful references to 
past, present and future events 
● Predominantly coherent speech; errors occur but they rarely hinder clarity of 
communication 
10–12 ● Manipulates a wide variety of grammatical structures, frequent use of complex 
structures 
● Consistently accurate grammatical structures, consistently successful references 
to past, present and future events 
● Fully coherent speech; any errors do not hinder the clarity of the 
communication 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● all grammar and structures included in the grammar list that are specific to Higher tier 
GCSE 
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free speech in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the listener from the content of what is being said. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
35 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make speech difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force listeners to strain to understand what is meant, 
for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the possessive 
adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the listener from the content of what is 
being said. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
36 
Paper 3: Reading and understanding in Portuguese 
Content 
Students are assessed on their understanding of written Portuguese across a range of 
different types of texts. 
Students need to: 
● identify the overall message, key points, details and opinions in texts 
● deduce meaning from a variety of written texts 
● recognise the relationship between past, present and future events 
● understand texts, organise and present relevant details, and, where appropriate, draw 
inferences in context and recognise implicit meaning 
● recognise and respond to key information, important themes and ideas in more extended 
written text, including authentic sources, adapted and abridged as appropriate, by being 
able to extract information and answer questions. 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes (see Themes and 
topics). 
Texts for individual questions within the assessment use high-frequency language and vary 
in length, including both short- and longer written passages. Texts include authentic sources 
that introduce more complex language and unfamiliar materials. 
The range of text types include: 
● advertisements, emails, letters, articles and literary texts 
● a short passage to be translated from Portuguese into English. 
Literary texts consist of short extracts from texts that may have been adapted and abridged 
from authentic sources to be appropriate to this level – from letters, short stories, novels or 
plays to contemporary and historical sources. Students are also expected to translate a short 
passage of written Portuguese into English to demonstrate an ability to transfer meaning 
accurately into English. 
Scenarios in the texts are set either at home or, more frequently, in a Portuguese-speaking 
country, allowing students to develop appropriate cultural awareness and understanding. 
To prepare students adequately for this assessment, teachers should present and exploit a 
range of vocabulary relevant to each theme listed, building on the Key Stage 3 Programme 
of Study, where appropriate. 
Students should be presented with Portuguese language in a range of styles or registers and 
in a variety of different contexts, as appropriate to their age and level of understanding. 
Students should also be presented with different fonts and formats, for example short, 
printed messages, articles and email messages. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
37 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2020. 
● The assessment time is: 
o Foundation tier – 45 minutes in length 
o Higher tier – 1 hour in length. 
● The assessment is out of 50 marks. 
● The assessment consists of 10 questions. 
● Students must answer all questions from each of the three sections. 
● Students are required to respond to questions based on passages of text from a range of 
sources. Each question is set in a context drawn from the themes. 
● Section A has six questions set in English. Question types comprise both multiple-response 
and short-answer open response questions. The instructions to students are in English. 
● Section B contains three questions set in Portuguese. The instructions to students are in 
Portuguese: 
o for the Foundation tier there are three multiple-response questions 
o for the Higher tier there are two multiple-response questions and one short-answer 
open-response question. 
● Section C contains one translation passage from Portuguese into English. The instructions 
to students are in English. 
● Four of the questions are common to both tiers. 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and mark scheme for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel  
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
38 
Paper 4: Writing in Portuguese 
Content 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate effectively through writing in 
Portuguese. 
Students need to: 
● communicate effectively in writing for a variety of purposes across a range of specified 
contexts 
● write short texts, using simple sentences and familiar language accurately to convey 
meaning and exchange information 
● produce clear and coherent text of extended length to present facts and express ideas and 
opinions appropriately for different purposes and in different settings 
● make accurate use of a variety of vocabulary and grammatical structures, including some 
more complex forms, to describe and narrate with reference to past, present and future 
events 
● manipulate the language, using and adapting a variety of structures and vocabulary with 
increasing accuracy and fluency for new purposes, including using appropriate style and 
register 
● make independent, creative and more complex use of the language, as appropriate, to 
note down key points, express and justify individual thoughts and points of view, in order 
to interest, inform or convince 
● translate sentences and short texts from English into the assessed language to convey key 
messages accurately and to apply grammatical knowledge of language and structures in 
context. 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2020. 
● The assessment is out of 60 marks. 
● Each question is set in a context drawn from the themes and topics. The assessment tasks 
feature general content that is familiar and accessible to all students. 
● Students are required to produce responses of varying lengths and types to express facts, 
ideas and opinions in Portuguese. 
● The length of each response required and complexity of language increases across the 
paper. Recommended word counts are specified for each question. Students will not be 
penalised for writing more or fewer words than recommended in the word count or for 
going beyond the mandatory bullets. 
● One question is a translation of a short passage from English into Portuguese. 
● All assessments are marked against assessment criteria, please see Marking guidance for 
Paper 4: Writing in Portuguese. 
● 'The instructions to students are in Portuguese. The question titles appear in English. 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
39 
● Foundation tier 
o The assessment time is 1 hour and 10 minutes in length. 
o The paper consists of three open questions and one translation from English into 
Portuguese. 
o Students must answer all questions. 
o Question 1 assesses students on their ability to write to describe and to express 
opinions. 
o Question 2 has two options from which students have to select one. This question 
assesses students on their ability to note down key points and convey information. 
Students must use the formal register, please see the definition in Marking guidance for 
Paper 4: Writing in Portuguese. 
o Question 3 has two options from which students have to select one. This question 
assesses students on their ability to convey information, narrate, express opinions, 
interest, and convince the reader about a certain point. Students must use the informal 
register, please see the definition in Marking guidance for Paper 4: Writing in 
Portuguese. This question is common to the Higher tier. 
o Question 4 is the translation question. Students are required to translate five sentences 
from English to Portuguese. The sentences are ordered by increasing level of difficulty. 
● Higher tier 
o The assessment time is 1 hour and 20 minutes in length. 
o The paper consists of two questions and one translation from English into Portuguese. 
o Students must answer all questions. 
o Question 1 has two options from which students have to select one. This question 
assesses students on their ability to convey information, narrate, express opinions, 
interest, and convince the reader about a certain point. Students must use the informal 
register, please see the definition in Marking guidance for Paper 4: Writing in 
Portuguese. This question is common to the Foundation tier. 
o Question 2 has two options from which students have to select one. This question 
assesses students on their ability to convey information, narrate, express and justify 
ideas and opinions, and interest or convince the reader. Students must use the formal 
register, please see the definition in Marking guidance for Paper 4: Writing in 
Portuguese. 
o Question 3 is the translation question. Students are required to translate a short 
paragraph from English into Portuguese. The individual sentences are ordered by 
increasing level of difficulty. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample question paper and accompanying marking guidance and assessment criteria can 
be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese Sample 
Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Marking guidance and assessment criteria are also provided in this document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
40 
Marking guidance for Paper 4: Writing in Portuguese 
This marking guidance is for the use of Pearson-appointed external examiners. The guidance 
has been included for teacher reference to aid understanding of how the assessment criteria 
will be applied. 
General guidance on using levels-based mark schemes 
Step 1 Decide on a band 
● The examiner will first of all consider the answer as a whole and then decide which descriptors 
most closely match the answer and place it in that band. The descriptors for each band 
indicate the different features that will be seen in the student’s answer for that band. 
● When assigning a band they will look at the overall quality of the answer and not focus 
disproportionately on small and specific parts of the answer where the student has not 
performed quite as well as the rest. If the answer covers different aspects of different 
bands of the mark scheme they will use a ‘best fit’ approach for defining the band and 
then use the variability of the response to help decide the mark within the band, for 
example if the response is predominantly band 5–8 with a small amount of band 9–12 
material, it would be placed in band 5–8 but be awarded a mark near the top of the band 
because of the band 9–12 content. 
Step 2 Decide on a mark 
● Once they have decided on a band they will then need to decide on a mark within the 
band. 
● They will decide on the mark to award based on the quality of the answer; they will award 
a mark towards the top or bottom of that band depending on how the student has 
evidenced each of the descriptor bullet points. 
● They will modify the mark based on how securely the trait descriptors are met at that band. 
● They will need to go back through the answer as they apply the mark scheme to clarify 
points and assure themselves that the band and the mark are appropriate. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
41 
Assessment criteria for the Foundation tier 
Question 1 – Foundation tier (12 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria given in  
two mark grids: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
The student is expected to produce 20–30 words for this task. The number of words is 
approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer words than 
recommended in the word count. All work produced by the student must be marked. 
Question 1: communication and content mark grid – Foundation tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Some relevant, basic information without development 
● Uses language to inform, give short descriptions and express opinions with 
limited success 
● Uses limited selection of common, familiar vocabulary and expression with 
frequent repetition 
3–4 ● Mostly relevant information, minimal extra detail 
● Uses language to give short descriptions, simple information and opinions with 
variable success 
● Uses small selection of common, familiar vocabulary and expression with some 
repetition 
5–6 ● Relevant information with occasional extra detail 
● Uses language to give short descriptions, simple information and opinions with 
some success 
● Uses small selection of common, familiar vocabulary and expression with little 
repetition 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
42 
Question 1: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Foundation tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Produces simple, short sentences in isolation 
● Limited accurate application of a small selection of straightforward grammatical 
structures, limited success in referring to present events; frequently errors 
prevent meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Produces simple, short sentences with little linking 
● Inconsistently accurate application of a small selection of straightforward 
grammatical structures, inconsistently successful reference to present events; 
often errors occur that hinder clarity of communication and occasionally prevent 
meaning 
5–6 ● Produces simple sentences with some linking 
● Accurate application of a small selection of straightforward grammatical 
structures, refers successfully to present events as appropriate to the task; 
occasionally errors occur that hinder clarity of communication 
Additional guidance 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: the mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on 
coherence.  
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the 
possessive adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
43 
Question 2 – Foundation tier (16 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria given in two 
mark grids: 
● communication and content  
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
This question requires students to write in a formal style/register (see Additional guidance). 
The student is expected to produce 40–50 words for this task. The number of words is 
approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer words than 
recommended in the word count. All work produced by the student must be marked. 
Question 2: communication and content mark grid – Foundation tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Limited information given likely to consist of single words and phrases 
● Limited ability to use language to present simple facts, inform and note down 
key points; expression is frequently constrained and communication often 
breaks down 
● Repetitive use of a limited selection of common words and phrases; heavy 
reliance on language of the stimulus material to express thoughts 
● Knowledge of register and style is rarely evident because of restricted use of 
vocabulary and expression 
3–4 ● Some brief information given, basic points made without development 
● Occasional success in using language to present simple facts, information and to 
note down key points but expression is sometimes constrained and 
communication occasionally breaks down 
● Limited use of common, familiar vocabulary and expression with frequent 
repetition; some reliance on language of the stimulus material to express 
thoughts 
● Occasional appropriate use of register and style 
5–6 ● Some relevant information given appropriate to the task, basic points made with 
little development 
● Uses language with some success, to present simple facts, information and to 
note down key points, expression is occasionally constrained 
● Uses a small range of, common, familiar vocabulary and expression, mostly 
independently selected, with some repetition; mostly goes beyond the language 
of the stimulus material 
● Mostly appropriate use of register and style, mostly sustained 
7–8 ● Relevant information given appropriate to the task, basic points made with 
some development 
● Uses language mostly with success, to present simple facts, information and to 
note down key points using simple ideas 
● Uses independently selected, common, familiar vocabulary and expression with 
little repetition; goes beyond the language of the stimulus material 
● Appropriate use of register and style sustained 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
44 
Additional guidance 
Independently selected vocabulary and expression: students may use key words from 
the stimulus material but to demonstrate their knowledge of vocabulary and ability to 
express themselves independently they must be able to use vocabulary and expression that 
is not in the stimulus material. 
Register and style definition: formal register and style include, for example, avoidance of 
slang, over-familiar language, exaggeration, ‘text-speak’, inappropriate colloquialisms or 
writing in a conversational style. Formal register and style require the use of the formal 
structure when using, for example, verbs, personal pronouns and possessive adjectives. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
45 
Question 2: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Foundation tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Repetitive use of minimal selection of straightforward grammatical structures 
● Produces individual words/set phrases 
● Limited accuracy in grammatical structures used, limited success in referring to 
present and future events; regular errors prevent meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Use of a restricted range of straightforward grammatical structures, frequent 
repetition 
● Produces simple, short sentences, which are not linked 
● Occasional accuracy in grammatical structures used, occasional success in 
referring to present and future events; sometimes errors prevent meaning being 
conveyed 
5–6 ● Uses straightforward grammatical structures, some repetition 
● Produces simple, short sentences; minimal linking 
● Some accurate use of straightforward grammatical structures, some success in 
referring to present and future events to meet the requirements of the task; 
occasionally errors prevent meaning being conveyed 
7–8 ● Uses straightforward grammatical structures, occasional repetition 
● Produces predominantly simple sentences occasionally linked together 
● Mostly accurate use of straightforward grammatical structures, mostly 
successful references to present and future events to meet the requirements of 
the task; occasionally errors hinder clarity of communication 
Additional guidance 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: the mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have 
on coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the 
possessive adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
46 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
47 
Question 3 – Foundation tier (20 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria given in two 
mark grids: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
This question contains four bullet points that form part of the task. Failure to cover all four 
bullet points will impact on the marks that can be awarded against the requirements of the 
two mark grids for this question. There is no requirement for even coverage of the bullet 
points in any band. However, in order to access marks in the top band, students must refer 
to all bullet points and meet the other assessment criteria in the top band. 
This question requires students to write in an informal style (see Additional guidance). 
The student is expected to produce 80–90 words for this task. The number of words is 
approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer words than 
recommended in the word count. All work produced by the student must be marked. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
48 
Question 3: communication and content mark grid – Foundation tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Communicates brief information relevant to the task with little development 
● Limited adaptation of language to narrate, inform and interest; straightforward 
personal opinions are given with limited justification 
● Expresses straightforward thoughts and ideas; uses common, familiar language 
with repetition 
● Variable use of appropriate register and style 
4–6 ● Communicates information relevant to the task, with development of the 
occasional key point and idea 
● Some effective adaptation of language to narrate and inform; attempts are 
made to interest and give convincing personal opinions which are occasionally 
successful 
● Expresses mainly straightforward thoughts and ideas with the occasional 
individual thought/idea; some different examples of common, familiar language 
● Appropriate use of register and style is evident but with inconsistencies 
7–9 ● Communicates information relevant to the task, with development of some key 
points and ideas 
● Mostly effective adaptation of language to narrate and inform, some effective 
language to interest and give convincing personal opinions 
● Some examples of creative language use to express individual thoughts and 
ideas; a variety of mainly common, familiar language with the occasional 
example of uncommon language 
● Appropriate use of register and style is evident but with occasional 
inconsistency 
10–12 ● Communicates information relevant to the task with expansion of key points 
and ideas 
● Effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest and give convincing 
personal opinions 
● Frequent examples of creative language use to express individual thoughts and 
ideas; a variety of vocabulary and expression, some examples of uncommon 
language 
● Appropriate use of register and style throughout with minimal inconsistency 
Additional guidance 
Creative language use – examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● using language, including familiar, high-frequency and simple language, to respond to 
unfamiliar/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to maintain 
interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, to 
convince. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
49 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view which go 
beyond the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
Register and style definition: informal register and style – examples of informal style 
include colloquial, conversational language that students would use with friends. It also 
requires use of the informal structure when using, for example, verbs, personal pronouns 
and possessive adjectives. 
In order to guarantee consistency and clarity for students of European Portuguese and 
Brazilian Portuguese, when using the second person singular form of address, você with a 
verb conjugated in the third person singular is accepted in both formal and informal 
contexts. 
Adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest and give convincing opinions: 
adapts language to achieve different purposes in the language; students may adapt language 
more effectively for one purpose than another, for example they may use language 
effectively to narrate but less effectively to interest or give a convincing opinion. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
50 
Question 3: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Foundation tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Uses straightforward grammatical structures, some repetition 
● Produces brief, simple sentences, limited linking of sentences 
● Variable accuracy with language and structures, variable success when referring 
to past, present and future events, regular ambiguity; often errors prevent 
meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Uses mostly straightforward grammatical structures, occasional repetition 
● Produces occasionally extended sentences linked with familiar, straightforward 
conjunctions 
● Some accurate language and structures, including some successful references to 
past, present and future events, some ambiguity; often errors occur that hinder 
clarity of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
5–6 ● Different examples of straightforward grammatical structures are evident 
● Produces some extended sentences that are linked with familiar, straightforward 
conjunctions 
● Frequently accurate language and structures, including mostly successful 
references to past, present and future events, occasional ambiguity; sometimes 
errors occur that hinder clarity of communication 
7–8 ● Some variation of grammatical structures, occasional complex structure 
● Produces frequently extended sentences, well linked together 
● Generally accurate language and structures, including successful references to 
past, present and future events; occasionally errors occur that hinder clarity of 
communication 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language. 
Straightforward grammatical structures is considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
51 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the 
possessive adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
52 
Question 4 – Foundation tier (12 marks) 
Translation mark grids 
Mark grid for sentences (a), (b) and (c), which are worth 2 marks each. The mark 
grid will be applied to each individual sentence. 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1 ● Meaning partially communicated with errors that hinder clarity or prevent 
meaning being conveyed 
2 ● Meaning fully communicated with occasional errors that do not hinder clarity 
Mark grid for sentences (d) and (e), which are worth 3 marks each. The mark grid 
will be applied to each individual sentence. 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1 ● Some words are communicated but the overall meaning of the sentence is not 
communicated 
2 ● The meaning of the sentence is partially communicated 
● Linguistic structures and vocabulary are mostly accurate with some errors that 
hinder clarity or prevent meaning being conveyed 
3 ● The meaning of the sentence is fully communicated 
● Linguistic structures and vocabulary are accurate with only occasional errors 
that do not hinder clarity 
Additional guidance 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the 
possessive adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of 
the writing. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
53 
Assessment criteria for the Higher tier 
Question 1 – Higher tier (20 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria given in two 
mark grids: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
This question contains four bullet points that form part of the task. Failure to cover all four 
bullet points will impact on the marks that can be awarded against the requirements of the 
two mark grids for this question. There is no requirement for even coverage of the bullet 
points in any band. However, in order to access marks in the top band, students must refer 
to all bullet points and meet the other assessment criteria in the top band. 
This question requires students to write in an informal style (see Additional guidance). 
The student is expected to produce 80–90 words for this task. The number of words is 
approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer words than 
recommended in the word count. All work produced by the student must be marked. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
54 
Question 1: communication and content mark grid – Higher tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Communicates brief information relevant to the task with little development 
● Limited adaptation of language to narrate, inform and interest; straightforward 
personal opinions are given with limited justification 
● Expresses straightforward thoughts and ideas; uses common, familiar language 
with repetition 
● Variable use of appropriate register and style 
4–6 ● Communicates information relevant to the task, with development of the 
occasional key point and idea 
● Some effective adaptation of language to narrate and inform; attempts are 
made to interest and give convincing personal opinions which are occasionally 
successful 
● Expresses mainly straightforward thoughts and ideas with the occasional 
individual thought/idea; some different examples of common, familiar language 
● Appropriate use of register and style is evident but with inconsistencies 
7–9 ● Communicates information relevant to the task, with development of some key 
points and ideas 
● Mostly effective adaptation of language to narrate and inform, some effective 
language to interest and give convincing personal opinions 
● Some examples of creative language use to express individual thoughts and 
ideas; a variety of mainly common, familiar language with the occasional 
example of uncommon language 
● Appropriate use of register and style is evident but with occasional 
inconsistency 
10–12 ● Communicates information relevant to the task with expansion of key points 
and ideas 
● Effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest and give convincing 
personal opinions 
● Frequent examples of creative language use to express individual thoughts and 
ideas; a variety of vocabulary and expression, some examples of uncommon 
language 
● Appropriate use of register and style throughout, with minimal inconsistency 
Additional guidance 
Creative language use: examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● using language, including familiar, high frequency and simple language, to respond to 
unfamiliar/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to maintain 
interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, to 
convince. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
55 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view that go beyond 
the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
Register and style definition: informal register and style – examples of informal style 
include colloquial, conversational language that students would use with friends. It also 
requires use of the informal structure when using, for example, verbs, personal pronouns 
and possessive adjectives. 
In order to guarantee consistency and clarity for students of European Portuguese and 
Brazilian Portuguese, when using the second person singular form of address, você with a 
verb conjugated in the third person singular is accepted in both formal and informal 
contexts. 
Adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest and give convincing opinions: 
adapts language to achieve different purposes in the language; students may adapt language 
more effectively for one purpose than another, for example they may use language 
effectively to narrate but less effectively to interest or give a convincing opinion. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
56 
Question 1: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Higher tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Uses straightforward grammatical structures, some repetition 
● Produces brief, simple sentences, limited linking of sentences 
● Variable accuracy with language and structures, variable success when referring 
to past, present and future events, regular ambiguity; often errors prevent 
meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Uses mostly straightforward grammatical structures, occasional repetition 
● Produces occasionally extended sentences linked with familiar, straightforward 
conjunctions 
● Some accurate language and structures, including some successful references 
to past, present and future events, some ambiguity; often errors occur that 
hinder clarity of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being 
conveyed 
5–6 ● Different examples of straightforward grammatical structures are evident 
● Produces some extended sentences that are linked with familiar, 
straightforward conjunctions 
● Frequently accurate language and structures, including mostly successful 
references to past, present and future events, occasional ambiguity; sometimes 
errors occur that hinder clarity of communication 
7–8 ● Some variation of grammatical structures, occasional complex structure 
● Produces frequently extended sentences, well linked together 
● Generally accurate language and structures, including successful references to 
past, present and future events; occasionally errors occur that hinder clarity of 
communication 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● all grammar and structures included in the grammar list that are specific to 
Higher tier GCSE 
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language. 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, 
high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
57 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the 
possessive adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
58 
Question 2 – Higher tier (28 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria contained in 
two mark grids: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
This question contains four bullet points that form part of the task. Failure to cover all four 
bullet points will impact on the marks that can be awarded against the requirements of the 
two mark grids for this question (see below). There is no requirement for even coverage of 
the bullet points in any band. However, in order to access marks in the top band, students 
must refer to all bullet points and meet the other assessment criteria in the top band. 
This question requires students to write in a formal register/style (see Additional guidance). 
The student is expected to produce 130–150 words for this task. The number of words is 
approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer words than 
recommended in the word count. All work produced by the student must be marked. 
Question 2: communication and content mark grid – Higher tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–4 ● Communicates occasionally detailed information relevant to the task with 
occasionally effective development of key points and ideas 
● Some effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest/convince 
● Occasional examples of creative use of language to express individual thoughts, 
ideas and points of view, occasional justification; variety of mainly common, 
familiar language, occasional examples of uncommon language 
● Appropriate use of register and style with occasional inconsistency 
5–8 ● Communicates some detailed information relevant to the task, frequently 
effective development of key points and ideas 
● Frequently effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest/convince 
● Examples of creative use of language to express some individual thoughts, ideas 
and points of view, some justified; some variation of vocabulary and expression 
with some examples of uncommon language 
● Appropriate use of register and style with few inconsistencies 
9–12 ● Communicates detailed information relevant to the task, with mostly effective 
development of key points and ideas 
● Mostly effective adaptation of language, to narrate, inform, interest/convince 
● Creative use of language to express a range of individual thoughts, ideas and 
points of view, most of which are justified; variety of vocabulary and expression, 
frequent examples of uncommon language 
● Predominantly appropriate use of register and style 
13–16 ● Communicates detailed information relevant to the task, with consistently 
effective development of key points and ideas 
● Consistently effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, 
interest/convince 
● Creative use of language to express and fully justify a wide range of individual 
thoughts, ideas and points of view; wide variety of vocabulary and expression, 
many examples of uncommon language 
● Consistent use of appropriate register and style throughout 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
59 
Additional guidance 
Creative use of language: examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● using language, including familiar, high frequency and simple language, to respond to 
unfamiliar/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to 
maintain interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, 
to convince. 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view that go beyond 
the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
Adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest/convince: adapts language to 
achieve different purposes in the language; students may adapt language more effectively 
for one purpose than another, for example they may use language effectively to narrate but 
less effectively to interest/convince. 
Register and style definition: formal register and style include, for example, avoidance of 
slang, over-familiar language, exaggeration, ‘text-speak’, inappropriate colloquialisms or 
writing in a conversational style. Formal register and style require the use of the formal 
structure when using, for example, verbs, personal pronouns and possessive adjectives. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
60 
Question 2: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Higher tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Uses a variety of mainly straightforward grammatical structures, occasional 
examples of repetitive complex language 
● Occasional sequences of fluent writing, occasionally extended, well-linked 
sentences 
● Straightforward grammatical structures are largely accurate with occasional 
accurate use of complex language, some successful references to past, present 
and future events but some ambiguity; errors occur that sometimes hinder 
clarity of communication 
4–6 ● Some variation of grammatical structures, including some repetitive instances 
of complex language 
● Prolonged sequences of fluent writing, some extended, well-linked sentences 
● Generally accurate language and structures, frequently successful references to 
past, present and future events, occasional ambiguity; errors occur that 
occasionally hinder clarity of communication 
7–9 ● Uses a variety of grammatical structures including some different examples of 
complex language 
● Predominantly fluent response; frequent extended sentences, mostly 
well linked 
● Mostly accurate language and structures, mostly successful references to past, 
present and future events; errors occur but they rarely hinder clarity of 
communication 
10–12 ● Uses a wide variety of grammatical structures, including complex language 
● Fluent response throughout with extended, well-linked sentences 
● Consistently accurate language and structures, consistently successful 
references to past, present and future events; any errors do not hinder the 
clarity of the communication 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● all grammar and structures included in the grammar list that are specific to  
Higher tier GCSE 
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language. 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
61 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the 
possessive adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
62 
Question 3 – Higher tier (12 marks) 
Translation mark grid 
The translation mark grid assesses both communication and content and linguistic knowledge 
and accuracy. When awarding marks, the student’s response across the whole paragraph 
should be considered. 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Meaning of some individual words or phrases is conveyed; frequent 
omissions/incorrectly communicated words and phrases/mother-tongue 
interference 
● Some straightforward structures are accurate but regular errors prevent 
meaning of individual phrases/sentences being conveyed 
4–6 ● The meaning of the passage is partially communicated, some words and phrases 
are omitted/incorrectly communicated 
● Language and structures are accurate in some phrases and sentences but some 
errors prevent meaning being conveyed 
7–9 ● The meaning of the passage is mostly communicated, occasional words are 
omitted/incorrectly communicated 
● Mostly accurate language and structures; errors occur that occasionally hinder 
clarity and in rare instances prevent meaning being conveyed 
10–12 ● The meaning of the passage is fully communicated 
● Consistently accurate language and structures, any errors do not hinder clarity 
Additional guidance 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the 
possessive adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
63 
Assessment Objectives 
 
Students must: 
% in 
GCSE 
AO1 Listening – understand and respond to different types of spoken 
language 
25 
AO2 Speaking – communicate and interact effectively in speech 25 
AO3 Reading – understand and respond to different types of written 
language 
25 
AO4 Writing – communicate in writing 25 
Total 100% 
 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
 
Paper 
Assessment Objectives Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives AO1 % AO2 % AO3 % AO4 % 
Paper 1: Listening and 
understanding in Portuguese 
25 0 0 0 25% 
Paper 2: Speaking in Portuguese 0 25 0 0 25% 
Paper 3: Reading and 
understanding in Portuguese 
0 0 25 0 25% 
Paper 4: Writing in Portuguese 0 0 0 25 25% 
Total for GCSE 25% 25% 25% 25% 100% 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
64 
3 Administration and general information 
Entries 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for this qualification can be found in 
our UK Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations officers and is 
available on our website: qualifications.pearson.com 
Discount code and performance tables 
Students taking the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese must take all 
assessments in either the Foundation tier or the Higher tier only. 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more than one GCSE, or other Level 2 
qualifications with the same discount code, will have only the grade for their 'first entry' 
counted for the purpose of the school and college performance tables (please see 
Appendix 6: Codes). For further information about what constitutes 'first entry' and full 
details of how this policy is applied, please refer to the DfE website: 
www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-education 
Students should be advised that if they take two GCSEs with the same discount code, the 
schools and colleges to which they wish to progress are likely to take the view that this 
achievement is equivalent to only one GCSE. The same view may be taken if students take 
two GCSEs or other Level 2 qualifications that have different discount codes but which have 
significant overlap of content. Before embarking on their programmes, students or their 
advisers who have any doubts about their subject combinations should check with the 
institution to which they wish to progress. 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, 
special consideration and malpractice 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality policy requires all students to 
have equal opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our qualifications 
to be awarded in a way that is fair to every student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the Equality Act 2010) are not, 
when they are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in comparison to 
students who do not share that characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification and that 
this achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their peers. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be available in English, with the exception of specific 
questions in the listening, reading and writing assessments. 
For speaking and writing assessments, all student work must be in Portuguese. For listening 
and reading, all student work must follow the instruction provided for the individual question. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
65 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with special 
educational needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to: 
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the assessment. 
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an individual 
student with a disability, without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding bodies comply with the duty under the 
Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students will 
then know what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for assessment. 
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable adjustments 
where a person with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in undertaking an 
assessment. The awarding organisation is required to take reasonable steps to overcome 
that disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be unique to that individual and 
therefore might not be in the list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of factors, 
including: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding 
organisation, or affects timeframes or the security or integrity of the assessment. This is 
because the adjustment is not ‘reasonable’. 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student's mark or grade to 
reflect temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the examination/ 
assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a material effect on a 
candidate’s ability to take an assessment or demonstrate their level of attainment in an 
assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to apply for access arrangements 
and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special 
consideration, please refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
66 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that compromises or seeks to 
compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in examinations must be reported to Pearson using a JCQ Form M1 
(available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to Investigations Team, Pearson, 190 High Holborn, 
London, WC1V 7BH. Please provide as much information and supporting documentation as 
possible. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice constitutes staff or centre malpractice. 
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and maladministration of 
our qualifications. As with candidate malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is any act that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the 
integrity of the qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported 
immediately, before any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson on a  
JCQ Form M2(a) (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form, 
supporting documentation and as much information as possible can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to Investigations Team, Pearson, 190 High Holborn, 
London, WC1V 7BH. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies with 
Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the document 
General and Vocational Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments Policies and Procedures, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice. 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to comply with the requirements of 
Ofqual's General Conditions of Recognition. 
The raw marks for papers 1, 3 and 4 in this qualification will be scaled by Pearson to 
represent the relative weighting of 25% for each paper. 
Foundation and Higher tier 
Paper  Weighting  Raw marks Scaling factor Scaling mark 
1 25% 50 1.400 70 
2 25% 70 1.000 70 
3 25% 50 1.400 70 
4 25% 60 1.167 70 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
67 
This GCSE qualification will be graded and certificated on a nine-grade scale from 9 to 1 
using the total subject mark where 9 is the highest grade. Individual papers are not graded. 
For Foundation tier, grades 1–5 are available and for Higher tier, grades 4–9 are available, 
however if the mark achieved is a smaller number of marks below the 4/3 grade boundary, 
then a grade 3 may be awarded. 
The first certification opportunity for this qualification will be 2020. 
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum judged by Pearson to be of 
sufficient standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U result. 
Student recruitment and progression 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this qualification. 
Progression 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese builds on the programme of 
study at Key Stages 2 and 3, focusing on the development of all four language skills, 
listening, speaking, reading and writing. Grammar and the mastering of linguistic features 
are key elements of this specification as is the inclusion of authentic written and spoken 
sources. 
Students will be expected to be able to talk about themselves as well as matters that go 
beyond their immediate experience. They should be able to express and justify their own 
opinions in speech and writing, building on the fluency and spontaneity developed at 
Key Stage 3. 
The skill of translation will be developed from those skills initiated from Key Stage 3. The 
broader range of topics promotes a clear progression in grammar and vocabulary from Key 
Stage 3 and will increase linguistic and cognitive demand. The grammar and vocabulary lists 
illustrate the level required for this qualification. 
This qualification offers a suitable progression route to GCE A Level in Portuguese. In 
addition, the study of one language at GCSE can facilitate and help promote the learning of 
other languages. The qualification may also add to an individual’s employability profile. 
Students will be able to apply their knowledge, skills and understanding to authentic,  
real-life contexts. They will develop transferable skills that support higher education study 
and the transition to employment, together with an understanding and appreciation of 
Portuguese-speaking countries and their cultures. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
68 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
69 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Candidate speaking examination record form (CS2) 71 
Appendix 2: Grammar list 72 
Appendix 3: Vocabulary list 79 
Appendix 4: The context for the development of this qualification 135 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 137 
Appendix 6: Codes 138 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
70 
 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
71 
Appendix 1: Candidate speaking examination record form (CS2) 
A separate form must be submitted for Foundation-tier and Higher-tier candidates. Please indicate the tier below. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 1PG0:       2F/2H*                     (*Please delete as appropriate) 
Centre name:  Centre number:  
 
Candidate name and number Declaration and permissions signature 
and date* 
Role play Picture-
based 
discussion 
Conversation 
(1)                  (2) 
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
Teacher name Declaration and permissions signature 
and date* 
        
            
 
*I declare that the above examinations have been carried out in line with Pearson and JCQ documentation for the conduct of the examinations and agree to 
this work being used to support teachers and examiners. 
Please photocopy and continue on a separate sheet as necessary. Please do not write in shaded boxes – these areas are for Pearson Examiner use 
only. A ‘Word’ version of this form is available on our website to facilitate administration in centres. 
 

 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
72 
Appendix 2: Grammar list 
GCSE students will be expected to have acquired knowledge and understanding of Portuguese 
grammar during their course. In the examination they will be required to apply their knowledge 
and understanding, drawing from the following lists. The examples in brackets are indicative, 
not exclusive. For structures marked (R), only receptive knowledge is required.  
Portuguese (Foundation tier) 
Nouns 
Gender 
● Gender of all nouns  
● Gender endings 
● Common feminine and masculine diminutives and augmentatives, e.g. pãozinho, casarão 
● Alternative meanings of common nouns depending on gender, e.g. a caixa – o caixa 
● Masculine verbal noun, e.g. o trabalhar 
Singular and plural forms 
● Plural of all nouns and, where applicable, their feminine equivalents 
● Change of stressed closed to open vowel, e.g. ovos 
● Plural of noun+de+noun, e.g. quartos de casal 
● Plural of common compound nouns, diminutives and augmentatives, e.g. couves-flores, 
guarda-chuvas, pãezinhos, cafezinhos 
● Masculine and feminine plurals covering both genders, e.g. os filhos, as crianças 
Articles 
● Definite, o, a, os, as agreement with noun 
● Indefinite, um, uma, uns, umas, agreement with noun 
● Combined forms preposition + article: e.g. ao, do, no, pelo 
● Additional use of definite article -    with a toponym or name of country, o Porto, o Brasil 
- with name of a person, a Ana 
- with possessive, o meu passaporte 
- with nouns used in a general sense,  
a fruta está cara 
- other uses of article, e.g. 5 euros o quilo 
● Omission of indefinite article      -    origin, sou inglês 
- profession, occupation, sou estudante 
- possession, tem carro 
- marital status, ela é casada 
- affilliation, religion, ele é católico 
   
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
73 
Adjectives 
● Adjectives and past participles used adjectivally 
● Agreement in gender and number 
● Position 
● Change of stressed closed to open vowel, e.g. novo, nova, novos 
● Position of adjectives – noun+adjective and common exceptions, e.g. bom dia 
● Demonstrative: este/a, esse/a, aquele/a 
● Possessive: meu/minha, teu/tua, seu/sua, nosso/a, vosso/a, seu/sua 
Adverbs  
● Formation with –mente, e.g. igualmente 
● Everyday usage, e.g. bem, devagar, assim 
● Common adverbial phrases, e.g. de repente, de novo 
● Position of adverbs 
● Adverbs of time and place: aqui, ali, acolá, agora, já 
● Interrogative: como, quando, onde, aonde, por que 
Comparatives and superlatives  
● Regular Comparatives with Adjectives and Adverbs: 
o tão...como; tão…quanto; mais…do que; menos…do que 
o muito..., pouco… 
● Superlative Relative 
o O mais... / o menos 
● Superlative Absolute 
o muito/bastante/bem + adjective or adverb 
● Irregular comparatives maior, menor, melhor, pior, superior, inferior 
● Irregular superlatives o/a maior,o/a  menor, o/a melhor,o/a  pior, o máximo, o mínimo (R) 
Connectives  
● Common examples: e, e ainda, antes, depois, pois, porque, também, mas, apenas, por 
exemplo, portanto, quando, para, para que, se, sobre, ao lado, na minha opinião, como, tal 
como, ou 
Quantifiers/intensifiers 
● Common examples: claro, mesmo, pois não, também, apenas ,  
com certeza, naturalmente, ora, próprio 
Pronouns 
Personal  
• Subject personal pronouns 
• Direct and indirect personal pronouns 
• Direct and indirect personal pronouns with prepositions, e.g. para mim, comigo, contigo, 
consigo, com você (R) 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
74 
Pronouns (continued) 
● Reflexives and usage with reflexive verbs: after the verb hyphenated, (e.g. eu lavo-me EP) 
and before the verb (eu me lavo BP) 
● Position of direct and indirect pronouns: after the verb hyphenated and before the verb 
Demonstratives and indefinites  
● isto, isso, aquilo 
● cada, tudo, nada, tanto, vários 
● alguém, ninguém 
● este, esse, aquele 
Relatives  
● Que, quem, onde 
● Word order 
Possessives 
● First, second and third persons singular and plural 
● Possession expressed with de...   dele/dela de você, do/da + proper noun 
● Omission of possessive, e.g. lavar as mãos 
Verbs  
● Regular and irregular verbs 
● All persons of the verb, singular and plural 
● Modes of address: tu and você 
● Radical-changing verbs 
● Negative forms 
● Interrogative forms 
● Uses of ser and estar 
● Reflexive verbs, where applicable, e.g. sentar-se, levantar-se 
● Progressive with estar  (e.g. está a chover)  
● Common idiomatic expressions with ter and haver, e.g. tem de estudar há pouco 
● Verbs followed by an infinitive (with or without preposition), e.g. quero comer, gosto de fazer 
● Verbs followed by preposition em e de, e.g pensar em, gostar de…. 
Voice and person  
● Active voice 
● Passive voice (R) 
● First- and third-person endings, singular and plural second person, using third-person verb 
ending, singular and plural, e.g. você gosta, vocês gostam 
● Second person singular, e.g. tu gostas 
● Omission of subject denotator, e.g. gosta, gostas, gostam 
Infinitive forms  
● Inflected or personal infinitive (R) 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
75 
Past participle and gerund 
● Common regular and irregular past participles and gerunds 
Indicative  
● Present 
● Preterite 
● Imperfect 
● Reported speech, e.g. diz que compra / disse que comprava (R) 
● Future 
● Periphrastic forms with ir for future, e.g. vou comprar 
● Imperfect instead of conditional, e.g. gostava, comprava  
Subjunctive  
● Present of common verbs, e.g. quero que tenham... (R) 
Conditional  
● Common use of the Conditional to introduce requests, wishes and polite interaction,  
e.g. gostaria 
Imperative 
● Command and request forms using third person present subjunctive,  
singular and plural, e.g. venha, sirvam-se 
● Commands and requests using imperative second and third person singular,  
e.g. olha, olhe (R) 
Numbers and quantity 
● Cardinal numbers from zero to milhões, mais de and menos de, agreements where applicable 
● Ordinal numbers from primeiro/a to décimo/a, ultimo, penúltimo (R), and agreements 
● Proportional – duplo, dobro, meio, metade, um terço, um quarto 
● Collective – par, dezena, década, dúzia, centena, milhar 
● Basic measurements and distance, e.g. meio metro, dez quilómetros, a quinze quilómetros 
● Position of ordinals – ordinal+noun, e.g. terceiro andar 
Prepositions 
● Common ones: a, até, com , contra, de, desde, em, entre, para, por, sem, sobre trás 
● Contracted forms – with definite article, e.g. ao, da, no, pelo 
● with indefinite article, e.g. numa 
● Commonly used prepositional phrases, e.g. ao lado de, ao pé de (R) 
Conjunctions 
● Co-ordinating conjunctions, e.g. e, ou, mas, também, nem, portanto 
● Co-ordinating conjunctions e.g. por isso, porém, contudo, não só…..mas também (R) 
● Subordinating conjunctions, e.g. que, porque, se, quando, como 
● Word order in subordinate clauses 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
76 
Times and dates 
● Times using 12- and 24-hour clock 
● Days, months 
● Oito dias, quinze dias 
● Primavera, verão, outono, inverno 
● Da manhã, da tarde, da noite, ontem à noite 
● Madrugada, anoitecer, amanhecer (R) 
● Véspera (R) 
Negatives 
● Simple negative using não 
● Nunca, nem…nem 
● Double negatives, e.g. não... nada (R) 
● Word order in negative sentences 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
77 
Portuguese (Higher tier) 
All grammar and structures listed for Foundation tier, as well as the following. 
Adverbs 
● Adverbs 
o Manner: aliás , como 
o Intensity: demasiado, quanto, quase 
o Affirmation: decerto e realmente 
o Negation: jamais, nunca 
● Adverbial phrases: de vez em quando, de tempos a tempos, em breve, ao contrário,  
em geral... 
Comparatives and superlatives 
● Superlative Absolute: íssimo/a/os/as as in felícissimo (R) 
Connectives 
● examples: além disso, dado que, portanto, é evidente que, de modo que, logo, em 
conclusão, é possível, com efeito, a fim de, a menos que, após, em seguida, a meu ver, 
apesar de, no entanto, ou...ou 
Pronouns 
Personal 
● Contracted forms, e.g. mo(s) (R)  
● Contracted forms, e.g. no-la(s) (R) 
● Position 
● Comprá-lo(s), vendê-la(s), compram-na(s) 
● Intercalated, comprá-lo-ei, vendê-la-ia (R) 
● Position in a negative sentence (Não lhas comprou) or in a relative one (as flores que 
● ela me deu) 
● Indirect object pronoun instead of possessive, e.g. roubaram-lhe a carteira (R) 
Demonstratives and indefinites  
● Algo, certo, cada, diverso 
● Qualquer, quaisquer 
● Tal, tais 
● Um tal (R) 
Relatives 
● Cujo (R) 
● o/a qual, os/as quais 
● Common idiomatic expressions, e.g. foi isto que, fui eu quem, foi ele quem me disse 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
78 
Verbs 
● Third person conjugated reflexively instead of the passive voice, e.g. fala-se inglês,  
aceitam-me cheques (R) 
● Undefined subject, using third person verb ending + no subject denotator, 
● e.g. disseram-me 
Voice and person 
● Passive voice 
Infinitive forms 
● Inflected or personal infinitive e.g. Ao saíres de casa...  
Indicative 
● Perfect with ter, e.g. tenho estado 
● Pluperfect with ter, e.g. tinha comprado 
● Pluperfect with haver, e.g. havia visto (R) 
● Future in pronominal and reflexive conjugations, e.g. lavar-se-á (R) 
● Reported speech, e.g. diz que vai / disse que ia 
Subjunctive 
● Present e.g. espero que não chova 
● Future e.g. quando chegarem, se puderes (R) 
● Imperfect e.g. se pudesse (R) 
● Perfect subjunctive with ter, e.g. espero que tenha chegado (R) 
Conditional 
● Conditional in pronominal and reflexive conjugations, e.g. lavar-se-ia (R) 
 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
79 
Appendix 3: Vocabulary list 
The following vocabulary list is intended to assist teachers in planning their work. It provides 
the core generic vocabulary that all students will need to acquire. It is an essential vocabulary 
list that students should refer to and build on when preparing for the duration of their study for 
the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese. 
However, students entered for the Foundation tier are required to understand and respond to 
common or familiar words and/or forms of words that are not on the vocabulary list. Similarly, 
students entered for the Higher tier are required to understand and respond to common or 
familiar words and/or forms of words that are not on the vocabulary list and which are less 
common or familiar than those used in relation to Foundation-tier assessments. 
Word lists 
Section 1: High-frequency language 
Common verbs 
Common adjectives 
Common adverbs 
Prepositions 
Colours 
Numbers 
Ordinal numbers 
Quantities and measures 
Some useful connecting words 
Time expressions 
Times of day 
Days of the week 
Months and seasons of the year 
Question words 
Other useful expressions 
Other high-frequency words 
Countries 
Continents 
Nationalities 
Administrative regions of Portugal and Brazil with English equivalents 
Areas/mountains/seas 
Useful acronyms 
Social conventions 
Language used in dialogue and messages 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
80 
Section 2: Topic-specific language 
Although words are listed under specific topic headings, the words are not exclusive to those 
particular headings. Many words also relate to other themes but may be listed in only one 
theme. Many common verbs are given in the verb list, with a few others included under a 
specific topic. 
Each topic has been highlighted in bold. 
All topics must be studied in the context of both the student’s home country and that 
of countries and communities where Portuguese is spoken. 
 
Theme 1: Identity and culture 
Who am I?: relationships; when I was younger; what my friends and family are like; what 
makes a good friend; interests; socialising with friends and family; role models 
Daily life: customs and everyday life; food and drink; shopping; social media and technology 
(use of, advantages and disadvantages) 
Cultural life: celebrations and festivals; reading; music; sport; film and television 
 
Theme 2: Local area, holiday and travel 
Holidays: preferences, experiences and destinations 
Travel and tourist transactions: travel and accommodation; asking for help and dealing with 
problems; directions; eating out; shopping 
Town, region and country: weather; places to see; things to do 
 
Theme 3: School 
What school is like: school types; school day; subjects; rules and pressures; 
celebrating success 
School activities: school trips; events and exchanges 
 
Theme 4: Future aspirations, study and work 
Using languages beyond the classroom: forming relationships; travel; employment 
Ambitions: further study; volunteering; training 
Work: jobs; careers and professions 
 
Theme 5: International and global dimension 
Bringing the world together: sports events; music events; campaigns and good causes 
Environmental issues: being ‘green’; access to natural resources 
 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
81 
Section 1: High-frequency language 
Common verbs 
to accept aceitar 
to admire admirar 
to agree estar de acordo 
to appreciate apreciar 
to argue discutir 
to arise, come about, emerge surgir 
to arrive chegar 
to ask perguntar 
to ask (for something) pedir 
to ask a question fazer uma pergunta 
to attend frequentar 
to awaken despertar 
to bathe tomar banho 
to be ser/estar 
to be born nascer 
to be ill; to hurt estar doente/doer 
to be interested in estar interessado/a em 
to be missing faltar 
to be situated situar 
to become tornar-se 
to begin começar 
to believe acreditar 
to book reservar/marcar 
to buy comprar 
to carry/to wear levar 
to chat conversar 
to check verificar 
to choose escolher 
to clean limpar 
to clear away deitar fora 
to click (ICT) clicar 
to close fechar/encerrar 
to collect recolher 
to come vir/chegar 
to complete completar 
to consider considerar 
to contact contactar 
to continue continuar 
to continue/carry on seguir 
to convince convencer 
to cook cozinhar 
to cope/manage/get by superar/gerir/arranjar-se 
to copy copiar 
to cost custar 
to cross, go across cruzar/atravessar 
to cry chorar 
to decide decidir 
to demand exigir 
to depart/leave partir 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
82 
Common verbs (cont)  
to describe descrever 
to die morrer 
to discuss discutir 
to do fazer/realizar 
to draw desenhar 
to drink beber 
to drive conduzir 
to earn ganhar 
to eat comer 
to end terminar 
to enjoy desfrutar 
to enjoy oneself divertir-se 
to enter/go in entrar 
to exist existir 
to explain explicar 
to fail (exam) chumbar 
to fall cair 
to fall asleep adormecer 
to feed, nourish alimentar 
to feel sentir 
to fight brigar 
to fill/fill in encher 
to find encontrar 
to find out descobrir 
to finish acabar/terminar 
to fly voar 
to follow seguir 
to forget esquecer 
to forgive perdoar 
to get obter/buscar 
to get angry zangar-se 
to get dressed vestir-se 
to get into (bus, train)/ 
to get into a car 
apanhar o/entrar no (EP autocarro/BP ônibus,  
EP comboio/BP trem)/entrar no carro 
to get out of (bus, car, train) sair do (EP autocarro/BP ônibus, EP comboio/ 
BP trem, carro) 
to get undressed despir-se 
to get up levantar-se 
to give dar 
to give (a gift/present) oferecer (uma prenda/um presente) 
to give back devolver 
to go ir 
to go (in a car) ir (de carro) 
to go down descer/baixar 
to go for a walk dar uma volta a pé 
to go out sair 
to go to bed ir para a cama 
to go up subir 
to grow crescer/cultivar 
to happen acontecer 
to harm/damage danificar, prejudicar 
to hate odiar 
to have/to be ter/haver 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
83 
Common verbs (cont) 
 
to have breakfast tomar o EP pequeno-almoço/BP café da manhã 
to have lunch almoçar 
to have dinner/supper jantar/cear 
to hear ouvir 
to help ajudar 
to hire alugar 
to hit bater 
to hold segurar 
to hope esperar 
to hurry apressar-se 
to illuminate iluminar 
to imagine imaginar 
to improve melhorar 
to inform informar 
to intend ter a intenção 
to interest interessar 
to introduce (a person) apresentar (uma pessoa) 
to invite convidar 
to iron passar a ferro 
to jump saltar 
to justify justificar 
to keep fit manter-se em forma 
to knock bater 
to knock over atropelar 
to know saber 
to know how to saber como 
to land EP aterrar/BP aterrisar ou pousar 
to last durar 
to laugh rir 
to learn aprender 
to leave (behind) EP deixar/BP deixar para trás  
to leave; to depart partir 
to lie mentir 
to lie down deitar-se 
to light, turn/switch on acender/ligar 
to like gostar 
to listen ouvir 
to live viver 
to live (reside) morar 
to look after/mind (child, dog) tomar conta de (criança, cão) 
to look for procurar 
to lose perder 
to love amar 
to manage (business) EP gerir/BP gerenciar (um negócio) 
to manage, to cope lidar, enfrentar 
to mean to (do) ter a intenção de 
to mean/to signify significar 
to meet/to know someone conhecer 
to miss (appointment, etc.) perder (marcação/consulta) 
to miss (bus, train, etc.) perder o (EP autocarro/BP ônibus, EP 
comboio/BP trem, etc.) 
to motivate motivar 
to need  precisar 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
84 
Common verbs (cont)  
to note down tomar nota 
to notice notar 
to offer oferecer 
to open abrir 
to order encomendar 
to organise organizar 
to owe dever 
to park estacionar 
to pay pagar 
to perform atuar 
to (tele)phone telefonar 
to play brincar/jogar 
to pop in/go in entrar 
to possess possuir 
to prefer preferir 
to prepare preparar 
to present apresentar 
to prevent prevenir 
to produce produzir 
to put meter, colocar, pôr 
to put back devolver 
to read ler 
to receive receber, acolher 
to recognise reconhecer 
to recommend recomendar 
to refund EP restituir/BP devolver 
to regret, be sorry ter pena de 
to remain permanecer 
to remember recorder/lembrar-se de 
to repair reparar 
to repeat repetir 
to replace substituir 
to reply responder 
to research pesquisar 
to reserve reservar 
to rest descansar, relaxar 
to return devolver, voltar 
to return; to go back regressar 
to ride a horse montar a cavalo  
to ring (a bell) tocar (à campainha)  
to run correr 
to save poupar, EP guardar/BP salvar  
to say dizer 
to see ver  
to seem parecer  
to sell vender  
to send enviar 
to serve servir 
to share partilhar 
to show mostrar 
to sign assinar 
to sing cantar 
to sit sentar 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
85 
Common verbs (cont) 
to sit down sentar-se 
to skate patinar 
to ski esquiar 
to sleep dormir 
to smile sorrir 
to smoke fumar 
to solve (a problem) resolver (um problema) 
to speak falar 
to spend (money) gastar (dinheiro) 
to spend (time) passar (tempo) 
to stand levantar-se 
to stand up enfrentar, pôr-se de pé 
to stay ficar 
to steal roubar 
to stop parar 
to stroll, go for a walk passear 
to study (a subject) estudar (uma disciplina) 
to study (be a student) estudar  
to sunbathe tomar banho de sol 
to support apoiar  
to swim nadir 
to switch off desligar 
to take levar 
to take off (clothes, etc.) despir-se 
to take off (plane) EP descolar/BP decolar or levantar voo 
to take one's coat off tirar o casaco 
to taste provar 
to tell/recount contar/narrar 
to tell/to say dizer 
to thank agradecer 
to think (about) pensar (sobre), achar 
to throw atirar 
to touch tocar 
to travel viajar 
to try tentar 
to understand compreender 
to use usar 
to vacuum aspirar 
to visit (person, place) visitar (uma pessoa, um lugar) 
to wait for esperar por 
to wake up acordar 
to walk andar 
to want querer 
to warn avisar 
to wash lavar 
to wash (oneself) lavar-se 
to wash, launder lavar a roupa 
to watch ver 
to wear usar 
to weigh (have weight) pesar 
to weigh (sth.) pesar 
to win ganhar 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
86 
Common verbs (cont) 
to wish desejar 
to work trabalhar 
to write escrever  
Common adjectives 
active ativo/a 
alike; the same igual 
amazing espantoso/a, maravilhoso/a 
any sort of qualquer estilo de 
bad mau/má 
because porque/pois 
better/best melhor 
big, large grande 
boring aborrecido/a 
brave/adventurous corajoso 
calm/peaceful calmo/tranquilo 
cheap barato/a 
clean limpo/a 
complex, complicated complicado/a 
constant constante 
cosy aconchegante 
dangerous perigoso/a 
different diferente 
dirty sujo/a 
easy fácil 
enjoy desfrutar 
every cada  
excellent excelente 
exciting, entertaining emocionante 
expensive caro/a 
fair justo/a 
famous famoso/a 
fashionable elegante 
fast rápido/a 
fat gordo/a 
favourite favorito/a 
foreign estrangeiro/a 
former anterior 
free (at no cost) grátis 
free (unoccupied, available) livre 
friendly simpático/a 
frightening assustador/a 
full cheio/a 
fun; amusing divertido/a 
funny (comical) cómico/a 
generous generoso/a 
genuine genuíno/a 
good bom/boa 
good (well behaved) bem comportado/a 
grateful grato/a 
great ótimo/a 
happy, fortunate, jolly feliz 
hard (not soft) duro/a 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
87 
Common adjectives (cont) 
 
hard, difficult difícil  
hardworking trabalhador/a 
harmful prejudicial 
healthy (food/way of life) saudável 
heavy pesado/a 
high; tall (building) alto/a 
honest honesto/a 
hot (of liquid) quente 
huge enorme 
ideal ideal 
ill (chronic) doente (crónico) 
important importante 
in a good mood de bom humor 
independent independente 
intelligent; clever inteligente 
interesting interessante 
kind gentil, carinhoso/a 
last último/a 
lazy preguiçoso/a 
light leve, ligeiro/a 
long longo/a 
lost perdido/a 
loud barulhento/a 
magnificent magnífico/a 
main principal 
marvellous maravilhoso/a 
modern moderno/a 
narrow estreito/a 
naughty malcriado/a 
necessary, needed necessário/a 
necessary, unavoidable inevitável 
negative negativo/a 
new novo/a 
next próximo/a 
nice; likeable agradável 
noisy ruidoso/a 
normal normal 
old velho/a 
old (former) antigo/a  
old fashioned fora de moda 
open aberto/a 
optimistic otimista  
original original 
other outro/a 
patient (im-) (im)paciente 
peaceful pacífico/a 
pessimistic pessimista 
pleasant, nice agradável 
pleased satisfeito/a 
polite polido/a, educado/a 
poor pobre 
popular popular 
positive positivo/a 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
88 
Common adjectives (cont) 
 
practical prático/a 
pretty bonito/a 
quiet quieto/a 
ready pronto/a 
real real 
reasonable razoável 
recent recente 
reliable confiável 
responsible responsável 
rich rico/a 
sad triste 
safe seguro/a 
same mesmo/a 
selfish egoísta 
sensational sensacional 
serious sério/a 
several vários/as 
shallow superficial 
short curto/a 
short (person) baixo/a 
silent silencioso/a 
silly EP tolo/a BP bobo/a 
situated situado/a 
slender esbelto/a 
slow lento/a 
small pequeno/a 
soft macio/a 
splendid esplêndido/a 
strange estranho/a 
strict rigoroso/a, rígido/a 
strong forte 
suitable adequado/a 
surprised surpreendido/a 
talkative falador 
terrible terrível 
thin, slim magro/a 
tiredF cansado/a 
typical típico/a 
ugly feio/a 
unfair injusto/a 
unhappy infeliz 
unhealthy não saudável 
unique único/a 
unpleasant desagradável 
useful útil 
useless inútil 
valuable com valor 
varied variado/a 
weak fraco/a 
well known famoso/a 
wet molhado/a 
wise esperto/a  
wonderful maravilhoso/a 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
89 
Common adjectives (cont) 
 
worse/worst pior 
young jovem, novo/a 
younger mais jovem 
Common adverbs 
(for) a long time (por) muito tempo 
again de novo 
almost quase 
already já 
also também 
always sempre 
approximately aproximadamente 
badly mal 
better melhor 
cheap barato 
completely completamente 
down (there) (lá) em baixo 
earlier mais cedo 
early cedo 
especially especialmente 
everywhere em todo o lado 
fairly; quite razoavelmente 
fortunately (un-) (in)felizmente 
free gratuitamente 
hardly dificilmente 
here aqui 
inexpensive pouco caro 
later mais tarde 
loud(ly) ruidosamente 
never nunca/jamais 
no longer já não 
not yet ainda não 
nowhere em nenhum lado 
often frequentemente 
only apenas/só/somente 
over there acolá 
perhaps talvez 
possibly possivelmente 
quickly rapidamente 
rarely raramente 
rather um pouco 
recently recentemente 
regularly regularmente 
similarly de maneira semelhante 
simply simplesmente 
slowly EP devagar/BP lentamente 
so tão 
sometimes às vezes 
somewhere em qualquer parte 
soon cedo 
special especial 
still ainda 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
90 
Common adverbs (cont) 
 
straight away já 
there lá 
to here para cá 
to there para lá 
together juntos 
too (much) demasiado 
up (there) (lá) em cima 
usually geralmente 
very muito 
well bem 
worse pior 
Prepositions 
about cerca de 
after após 
among no meio de 
around à volta de 
at às 
at (someone’s house) em casa de 
at the back atrás de 
because of devido a  
before antes 
behind detrás 
besides além de 
between entre 
far from longe de 
from de 
from (a given time) a partir de 
in em 
in front of em frente a  
in the background ao fundo 
in the foreground à frente 
in the middle (of) no meio de 
near (to) próximo de/ perto de 
next to ao lado de 
on em cima de 
onto sobre 
opposite oposto 
outside fora de  
through através 
to para 
towards em direção a  
under debaixo 
until até 
with com 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
91 
Colours 
black preto 
blue (dark) azul (escuro) 
brown EP castanho/BP marron 
brown (eyes) (olhos) EP castanhos/BP marrons 
chestnut brown castanho avelã 
dark escuro 
green verde 
grey cinzento 
grey (hair) grisalho 
light claro 
light blue azul claro 
orange laranja 
pink rosa 
purple violeta 
red vermelho/encarnado 
red (of hair) ruivo/a 
white branco 
yellow amarelo 
Numbers 
1 um 
2 dois 
3 três 
4 quarto 
5 cinco 
6 seis/BP meia – for telephone numbers 
7 sete  
8 oito  
9 nove 
10 dez 
11 onze 
12 doze 
13 treze  
14 catorze  
15 quinze  
16 dezasseis  
17 dezassete 
18 dezoito  
19 dezanove  
20 vinte  
21 vinte e um 
22 vinte e dois 
23 vinte e três 
24 vinte e quatro 
25 vinte e cinco 
26 vinte e seis 
27 vinte e sete 
28 vinte e oito 
29 vinte e nove 
30 trinta  
31 trinta e um 
32, etc. trinta e dois, etc. 
40 quarenta 
50 cinquenta 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
92 
Numbers (cont) 
60 sessenta 
70 setenta 
80 oitenta 
90 noventa 
100 cem 
101 cento e um 
120 cento e vinte 
200 duzentos  
1000 mil  
1100 mil e cem 
2000 dois mil  
1.000.000 1 milhão 
2.000.000 2 milhões 
Ordinal numbers 
first primeiro 
second segundo  
third terceiro  
fourth quarto  
fifth quinto  
sixth sexto  
seventh sétimo  
eight oitavo  
ninth nono 
tenth décimo  
eleventh décimo primeiro 
twelfth décimo segundo  
twenty first vigésimo primeiro  
Quantities and measures 
a bottle uma garrafa 
a box uma caixa 
a jar  um frasco  
a kilo um quilo 
a litre um litro 
a little um pouco 
a lot muita quantidade de 
a packet um pacote 
a piece um bocado 
a slice uma fatia 
about a hundred cerca de cento 
centimetre centímetro 
enough suficiente 
gramme uma grama 
half meio 
kilometre quilómetro 
less menos 
majority maioria 
many muito 
metre metro 
more mais 
not much/not many não muito 
percent(age) por cento (percentagem) 
quantity quantidade 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
93 
Quantities and measures (cont) 
 
quarter um quarto 
several alguns/algumas 
some um pouco de 
third um terço 
too  demasiado   
weight peso  
Some useful connecting words 
also também 
although apesar de  
and e 
as, since (time), since (cause) como, desde. uma vez que 
because porque 
because of devido a  
but mas 
even mesmo 
finally finalmente 
first of all em primeiro lugar 
however no entanto 
if se 
in order that para que 
it is obvious é óbvio 
moreover além disso 
neither… nor… não… nem… 
or ou 
perhaps talvez  
so por isso  
then então  
then, next em seguida 
therefore consequentemente 
this is, here is isto é 
thus, like this, in that way, therefore assim 
whether quer  
while enquanto 
Time expressions 
after depois  
ago há 
already já  
always sempre  
as soon as assim que  
at night à noite  
at the same time ao mesmo tempo 
at the start no princípio 
before antes  
day dia  
day (24 hours) dia (24 horas) 
day off dia de folga  
daytime diurno/a 
delayed atrasado 
during durante  
early cedo  
evening noite  
every day todos os dias/diário/quotidiano 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
94 
Time expressions (cont) 
 
fortnight quinzena  
from desde 
from time to time de vez em quando 
hour hora 
immediately imediatamente 
in the afternoon à tarde  
in the evening à noite 
in the morning de manhã 
in the night durante a noite 
last night (during the night) na noite passada (durante a noite) 
last night (yesterday evening) na noite passada (ontem à noite) 
late tarde 
later mais tarde 
midday meio dia 
midnight meia noite 
minute minuto  
morning manhã  
night noite  
night-time noturno/a 
now agora  
on time a tempo 
once uma vez  
one day um dia  
since desde  
soon cedo  
the day after tomorrow o dia depois de amanhã 
the day before yesterday anteontem  
the day/evening before ontem/ontem à noite/véspera 
the next day; following day o dia seguinte 
time tempo 
today hoje  
tomorrow amanhã 
twice duas vezes 
week semana  
weekend fim de semana 
what is the time? que horas são? 
year/s ano(s) 
yesterday ontem  
  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
95 
Times of day 
1 a.m. uma da manhã 
1 p.m. uma da tarde 
nine o’clock in the evening nove da noite 
13.00 13.00 
at exactly 2 o’clock às duas em ponto 
at about… o’clock por volta das… em ponto 
it is five past three são três e cinco 
five to three três menos cinco 
half past nine nove e meia 
ten past four quatro e dez 
ten to four quatro menos dez 
quarter to six seis menos um quarto 
quarter past seven sete e um quarto 
Days of the week 
Monday segunda feira 
Tuesday terça feira 
Wednesday quarta feira 
Thursday quinta feira 
Friday sexta feira 
Saturday sábado 
Sunday domingo 
(on) Monday (na) segunda 
(on) Monday morning (na) segunda de manhã 
(on) Monday evening (na) segunda à noite 
on Mondays às segundas 
every Monday todas as segundas 
Months and seasons of the year 
month mês 
January janeiro  
February fevereiro  
March março  
April abril  
May maio  
June junho  
July julho  
August agosto  
September setembro  
October outubro  
November novembro  
December dezembro  
season estação do ano 
autumn (in) (no) outono 
spring (in) (na) primavera 
summer (in) (no) verão 
winter (in) (no) inverno 
  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
96 
Question words 
(at) what time? (a) que horas? 
from where? donde?/de onde? 
how much, how many? quanto (custa)? quantos? 
how? como? 
to there? para lá? 
to where? para onde? 
what colour? de que cor? 
what/which? o quê/qual? 
what? que? 
when? quando? 
where? onde? 
who? quem? 
why? porquê? 
Other useful expressions 
all the better tanto melhor 
as/so much tanto 
false (this is) (isto é) falso 
finally, ultimately finalmente 
good luck boa sorte 
great! EP que bom!/ótimo!/BP que legal! 
here is/are aqui tem 
how do I get (to)? como é que vou (para)? 
how do you spell that? como é que se escreve? 
I don’t know não sei 
I don’t mind não me importo 
I don’t understand não entendo 
I like it gosto  
I’m fine; it’s OK tudo EP bem/BP legal 
I’ve had enough estou farto/a  
in my opinion na minha opinião 
in my view do meu ponto de vista 
it annoys me aborrece-me 
it depends depende 
it doesn’t matter não importa 
it makes me laugh EP isso é para rir/BP isso é para me fazer rir 
it’s all the same to me EP para mim vai dar ao mesmo/BP para mim é o 
mesmo 
of course claro 
okay (in agreement) tudo EP bem/BP legal 
on the other hand por outro lado 
once again mais uma vez 
one of the following um dos seguintes 
personally pessoalmente  
so much the better tanto melhor 
so, so assim assim 
that doesn’t interest me isso não me interessa 
that’s enough já chega 
there is/are existe/existem 
too bad, what a shame que pena 
true (this is) (isto é) verdade 
well done! muito bem! 
what does that mean? o que é que isso quer dizer? 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
97 
Other useful expressions (cont) 
what is it like? como é que isso é? 
with pleasure com prazer 
you are not allowed to não pode 
you can (one can) podes (pode) 
you must (one must) deves (deve) 
Other high-frequency words 
action/deed ação 
advice conselho 
anything algo/alguma coisa 
as/like como 
can/could poder/ser capaz de 
community comunidade 
description descrição 
duration duração 
end fim 
everybody toda a gente 
everything tudo  
except exceto 
figure (number) algarismo 
for example por exemplo 
frequence frequência 
information informações 
lusophone (Portuguese-speaking) lusófono/a 
Miss menina  
Mr (also Sir) senhor 
Mrs (also Madam) senhora 
national anthem hino nacional 
number número  
number (e.g. phone number) número (de telefone) 
opinion opinião 
own, -self próprio 
patriotic patriota 
preference preferência 
previously previamente 
reason razão  
relatives familiares, parentes 
someone alguém 
something alguma coisa 
suggestion sugestão 
task tarefa 
that que 
thing coisa 
time (occasion) vez (ocasião) 
type (kind of) tipo 
way maneira/forma 
with com 
without sem  
word palavra 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
98 
Countries 
Angola Angola 
Australia Austrália 
Austria Áustria  
Belarus Bielorússia 
Belgium Bélgica 
Belarus Bielorússia 
Brazil Brasil 
Cape Verde Cabo Verde 
Canada Canadá 
China China 
Cyprus Chipre 
Denmark Dinamarca  
England Inglaterra 
Estonia Estónia 
Finland Finlândia 
France França  
Germany Alemanha  
Great Britain Grã-Bretanha  
Greece Grécia 
Guinea-Bissau Guiné-Bissau 
Holland Holanda 
India Índia 
Ireland Irlanda  
Italy Itália  
Japan Japão 
Latvia Letónia 
Lithuania Lituânia 
Mozambique Moçambique 
Netherlands  Holanda  
Northern Ireland Irlanda do Norte 
Norway Noruega 
Poland Polónia 
Portugal Portugal 
Russia Rússia  
São Tomé e Príncipe São Tomé e Príncipe 
Scotland Escócia  
Spain Espanha  
Sweden Suécia 
Switzerland Suiça 
Timor Timor 
Turkey Turquia 
Ukraine Ucrânia 
United Kingdom Reino Unido  
United States Estados Unidos da América  
USA EUA 
Wales País de Gales 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
99 
Continents 
Africa África 
Asia Ásia 
Australia Austrália 
Europe Europa 
North America América do Norte 
South America América do Sul 
Nationalities 
American americano/americana 
Angolan angolano/angolana 
Austrian austríaco/austríaca 
Belorussian bielorusso/bielorussa 
Belgian belga 
Bissau-Guinean guineense 
Brazilian brasileiro/a 
British britânico/britânica 
Canadian canadiano/canadiana 
Cape Verdean cabo-verdiano/a 
Chinese chinês/chinesa 
Danish dinamarquês/dinamarquesa 
Dutch holandês/holandesa 
English inglês/inglesa 
Estonian estoniano/a 
European europeu/europeia 
French francês/francesa 
German alemão/alemã 
Greek grego/grega 
Indian indiano/a 
Inhabitant of Macau macaense 
Inhabitant of São Tomé são-tomense 
Inhabitant of Timor timorense 
Irish irlandês/irlandesa 
Italian italiano/italiana 
Latvian letão/letã 
Lithuanian lituano/lituana 
Mozambican moçambicano/moçambicana 
Pole (Polish) polaco/polaca 
Portuguese português/portuguesa 
Russian russo/russa 
Scottish escocês/escocesa 
Spanish espanhol/espanhola 
Swiss suiço/suiça 
Turkish turco/turca 
Ukranian ucraniano/ucraniana 
Welsh galês/galesa 
  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
100 
Areas/mountains/seas/places 
administrative area of Brazil República Federal do Brasil 
African steppe savana africana 
Amazon rainforest floresta amazónica 
Amazon river rio Amazonas 
Atlantic Ocean oceano Atlântico 
back country sertão/interior 
East leste 
Estrela mountain serra da Estrela 
North norte 
Pacific Ocean oceano Pacífico 
Polar circle círculo polar 
region região 
Siberia Sibéria 
south sul 
the Arctic o Ártico 
the Channel Tunnel o túnel da mancha 
Christ the Redeemer statue Cristo Redentor (in Brasil), Cristo Rei (in 
Portugal) 
Commerce Square Terreiro do Paço/Praça do Comércio 
Monastery of Jerónimos Mosteiro dos Jerónimos 
National Congress (Brasília) Congresso Nacional (Brasília) 
National Pantheon Panteão Nacional 
Sanctuary of Bom Jesus of Braga Santuário do Bom de Jesus de Braga 
The Castle of Guimaraes castelo de Guimarães 
the English Channel o canal da Mancha 
the Far East o extremo oriente 
the Ipiranga Monument Monumento do Ipiranga 
The Mediterranean Sea mar Mediterrâneo 
The Pena Palace Palácio da Pena 
The Ruins of San Miguel Archángel Sítio Arqueológico de São Miguel Arcanjo 
The São Bento Palace Palácio de São Bento 
The Seteais Palace Palácio de Seteais 
Tropical Wetland of Pantanal Pantanal 
west oeste 
Useful abbreviations and acronyms 
European Union União Europeia 
homeless sem abrigo 
high-speed train EP comboio/BP trem de alta velocidade 
please por favor 
Portuguese national railway company CP (comboios de Portugal) 
school leaving exam EP exame nacional do ensino secundário/BP 
vestibular 
suburban electric train EP comboio/BP trem urbano 
tram elétrico 
United Nations (UN) Organização das Nações Unidas (ONU) 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
101 
Social conventions 
best wishes melhores cumprimentos 
(I’m) sorry (informal/formal) desculpa/desculpe (informal/formal) 
bye! tchau!/adeus! 
could you say that again, please? EP podes/BP pode repetir, por favor?  
don’t mention it não tem de quê 
good afternoon boa tarde 
good evening boa noite 
good morning bom dia  
goodbye adeus  
goodnight boa noite 
have a good journey tenha uma boa viagem 
hello olá  
hello (on the telephone) olá  
help! socorro  
hi! oi!/olá! 
how are you? como estás? 
it is time to é tempo de 
I beg your pardon? pardon? como? desculpe? 
it’s a pleasure com muito prazer 
meet you at 6 o’clock encontro-te às 6 em ponto 
meeting; meeting place reunião; local da reunião 
nightmare! pesadelo! 
no thank you não, obrigado/obrigada 
of course claro  
please por favor 
see you later até logo! 
see you soon até breve 
see you tomorrow/on Friday até amanhã/até sexta 
sorry desculpa  
thank you (very much) (muito) obrigado/obrigada 
that doesn't matter/that's ok não faz mal/tudo bem 
what is (your) name? como te chamas/como se chama? 
(informal/formal) 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
102 
Language used in dialogues and messages 
address morada 
call me (informal/formal) telefona-me/telefone-me (informal/formal) 
dial the number marcar o número 
email e-mail 
I’ll be right back volto já 
I’m listening estou a ouvir 
message mensagem 
mobile phone telemóvel 
moment momento 
on line on-line 
on the line/speaking em linha/falando 
please repeat that por favor, repita 
postcode código postal 
receiver (telephone) recetor  
sender remetente 
stay on the line fique em linha 
telephone telephone 
text message sms/mensagem 
tone tom 
voice mail mensagem de voz 
wait espere 
wrong number erro no número 
  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
103 
Section 2 – Topic-specific vocabulary 
Identity and culture: daily life, food and drink, including eating out 
Foundation tier 
allergy alergia 
appetite apetite 
apple maçã 
banana banana 
beans feijão 
beef bife  
beer cerveja 
beetroot  beterraba 
bill conta 
biscuit biscoito 
bottle garrafa 
bread pão 
breakfast EP pequeno-almoço/BP café da manhã 
butter manteiga 
cabbage couve 
cabbage soup caldo verde 
café café 
cake bolo  
carrot cenoura 
cheese queijo 
chicken frango 
chips batatas fritas 
chocolate chocolate 
closed (on Mondays) fechado (às segundas) 
cocoa cacao/cacau 
coffee café 
crisps batatas fritas (de pacote) 
cucumber pepino 
cup chávena 
custom costume 
customer cliente 
daily diário 
delicious delicioso 
dessert sobremesa 
dining room sala de jantar 
dish prato 
drink bebida 
egg ovo 
enjoy your meal! bom apetite! 
euro euro 
evening meal, dinner jantar 
everyday diário 
fast food comida rápida 
fish peixe 
fizzy water água com gás 
fresh fresco 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
104 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
food comida 
fork garfo 
fruit fruta 
fruit juice sumo de fruta 
glass copo  
grapes uvas 
ham fiambre 
hamburger hamburguer 
hot chocolate chocolate quente 
ice cream gelado (EP), sorvete (BP) 
jam compota 
juice EP sumo, BP suco 
knife faca  
lemon limão 
lemonade limonada  
lettuce, salad alface, salada 
life vida 
lunch almoço  
meal refeição 
meat carne 
menu menú 
milk leite 
milkshake batido 
mineral water água mineral 
money dinheiro 
mushroom cogumelo 
napkin guardanapo 
oil óleo 
omelette omelete  
onion cebola 
orange laranja 
packet pacote 
pancakes panquecas  
pasta massa  
peach pêssego 
pear pêra  
peas ervilhas  
pineapple ananás  
pepper pimento  
plate prato  
pizza pizza  
pizzeria, pizza restaurant pizzaria  
porridge papa de aveia 
portion porção 
potato batata 
price preço 
raspberry framboesa 
restaurant restaurante 
rice arroz 
rice pudding arroz doce 
salami, cooked sausage salame 
salt sal 
sandwich sandes 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
105 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
sausages salsichas 
service serviço 
snack petisco, merenda 
snack bar snack bar 
soup sopa 
speciality especialidade 
spoon colher  
starters entradas 
steak bife 
still water água natural 
strawberry morango  
sugar açúcar 
supermarket supermercado 
supper ceia 
sweet doce 
sweet (tasting) doce 
sweet course, dessert doces, sobremesa 
table mesa 
tasty saboroso/a 
tea chá 
tomato tomate 
vegetables vegetais 
vitamins vitaminas 
waiter/waitress empregado/a de mesa 
water água 
watermelon melancia  
wine vinho  
yoghurt iogurte  
Higher tier 
business lunch almoço de negócios 
champagne champanhe 
choice escolha  
chop (e.g. pork/lamb) costeleta (de porco, de cordeiro) 
cooked cozinhado 
cream nata 
duck pato 
first course primeiro prato 
foodstuffs género alimentício 
fried egg ovo estrelado 
fried steak with fried eggs EP bitoque/BP bife a cavalo  
garlic alho 
grapefruit toranja 
homemade caseiro/a 
honey mel 
ice-cream parlour gelataria 
jar frasco  
lamb cordeiro 
main course prato principal 
margarine margarina 
mayonnaise maionese 
medium médio (ao ponto) 
mince cortar em pedaços 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
106 
Higher tier (cont) 
 
mixed misturado/a 
mustard mostarda 
natural, organic food natural, comida orgânica 
noodles EP talharim, massa/BP noodles ou macarrão 
nuts frutos secos 
pastries pastéis 
pork porco 
roll (bread) pãozinho (pequeno) 
salmon salmão  
sauce molho  
sea food marisco  
self-service self-service 
service service 
sideboard, dresser aparador 
slice fatia  
tip (money) gorjeta  
towel toalha  
turkey perú  
vegetarian vegetariano/a 
vinegar vinagre  
 
Identity and culture: what my friends and family are like 
Words relating to dress and style 
Foundation tier 
belt cinto 
blouse blusa 
boots botas 
bracelet pulseira 
cap boné 
clothes roupa  
clothes shop loja de roupa 
coat/overcoat casaco/casacão  
dress vestido  
dressed in vestido/a de 
fashion moda  
flowers flores  
footwear calçado  
glove luva 
handbag carteira, mala de mão  
hat chapéu 
jacket blusão  
jeans calças de ganga 
jumper camisola 
makeup maquilhagem  
pants, briefs cuecas  
pyjamas pijama  
ring anel  
rucksack mochila  
scarf cachecol  
shirt camisa  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
107 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
shoes sapatos  
shorts calções  
size tamanho  
skirt saia  
small pequeno  
smart elegante  
socks meias/peúgos 
sportsman desportista (m) 
sportswoman desportista (f) 
style estilo  
suit fato  
sweater suéter/camisola 
swimming costume fato de banho 
tee shirt/t-shirt t-shirt/blusa 
tie gravata 
tracksuit fato de treino 
trainers sapatilhas 
trousers calças  
umbrella guarda-chuva  
uniform uniforme  
vest colete  
watch relógio  
Higher tier 
brand, label marca  
cardigan casaco de malha  
cotton  algodão  
crooked torto/a 
fashionable estar na moda 
fur coat casaco de peles 
hairdresser's cabeleireiro 
heel salto 
leather pele 
lipstick batom  
loose (i.e. too big) largo  
neat apresentável  
old fashioned fora de moda 
perfume perfume  
raincoat gabardina 
slippers chinelos  
stripes riscas/barras 
tattoo tatuagem 
tights EP collans/BP meia-calça 
to put on makeup EP pôr maquilhagem/BP pôr maquiagem 
  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
108 
Words on relations, relationships, personal and physical characteristics 
Foundation tier 
adult, grown-up adulto/a 
age idade  
alcohol álcool  
arm, hand braço, mão 
armchair cadeirão 
at home em casa 
at my/our house em minha/na nossa casa 
aunt tia 
back costas  
bald careca  
bath banho  
bathroom casa de banho  
beard barba  
beautiful lindo/a 
bed (linen) roupa de cama 
bed(stead) cama 
bedroom quarto  
bedside cabinet EP mesa de cabeceira/BP mesinha de cabeceira 
bird pássaro 
birthday aniversário  
birthplace local de nascimento 
block (of flats) bloco de apartamentos 
blond/e louro/a 
body corpo 
boy menino, rapaz  
brother irmão  
brothers and sisters, siblings irmãos e irmãs, irmãos  
brunette moreno/a 
care cuidado 
cat (m/f) gato/a 
chair cadeira  
character, personality carácter, personalidade 
child criança  
children crianças  
clothes roupas  
comfortable (house, furniture) confortável (casa, mobília) 
curly (hair) encaracolado (cabelo) 
curtains cortinados 
country cottage casa de campo 
daily routine rotina diária 
dad EP papá/BP papai 
date of birth data de nascimento 
daughter filha  
diet dieta  
dining room sala de jantar  
dog cão/cadela  
door porta  
ear/s ouvido  
energetic energético 
enthusiasm entusiasmo 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
109 
Foundation tier (cont)  
eyes olhos  
face cara  
family família  
father pai  
first name primeiro nome 
flat; apartment apartamento 
foot pé 
friend (m/f) amigo/a  
friends amigos/as 
furniture mobília  
garage garagem  
garden jardim  
generation geração 
girl (older) EP rapariga/adolescente/BP moça 
girl (young) menina  
glasses óculos 
goldfish peixinho dourado  
grandchild (f) neta 
grandchild (m) neto  
grandfather, grandad avô 
grandmother, grandma, granny avó  
grandparents avós  
guest hóspede 
guinea pig porquinho da índia  
guy, dude, bloke sujeito 
hair cabelo  
hamster hamster  
head cabeça  
health saúde  
horse cavalo  
house casa  
house (small) casinha  
ideal ideal  
identity identidade  
intelligent inteligente  
kindness carinho 
kitchen cozinha 
lamp, light lâmpada, luz 
leg perna 
living room, front room sala de estar 
love amor 
man homem  
mother mãe  
mouse rato  
moustache bigode  
mouth boca  
mum EP mamã/BP mamãe 
neck pescoço 
neighbour vizinho/a 
nice, pleasant agradável  
nice (people) simpático/a 
normal normal  
nose nariz  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
110 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
old velho  
only child filho/a único/a 
parents pais  
party festa  
penfriend (f/m) penfriend (f/m) 
people pessoas  
person pessoa  
pet animal de estimação 
picture quadro  
plant planta  
present; gift presente, prenda 
public holiday feriado  
rabbit coelho  
refrigerator frigorífico  
relationship relação  
relative, relation parente, familiar 
religion religião  
respect respeito 
serious sério/a 
sister irmã 
slim magro/a 
snake cobra 
sofa; settee sofá 
son filho  
staying as a guest hospedar-se 
stomach estômago 
straight (hair) liso (cabelo) 
study (room) escritório 
surname EP apelido/BP sobrenome 
table mesa  
talented talentoso/a 
teenager adolescente  
terrace terraço 
thin magro 
throat garganta  
to be called (person, place) chamar-se 
to be healthy, fit ser saudável 
to look (e.g. angry/happy, etc.) parecer (ex. chateado/a, feliz, etc.) 
to seem parecer  
tooth dente  
tropical fish peixe tropical 
ugly feio/a 
uncle tio  
visit visita  
wife esposa  
woman mulher  
youth juventude 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
111 
Higher tier 
acquaintance conhecido/a 
alone sozinho/a 
argument discussão  
brave, adventurous forte, aventureiro 
career carreira  
carpet carpete  
celebrity celebridade  
character (in film, etc.) personagem (num filme, etc.) 
character trait traço de personalidade 
charming  encantador/a  
cousin primo/a 
discrimination discriminação  
elbow cotovelo  
elderly idoso  
example exemplo  
faith (religious) fé (religião) 
famous famoso/a 
feeling sensação 
furnished mobilado/a 
gender, sex género, sexo 
habit hábito 
hall (in house) hall de entrada 
healthcare cuidados de saúde 
honest honesto/a 
husband esposo, marido 
invitation convite 
knee joelho  
lazy preguiçoso/a 
lively animado/a 
loft loft, águas furtadas, sótão  
loyal, faithful leal, fiel  
meeting reunião  
member of the family membro da família 
mirror espelho  
mood humor 
old age terceira idade 
old people’s home EP lar da terceira idade/BP asilo 
older mais velho 
oldest (brother/sister) irmão/irmã mais velho/a 
optimistic otimista 
pensioner EP pensionista, reformado/a/BP aposentado/a 
pessimistic pessimista  
place of residence lugar de residência  
racist racista 
reasonable razoável  
relationship relação  
reliable fiável  
self (myself, yourself, etc.) mesmo (mim mesmo, você mesmo) 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
112 
Higher tier (cont) 
selfish egoísta 
sense of humour sentido de humor  
sensitive sensível  
similar similar  
survey inquérito  
thin/slender esbelto 
to babysit EP tomar conta/BP cuidar de crianças  
to be in a good/bad mood estar de bom/mau humor  
to do the washing up lavar a louça 
to get on (well) with dar-se (bem) com  
to move house mudar de casa 
understanding entendimento  
unemployed desempregado/a  
wages salário  
wanted procurado/a 
way of life, lifestyle estilo de vida  
 
Identity and culture: cultural life 
Foundation tier 
adventure film filme de aventura 
aerobics aeróbica  
art gallery galeria de arte 
athletics atletismo  
badminton badminton  
ball baile  
ballet ballet 
band/group banda/grupo 
basketball basquetebol  
book livro  
boxing boxe  
camera câmara fotográfica 
cartoon desenhos animados 
cat gato/a 
CD (compact disc) CD 
celebration celebração 
chess xadrez 
choir coro  
Christmas Natal  
cinema  cinema 
classical, classic clássico/a 
club clube 
collect colecionar  
collection coleção  
comedy comédia 
comic books banda desenhada 
computer game jogo de computador  
concert concerto  
cultural cultural  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
113 
Foundation tier (cont) 
culture cultura  
cycle andar de bicicleta 
dance dançar 
detective/police (story) detetive/polícia (história) 
disco (place) discoteca  
documentary documentário  
drama (TV, etc.) drama 
drum bateria  
Easter Páscoa 
event evento  
festival festival  
film filme  
flute flauta  
football futebol  
free time tempo livre  
game jogo  
guitar guitarra 
gymnastics ginástica  
Happy birthday!  Feliz aniversário! 
Happy New Year! Feliz Ano Novo! 
hobby; leisure activity hobby, atividade de lazer 
hockey hóquei  
ice skating patinagem no gelo 
idea ideia  
instrument instrumento musical 
interest interesse  
leaves folhas 
leisure lazer  
lottery EP lotaria/BP loteria 
magazine revista  
manager (sport) dirigente 
method método 
mobile phone telemóvel  
MP3 player leitor de MP3 
music música  
musical (show) show musical 
New Year ano novo 
news notícias 
nightclub clube noturno 
opera ópera  
orchestra orquestra  
to participate participar 
party festa  
photo(graph) fotografia  
piano piano  
ping pong pingue pongue  
player (music) leitor  
player (sport/games) jogador 
pop music música pop 
programme, broadcast programa 
rap rap  
reading leitura 
rock music música rock 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
114 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
role model modelo 
romantic romântico/a 
rugby rugby  
saxophone saxofone 
science-fiction film filme de ficção científica 
sculpture escultura 
series séries 
show (theatre, etc.) espetáculo (teatro, etc.) 
show, performance espetáculo 
skate boarding andar de skate 
skiing esquiar 
socialising socializar  
social media redes sociais 
sport EP desporto/BP esporte 
sports ground campo desportivo 
sporty desportivo/a 
spy film filme de espiões 
squash squash 
star estrela  
surfing fazer surf 
swimming nadar 
team equipa 
television (medium) televisão 
tennis ténis 
theme tema  
thriller thriller  
to adore adorar 
to celebrate celebrar  
to do sport fazer desporto 
to exercise fazer exercício 
to fish/go fishing pescar  
to get married casar-se  
to socialise with socializar com (alguém) 
to take a dog out for a walk ir passear o cão 
to take part (in) fazer parte de 
to train treinar  
toy brinquedo 
tree árvore 
(TV) channel canal de (televisão) 
video vídeo 
video camera câmara de vídeo 
video/computer game jogo de vídeo/computador (EP)/vídeo game (BP)  
violin violino 
volleyball voleibol  
windsurfing fazer windsurf 
witch bruxa 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
115 
Higher tier 
accordion acórdeão 
amusement divertimento  
audience audiência 
author autor  
boat barco 
ceremony cerimónia 
championship campeonato 
clarinet clarinete  
competition competição  
cyclist ciclista 
earphones auriculares  
entertainment entretenimento  
extreme sports desportos radicais 
fencing esgrima  
figure skating patinagem artística 
genre género 
goal objetivo  
horror film filme de terror 
knowledge conhecimento 
league liga 
melody melodia  
mountain bike bicicleta de montanha 
mountaineering montanhismo 
play (theatre) peça de teatro 
pleasure prazer  
pocket money semanada/mesada  
prize preço 
reading leitura 
referee árbitro 
review crítica 
riding (a horse) equitação 
roller blading patinagem em linha 
sailing navegação  
singer cantor/a 
soap (opera) telenovela 
song canção/música 
speakers altifalantes 
sports season época desportiva 
stage palco  
subtitles legendas 
table tennis ténis de mesa 
to (be) relax(ed) estar relaxado/a, relaxar-se 
to bathe tomar banho 
to congratulate dar os parabéns 
to create criar 
to do gymnastics fazer ginástica 
to hike, ramble caminhar 
to occupy oneself, do ocupar-se de, fazer 
to roller-skate andar de patins 
to sail velejar 
to score a goal marcar um golo 
to skateboard andar de skate 
tournament torneio 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
116 
Higher tier (cont) 
training treino  
trumpet trompete  
ukulele cavaquinho 
unforgettable inesquecível 
viewer espetador  
writer escritor/a 
Xbox Xbox 
youth club clube de jovens  
 
Identity and culture: using social media 
Foundation tier 
advantage vantagem 
blog blog 
chatroom sala de chat 
computer computador  
disadvantage desvantagem 
disk disco  
email e-mail  
internet internet 
laptop (computador) portátil 
new technology nova tecnologia 
page página 
password palavra passe 
programme programa 
risk risco 
screen ecrã 
social media meios sociais 
technology tecnologia 
to chat online conversar on-line 
to download fazer download 
to erase, delete apagar 
to load carregar  
to save, to store guardar 
to use usar  
use of technology uso da tecnologia 
virtual virtual 
virus vírus 
web rede 
web page página de internet 
webcam webcam 
website sítio na internet 
Higher tier 
connection conexão, ligação 
homepage inicial 
social network rede social 
to surf (the net) navegar pela internet 
to type teclar 
to upload fazer upload 
  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
117 
Local area, holiday and travel 
Foundation tier 
accommodation alojamento 
address oneself to dirigir-se 
air ar 
airport aeroporto 
aquarium aquário 
area (in town) área, zona 
arrival chegada 
art gallery galeria de arte 
atlas atlas  
balcony varanda  
bank banco  
bar bar  
barbecue churrasco  
bath banho  
bathroom EP casa de banho/BP banheiro 
beach praia  
bed cama  
bicycle/bike bicicleta  
boat barco  
bowling alley pista de boliche 
brand/make marca 
bridge ponte  
brochure folheto  
building edifício  
bus (by bus) (de) EP autocarro/BP ônibus 
bus stop paragem de autocarro (EP)/parada de ônibus (BP) 
bus/coach station rodoviária 
business negócio 
café café 
camp acampar 
campsite parque de campismo 
capital city capital 
car carro 
car, automobile automóvel 
cathedral catedral  
cave gruta 
centre centro 
chemist's farmácia 
cheque; receipt cheque; recibo 
church igreja 
cinema (building) cinema 
circus circo 
closed fechado  
coach EP autocarro/BP ônibus 
coast costa  
concert concerto  
country (i.e. nation) país  
countryside campo  
credit card cartão de crédito 
department (in a shop) departamento (loja) 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
118 
Foundation tier (cont) 
department store loja de departamentos 
departure partida 
destination destino 
direct direto  
disco discoteca  
door porta  
employee funcionário 
entrance entrada  
exit saída 
experience experiência 
factory fábrica  
farm quinta 
festival festival  
flight tickets bilhetes de avião  
floor (1st, 2nd) andar (primeiro, segundo) 
form formulário 
ground floor EP rés-do-chão/BP piso térreo 
guest hóspede 
guided tour visita guiada 
help ajuda 
historic histórico/a 
holiday cottage casa de férias 
holidays férias 
hospital hospital  
hotel hotel  
hotel (5*) hotel de cinco estrelas 
ice rink pista de gelo 
information office posto de informação 
journey (short) viagem 
key chave  
lake lago  
leisure centre centro de lazer 
library biblioteca  
lift boleia 
list lista 
litter lixo  
local area área local 
luggage bagagem 
map mapa  
map (of town) mapa (da cidade) 
market mercado  
means of transport meio de transporte 
microwave microondas 
monument monumento  
mosque mesquita 
motorbike moto 
mountain montanha  
museum museu  
nature natureza 
newspaper stall banca de jornais 
night club clube noturno 
noise ruído/barulho 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
119 
Foundation tier (cont) 
occupied/taken ocupado/a 
office escritório 
on foot a pé 
on the left à esquerda 
on the right à direita 
open aberto  
palace palácio 
paper papel 
park parque 
passenger passageiro 
passport passaporte  
passport control controlo de passaporte 
petrol gasolina 
place lugar 
plane avião  
platform plataforma 
police officer agente de polícia 
police station posto de polícia 
port porto 
post office correios 
postcard postal  
poster cartaz 
priority prioridade  
problem problema 
public público 
public transport transporte público 
radio rádio 
railway ferrovia 
region, area região, área 
region, district região, distrito 
return ticket bilhete de volta 
river rio  
road estrada  
room quarto 
room (in hotel) quarto de hotel 
rucksack mochila  
sea mar  
seaside beira-mar 
season estação 
shop loja  
shopping fazer compras 
shopping centre centro comercial 
show espetáculo 
shower chuveiro 
sight, tourist attraction, place to see atrações turísticas 
single ticket bilhete de ida 
snack bar snack bar 
snack bar, buffet (on a train) snack bar, bufê, bar 
souvenir recordação 
sports centre centro desportivo 
square (in town) praça  
stadium estádio 
station (mainline railway) estação (de comboio) 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
120 
Foundation tier (cont) 
station (metro) estação (EP de metro/BP de metrô) 
stop (bus, tram, etc.) paragem (de EP autocarro/BP ônibus, de elétrico) 
street rua 
suburb; outskirts of town subúrbios, arredores 
suitcase mala 
summer cottage casa de campo de verão 
supermarket supermercado 
swimming pool piscina 
taxi táxi 
teenager adolescente 
television set televisão 
tennis court campo de ténis 
tent tenda 
theatre teatro 
ticket bilhete  
ticket office EP bilheteira, BP bilhetaria 
ticket; tram, bus or metro ticket bilhete (de elétrico, EP autocarro/BP ônibus,  
EP metro/BP metrô) 
till; cash desk caixa 
to hang up the phone desligar o telefone 
to photograph tirar fotografias 
to pick up the phone atender o telefone 
toilets wc 
token (metro) ficha 
to stay as a guest hospedar-se, alojar 
tour excursão 
tourism turismo 
tourist turista 
tourist (adjective) turístico/a 
tourist information office posto de turismo  
town cidade 
town centre centro da cidade 
train EP comboio/BP trem 
tram elétrico 
travel viajar  
traveller viajante  
travel agency agência de viagens 
trolleybus trólei 
underground railway metro 
underground station estação de metro 
vacation férias 
view (over) vista 
village aldeia 
way out/exit saída 
welcome Bem-vindo/a 
window janela 
winter holidays férias de inverno 
yard, courtyard pátio 
youth hostel pousada da juventude 
zoo jardim zoológico 
  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
121 
Higher tier 
accident acidente 
abroad ao/no estrangeiro 
adolescent adolescente  
agricultural agrícola 
air conditioning/air-con ar condicionado 
airline companhia aérea 
ATM multibanco 
baker’s shop, bakery padaria 
bank card cartão EP multibanco/BP de débito 
basement cave 
border fronteira 
calm/peaceful sossegado 
canal canal 
car park parque de estacionamento 
castle castelo 
change mudança 
changing room provador 
commercial comercial 
compartment (train) compartimento 
cooker fogão 
corner canto  
crossroads cruzamento 
departure saída 
diesel (fuel) EP gasóleo/BP diesel 
direction direção 
double room quarto duplo 
driver condutor 
driver (professional) motorista 
driving licence carta de condução 
entertainment entretenimento 
event evento 
exhibition exposição 
ferry ferry-boat 
fireworks fogo de artifício 
flight voo 
forbidden to proibido 
foreigner estrangeiro 
fortress fortaleza 
fountain fonte 
free (available, vacant) disponível 
full (hotel, etc.) lotado 
games room salão de jogos 
garage, service station, petrol station estação de serviço 
heating aquecimento 
helicopter helicóptero 
hill colina 
hire of/hiring contratar 
hospitality hospitalidade 
in advance com antecedência 
included incluído 
industrial industrial 
industry indústria 
inhabitant habitante 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
122 
Higher tier (cont) 
 
inside interior, dentro de, interno 
landscape paisagem 
launderette lavandaria 
left-luggage office EP depósito de bagagem temporário/BP guarda 
volume 
line (underground) linha de EP metro/BP metrô 
lively animado/a 
lorry camião 
lost-property office balcão perdidos e achados 
luxurious luxuoso 
no parking proibido estacionamento 
open-air pool piscina ao ar livre 
order (request) pedido/encomenda 
outside fora 
outside/in the open air no exterior 
(to) overtake ultrapassar 
(to) pack (cases) fazer a mala 
package holiday pacote de férias 
pavement pavimento 
pedestrian EP peão/ BP pedestre 
pedestrian area EP zona pedonal/BP zona pedestre 
pedestrian crossing passadeira 
picturesque pitoresco  
pillow almofada 
place sítio, lugar 
playground pátio 
procession procissão 
receipt recibo 
reception receção  
receptionist rececionista 
reduction redução 
registration/booking in registo 
resort estância de férias/resort  
route itinerário 
rush hour hora de ponta 
savings bank banco de poupanças 
seat belt cinto de segurança 
(to) send (set off) enviar 
ship navio  
sign aviso  
single room quarto individual 
situated situado/a 
ski resort estância de esqui 
skiing esquiar  
sleeping bag saco cama 
sleeping car (in a train) vagão dormitório 
soap sabão, sabonete 
speed velocidade 
speed limit limite de velocidade 
(to) spend the night passar a noite 
summer camp acampamento de verão 
ticket inspector EP revisor de bilhetes/BP fiscal  
timetable horário 
toilet paper papel higiénico 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
123 
Higher tier (cont) 
toothbrush escova de dentes 
toothpaste pasta de dentes 
tower torre 
trade comércio 
traffic tráfego  
traffic jam engarrafamento  
traffic lights semáforo 
twin-bedded room quarto duplo com duas camas 
(to) unpack (cases) desfazer a mala 
(to) validate a ticket (e.g. train, tram, etc.) validar um bilhete (de comboio/trem, elétrico, etc.)  
waiting room sala de espera 
wash basin lavatório 
winter holiday férias de inverno 
Phrases associated with weather 
Foundation tier 
bad mau 
climate clima 
cloud nuvem 
cloudy nublado 
coolness frescura 
cold frio 
degree (temperature) graus (temperatura) 
fog nevoeiro 
highest temperature temperatura máxima 
hot quente, calor 
in the east no leste 
in the north no norte 
in the south no sul  
in the west no oeste  
it is chilly está fresco 
it is freezing está um gelo 
it is raining está a chover 
it is snowing está a nevar 
it is windy está ventoso 
lowest temperature temperatura mínima 
mist névoa 
overcast encoberto 
rain chuva 
shadow sombra 
snow neve 
storm tempestade 
sun sol 
sunny soalheiro/a 
the sun is shining o sol brilha 
warm ameno 
weather tempo 
weather forecast previsão meteorológica  
wind vento 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
124 
Higher tier 
average temperature temperatura 
bright luminoso 
changeable instável 
downpours aguaceiro 
dry seco 
hail granizo 
heat calor 
high temperature temperatura alta 
it is frosty está geada 
it is lightning está a relampejar 
lightning relâmpago 
low temperature temperatura baixa 
misty enevoado 
sky céu 
thunder trovão 
to be expected esperar-se 
Asking for directions 
are you going in a car? vais de carro? 
are you going on foot? vais a pé? 
as far as tão longe quanto 
close perto 
continue  continuar 
cross (over) cruzar 
far longe  
go straight on  seguir adiante  
high street/main street rua principal 
how do I get to? como é que chego a...? 
it is 100 metres away fica a 100 metros de distância 
it is very close fica perto 
not far não é longe 
on the left à esquerda 
on the right à direita 
straight on em frente 
take the first road on the left vire na primeira rua à esquerda 
turn left vire à esquerda 
turn right vire à direita 
  
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
125 
Dealing with problems 
Foundation tier 
address morada 
bill conta 
colour cor 
correct correto/a  
customer cliente 
customer service serviço ao cliente 
email address endereço de e-mail 
form formulário 
guarantee garantia 
part parte 
purse carteira 
receipt recibo 
size tamanho 
telephone number número de telephone 
to pay pagar 
to work, function trabalhar 
wrong  errado/a 
Higher tier 
a fine uma multa 
broken partido/a 
complaint reclamação 
criminal criminoso/a 
crime crime 
crime, criminality criminalidade 
fault defeito 
improvement melhoria 
incident incidente 
instructions  instruções 
insurance seguro 
investigation investigação 
mistake erro 
progress progresso 
(to) punish castigar 
quantity quantidade 
reduction redução 
repair reparação 
theft roubo  
thief ladrão 
to bring back, take back trazer de volta 
to complain reclamar 
to exchange trocar 
to fine multar 
to guarantee dar garantia 
to insure fazer um seguro 
wallet carteira 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
126 
School 
Foundation tier 
answer resposta 
art, drawing arte, desenho 
bell sino 
biology biologia 
board (blackboard, whiteboard, etc.) quadro (de giz, interativo) 
book livro 
break intervalo  
business studies economia 
calculator calculadora 
calendar calendário 
canteen cantina 
chemistry química  
choir coro  
circle, club grupo  
class aula/turma 
class test teste  
classroom sala de aula  
copy cópia 
corridor corredor  
cupboard armário  
desk secretária 
dining room sala de jantar 
drama (school subject) teatro  
DT (design technology) educação tecnológica 
Economics Economia  
English inglês 
event (at school) evento  
examination exame  
exchange intercâmbio 
exercise exercício 
exercise book livro de exercícios 
experiment experiência 
French Francês  
future plans planos futuros 
geography Geografia 
German Alemão  
gym ginásio 
gymnastics ginástica 
headteacher director  
history história 
holidays (school)  férias escolares 
homework EP trabalho de casa/BP deveres or tarefa 
ICT (information communication technology) informática 
Italian Italiano 
laboratory laboratório 
languages línguas 
Latin Latim 
lesson lição  
library biblioteca  
Literature Literatura  
lunch (adjective) almoço  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
127 
Foundation tier (cont)  
lunch break hora de almoço 
Maths Matemática  
Music Música 
PE (physical education) educação física 
pen caneta 
pencil lápis 
pencil case estojo   
physics física  
plan  plano 
Portuguese (language) Português 
practice prática 
pressure pressão  
primary school escola primária  
progress progresso  
projector projetor  
question questão  
Religion, Religious Studies Educação moral e religiosa 
result resultado 
rubber borracha  
rule regra  
ruler régua 
Science Ciências 
school escola 
school activities atividades escolares 
school bag mochila  
school bus EP autocarro escolar/BP ônibus escolar 
school day dia escolar 
school group/party grupo/festa escolar 
school trip visita escolar 
schoolchild (f) aluna 
schoolchild (m) aluno  
secondary school escola secundária 
Sociology Sociologia  
Spanish Espanhol  
sports hall, gym pavilhão desportivo, ginásio 
stress EP stress/BP estresse 
student estudante  
study/studies estudo/estudos  
subject disciplina  
success sucesso  
summer holidays férias de verão  
team equipa  
technology tecnologia  
the future o futuro 
the past o passado  
tie gravata 
timetable horário  
to teach ensinar  
type tipo  
uniform uniforme  
year ano  
  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
128 
Higher tier 
able capaz  
article (item) artigo 
assessment avaliação  
attention atenção  
ballpoint pen esferográfica 
boarding school colégio interno 
briefcase pasta  
clever esperto/a 
circle, club grupo  
compulsory subject EP disciplina/BP matéria obrigatória 
core subjects disciplinas de componente geral  
degree (university) licenciatura (universidade) 
dictionary dicionário  
discipline disciplina  
discussion discussão  
do badly; fail an exam EP chumbar/BP reprovar 
drama group, acting group grupo de teatro 
education educação  
essay redação  
exchange intercâmbio 
felt tip caneta de feltro 
foreign languages línguas estrangeiras 
fountain pen caneta de tinta permanente 
glue cola  
hardworking trabalhador/a 
headteacher  director 
kindergarten jardim de infância  
locker cacifo  
mark, grade nota  
meeting reunião  
mixed misto  
optional (subject) (disciplina) de opção 
oral oral  
pad of paper bloco de papel 
page página  
parents’ evening reunião de entrega de notas/reunião de pais 
permission autorização 
pressure pressão  
private school escola privada 
project projeto  
pronunciation pronúncia  
punishment castigo 
pupil (m/f) aluno/a 
qualification qualificação 
report relatório, trabalho  
rule regra  
school leaving certificate certificado de conclusão do ensino secundário 
school report ficha de avaliação de final de período 
school textbook manual escolar 
scissors tesouras  
sharpener EP afiadeira/BP apontador 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
129 
Higher tier (cont)  
shelf estante 
sixth form liceu  
sports ground complexo desportivo 
staff room sala de professores 
state estado 
strong, good at (subject) forte, bom/boa a (disciplina) 
successful bem-sucedido 
survey inquérito, questionário 
term período  
textbook manual  
to agree (with) something concordar (com) algo 
to calculate calcular  
to cancel (lessons) cancelar (aulas) 
to correct corrigir  
to drop a subject desistir de uma disciplina 
to pass (exam) passar (no exame de) 
to pay attention prestar atenção 
to practise praticar  
to pronounce pronunciar  
to revise fazer revisão  
to sit an exam fazer um exame 
to skive/to skip/bunk lessons faltar às aulas  
to translate traduzir  
to work hard trabalhar arduamente 
translation tradução 
unfair injusto 
vocational school; technical college escola professional 
waste of time perda de tempo 
weak, bad at (subject) fraco/a, mau/má a (disciplina) 
  
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
130 
Future aspirations, study and work 
Foundation tier 
actor  ator  
actress atriz  
advertisement anúncio  
air hostess hospedeiro/a de bordo 
ambition ambição  
architect arquiteto/a 
aspiration aspiração  
assistant assistente  
banker bancário/a 
beyond (the classroom) para lá (da sala de aula) 
builder constructor 
business negócio 
career carreira  
cashier caixa  
coffee (tea/lunch) break pausa para o café (chá, almoço) 
colleague colega  
company empresa  
computer  computador  
computer science ciência da computação  
cook cozinheiro/a 
degree grau 
dentist dentista 
designer designer  
doctor médico/a 
dream (aspiration) sonho (aspiração) 
driver motorista 
electrician eletrecista 
employment emprego  
engineer engenheiro/a 
farmer lavrador  
farmer worker caseiro 
fashion moda 
file ficheiro 
fireman bombeiro 
folder pasta  
form formulário 
future futuro  
interview entrevista 
job trabalho 
journalist jornalista 
language língua 
lawyer advogado/a 
lecture palestra  
male nurse enfermeiro 
manager gestor/gerente 
marketing marketing 
mechanic mecânico/a 
member membro 
musical musical 
musician músico/a 
nurse enfermeira 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
131 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
per hour à hora 
plan plano 
poet poeta 
printer impressora 
profession profissão 
programmer programador 
project projeto 
reporter repórter 
sales assistant vendedor/a 
shop loja 
soldier soldado 
student estudante 
study estudo 
teacher (m/f) professor/a 
technician técnico/a 
telephone telefone 
to build construir 
to organise organizar 
to study estudar 
training (sport) treinar 
training (study) curso  
travel agency agência de viagens 
university universidade 
vet veterinário/a 
volunteer voluntário/a 
work trabalho 
work experience estágio 
workplace local de trabalho 
Higher tier 
aim; goal objetivo 
ambition ambição 
answerphone atendedor de chamadas 
artist artista 
badly paid mal pago 
charity caridade 
civil servant funcionário público 
conference conferência 
database base de dados 
educational educacional 
employer empregador/a 
enclosed incluído/a 
experienced com experiência 
hard disk disco rígido 
higher education ensino superior 
impression impressão 
in aid of em auxílio de 
internship estágio 
job advert anúncio de emprego 
keyboard teclado 
law (study of the subject) direito  
link link  
medicine (study of the subject) medicina  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
132 
Higher tier (cont) 
 
model modelo  
mouse rato  
part time tempo parcial 
photo model modelo fotográfico 
plumber canalizador 
prospects perspectiva 
qualification qualificação 
qualified qualificado/a 
salary, wages salário 
signature assinatura 
situation wanted situação desejável 
skills competências 
society sociedade 
surgeon cirurgião/cirurgiã 
terms of employment termos do contrato de trabalho 
to apply for a job candidatar-se a um emprego 
to attach anexar  
to do a course fazer um curso 
to enclose/to include incluir 
to fill in a form preencher um formulário 
to introduce oneself apresentar-se imprimir 
to print out imprimir 
to type digitar 
to volunteer fazer voluntariado 
unemployment desemprego 
vacancy vaga 
voluntarily  voluntariamente  
voluntary work trabalho voluntário 
webmail webmail 
well paid bem pago 
without pay sem remuneração 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
133 
International and global dimension: bringing the world together, 
environmental issues 
Foundation tier 
access to aceder a  
against contra 
animals animais 
campaign campanha 
championship campeonato 
charity caridade 
country país 
earth terra  
ecological ecológico/a 
ecology ecologia  
effect efeito  
electricity eletricidade  
energy energia  
environment meio ambiente 
environmental issues questões ambientais 
festival festival 
for a favor 
forest floresta 
gas gás 
good cause boa causa 
global global  
green verde  
hurricane furacão 
illegal ilegal  
international internacional  
international dimension dimensão internacional 
island ilha 
legal legal 
music festival festival de música 
musical event evento musical 
natural resources recursos naturais 
ocean oceano 
oil petróleo 
Olympic games jogos olímpicos 
organisation organização 
people povo, gente 
planet planeta  
political político/a  
politics; policy política 
sporting event evento desportivo 
tiger tigre 
to recycle reciclar 
world mundo  
World Cup (football) copa do mundo (futebol) 
  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
134 
Higher tier 
advantages vantagens 
bear urso  
climate (adjective) climático 
coal carvão 
disadvantages desvantagens 
disaster desastre 
drinking water água potável 
drought seca 
drugs drogas 
earthquake tremor de terra 
elephant elefante 
fair trade comércio justo 
field campo 
flood; flooding cheia 
global warming aquecimento global 
hunger; famine fome  
lack (of) falta (de) 
nature natureza 
pesticide pesticida 
peace paz 
plastic plástico 
pollution poluição 
poverty pobreza 
protection proteção 
recycling reciclagem 
rights of man; human rights direitos do Homem; direitos humanos 
rubbish lixo 
security segurança 
solar power energia solar 
species espécies 
spying espionagem 
starving fome  
threat ameaça 
to contaminate contaminar 
to pollute poluir 
to preserve preservar 
to protect proteger 
to save, economise poupar, economizar 
to save, rescue salvar 
to sort/separate (e.g. rubbish) separar (o lixo) 
to stay in contact manter em contacto 
to survive sobreviver 
to threaten ameaçar 
volcano vulcão 
war guerra  
waste products resíduos 
world(wide) mundial 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
135 
Appendix 4: The context for the development 
of this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] and our 
ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
● reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with those taken 
in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
● consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including subject associations, 
academics and advisors, teachers and students to ensure this qualification is suitable for a 
UK context 
● reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in their 
documents GCSE (9 to 1) Subject Level Guidance and GCSE Subject Level Conditions and 
Requirements for Modern Foreign Languages, published in April 2016. 
 
  
 
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification Principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
● demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning and 
measuring higher-order skills 
● rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and valid 
assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in end users of the knowledge, skills and 
competencies of certified students 
● inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students develop at 
different rates and have different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
● empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills, see Appendix 5.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
136 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
May 2014 
“The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important change to the 
education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications will assist them in 
helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an ‘Expert 
Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or because of 
our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the world as diverse as 
SinFore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification development 
process that has included: 
● extensive international comparability of subject content against the highest-performing 
jurisdictions in the world 
● benchmarking assessments against UK and overseas providers to ensure that they are at 
the right level of demand 
● establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-specific 
expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
● subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future oriented. The 
design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, meaning learner outcomes 
have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a learner’s 
success in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident that we have 
supported the development of qualifications that are outstanding for their coherence, 
thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as representing world-class best 
practice.”    
  
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Lee Sing Kong  
Director, National Institute of Education, 
Singapore 
  
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
  
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
 
All titles correct as at May 2014 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
137 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently flagged the need 
for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable them to respond with confidence 
to the demands of undergraduate study and the world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines skills, or 
competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that can be learned and 
that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform an activity or task and can be 
built upon and extended through learning.’
[1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected and evaluated 
seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this process, we identified the 
National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the most evidence-based and robust skills 
framework. We adapted the framework slightly to include the Program for International Student 
Assessment (PISA) ICT Literacy and Collaborative Problem Solving (CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves:[2] 
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve general 
cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and communicate. [3]  
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, oral communication, written communication, assertive 
communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, service orientation, 
self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared understanding, 
taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team organisation. 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work stress, 
adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, and physical 
adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual teams, work 
autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and able to acquire new 
information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher education, as 
well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the teaching and learning of this 
qualification. We will provide teaching and learning materials, developed with stakeholders, to 
support our qualifications. 
  
 
[1]  OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012) 
[2]  Koenig J A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop  
(National Academies Press, 2011) 
[3]  PISA – The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy (2011) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Portuguese 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
138 
Appendix 6: Codes 
 
Type of code Use of code Code 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for performance 
tables is assigned a discount code that indicates 
the subject area to which it belongs. 
Discount codes are published by the DfE. 
Please see the 
GOV.UK website* 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an Ofqual 
Regulated Qualifications Framework (RQF) 
code. 
The RQF code is known as a Qualification 
Number (QN). This is the code that features in 
the DfE Section 96 and on the LARA as being 
eligible for 16–18 and 19+ funding, and is to be 
used for all qualification funding purposes. The 
QN will appear on students’ final certification 
documentation. 
The QN for this 
qualification is: 
603/2482/X 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to enter 
students for a qualification. Centres will need to 
use the entry codes only when claiming 
students’ qualifications. 
GCSE – 1PG0 
 
Paper codes These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be entered 
for individual papers. 
Paper 1: 1PG0/01 
Paper 2: 1PG0/02 
Paper 3: 1PG0/03 
Paper 4: 1PG0/04 
 
*www.gov.uk/government/publications/2018-performance-tables-discount-code 
 
 
 
290922 9781446946824_GCSE2017_L12_PORTUGUESE ISS4.DOCX.1–142/0 
 
 
About Pearson 
We are the world’s leading learning company operating in countries all around the world. We 
provide content, assessment and digital services to schools, colleges and universities, as well 
as professional and vocational education to learners to help increase their skills and lifelong 
employability prospects. We believe that wherever learning flourishes so do people.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This specification is Issue 4. We will inform centres of any changes to this issue. The latest 
issue can be found on the Pearson website: qualifications.pearson.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References to third party materials made in this specification are made in good faith. Pearson 
does not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may 
be subject to change, or any opinions expressed therein. (Materials may include textbooks, 
journals, magazines and other publications and websites.) 
 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
 
ISBN 978 1 446 94682 4 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2022 
 
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office:  80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121