GCSE (9-1)
English Literature
Specification
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9 - 1) in English Literature (1ET0)
First teaching from September 2015
First certification from June 2017 Issue 2
Edexcel, BTEC and LCCI qualifications 
Edexcel, BTEC and LCCI qualifications are awarded by Pearson, the UK’s largest awarding 
body offering academic and vocational qualifications that are globally recognised and 
benchmarked. For further information, please visit our qualifications website at 
qualifications.pearson.com. Alternatively, you can get in touch with us using the details 
on our contact us page at qualifications.pearson.com/contactus 
About Pearson 
Pearson is the world's leading learning company, with 35,000 employees in more than  
70 countries working to help people of all ages to make measurable progress in their 
lives through learning. We put the learner at the centre of everything we do, because 
wherever learning flourishes, so do people. Find out more about how we can help you 
and your learners at qualifications.pearson.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References to third party material made in this specification are made in good faith. 
Pearson does not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, 
which may be subject to change, or any opinions expressed therein. (Material may 
include textbooks, journals, magazines and other publications and websites.) 
 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
 
ISBN 978 1 446 91435 9 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
Summary of Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE 
(9-1) in English Literature specification  
Issue 2 changes 
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this current 
issue 
Page 
number 
Component 1 
We have added four new diverse texts to the prescribed texts list for post-
1914 Literature: two British plays and two British novels. These are: 
● play: The Empress, Tanika Gupta 
● play: Refugee Boy, Benjamin Zephaniah (adapted for the stage by Lemn 
Sissay) 
● novel: Coram Boy, Jamila Gavin 
● novel: Boys Don’t Cry, Malorie Blackman. 
These texts are for first teaching from September 2019 and first assessment 
is May 2021. 
3, 8 
Component 2 
We have added a new poetry collection on ‘Belonging’ into the Poetry 
Anthology. 
This new collection is for first teaching from September 2019 and first 
assessment is May 2021. 
5, 10, 
31 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives table 
In line with the addition of new texts – this table has been updated to include 
the new question numbers. 
16 
 
If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, contact us via 
our website at: qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/contact-us.html. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
 
“The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important 
change to the education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications 
will assist them in helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an 
‘Expert Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or 
because of our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the 
world as diverse as Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries 
across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification 
development process that has included: 
• Extensive international comparability of subject content against the highest-
performing jurisdictions in the world 
• Benchmarking assessments against UK and overseas providers to ensure that 
they are at the right level of demand 
• Establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-
specific expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
• Subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future 
oriented. The design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, 
meaning learner outcomes have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a 
learner’s success in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident 
that we have supported the development of qualifications that are outstanding for 
their coherence, thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as 
representing world-class best practice.
” 
  
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Lee Sing Kong 
Director, National Institute of 
Education, Singapore 
  
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
  
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
 
All titles are correct as of May 2014. 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature is designed 
for use in schools and colleges. It is part of a suite of GCSE qualifications offered by 
Pearson. 
Purpose of the specification 
This specification sets out: 
● the objectives of the qualification 
● any other qualification(s) that students must have completed before taking the 
qualification 
● any prior knowledge and skills that students are required to have before taking 
the qualification 
● any other requirements that students must have satisfied before they will be 
assessed or before the qualification will be awarded 
● the knowledge and understanding that will be assessed as part of the 
qualification 
● the method of assessment and any associated requirements relating to it 
● the criteria against which students’ level of attainment will be measured (such 
as assessment criteria). 
 
 
Rationale 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature meets the 
following purposes, which fulfil those defined by the Office of Qualifications and 
Examinations Regulation (Ofqual) for GCSE qualifications in their GCSE (9–1) 
Qualification Level Conditions and Requirements document, published in April 2014. 
The purposes of this qualification are to: 
● provide evidence of students’ achievements against demanding and fulfilling 
content, giving students the confidence that the literacy skills, knowledge and 
understanding that they will have acquired during the course of their study are 
comparable to those of the highest performing jurisdictions in the world, 
enriching their cultural awareness through the study of literary heritage texts  
● provide a strong foundation for further academic and vocational study and for 
employment, to help students progress to a full range of courses in further and 
higher education. This includes Level 3 English courses, as well as Level 3 
courses in other disciplines such as Drama and Theatre Studies 
● provide (if required) a basis for schools and colleges to be held accountable for 
the performance of all of their students. 
Qualification aims and objectives 
The aims and objectives of the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in 
English Literature are to enable students to: 
● read a wide range of classic literature fluently and with good understanding, and 
make connections across their reading 
● read in depth, critically and evaluatively, so that they are able to discuss and 
explain their understanding and ideas 
● develop the habit of reading widely and often 
● appreciate the depth and power of the English literary heritage 
● write accurately, effectively and analytically about their reading, using Standard 
English 
● acquire and use a wide vocabulary, including grammatical terminology, and 
other literary and linguistic terms they need to criticise and analyse what they 
read. 
 
 
 
 
The context for the development of this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] 
and our ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
● reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with 
those taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
● consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including learned 
bodies, subject associations, higher-education academics, teachers and 
employers to ensure this qualification is suitable for a UK context 
● reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in 
their documents GCSE (9–1) Qualification Level Conditions and Requirements and 
GCSE Subject Level Conditions and Requirements for GCSE in English Literature, 
published in April 2014. 
 
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
● demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep 
learning and measuring higher-order skills 
● rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing 
reliable and valid assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in 
end users of the knowledge, skills and competencies of certified students 
● inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that 
students develop at different rates and have different learning needs, and 
focusing on progression 
● empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills, see 
Appendix 1. 

 
 
 
Contents 
Qualification at a glance 1 
Set texts at a glance 3 
Assessment Objectives and weightings 5 
Knowledge, skills and understanding 7 
Component 1: Shakespeare and Post-1914 Literature 7 
Component 2: 19th-century Novel and Poetry since 1789 9 
Assessment 13 
Assessment summary tables 13 
Assessment Objectives and weightings 15 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives by component 16 
Entry and assessment information 17 
Student entry 17 
Forbidden combinations and discount code 17 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special consideration 
and malpractice 18 
Equality Act 2010 and Pearson equality policy 20 
Awarding and reporting 21 
Language of assessment 21 
Grade descriptions 21 
Other information 22 
Student recruitment 22 
Prior learning and other requirements 22 
Progression from GCSE 22 
Appendix 1: Transferable skills 25 
Appendix 2: Codes 27 
Appendix 3: Poetry Anthology lists 29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2019  © Pearson Education Limited 2019 
1 
Qualification at a glance 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature is a linear 
course. It consists of two externally examined components. 
Students must complete all assessment in May/June in any single year. 
 
Component 1: Shakespeare and Post-1914 Literature  
*Paper code: 1ET0/01 
● Externally assessed 
● Availability: May/June 
● First assessment: 2017 
50% of the 
total GCSE 
Overview of content 
● Study a Shakespeare play and a post-1914 British play or novel. 
● Develop skills to analyse how the language, form, structure and context of 
texts can create meanings and effects. 
● Develop skills to maintain a critical style and informed personal response. 
Overview of assessment 
● Section A – Shakespeare: a two-part question, with the first task focused on 
an extract of approximately 30 lines. The second task is focused on how a 
theme reflected in the extract is explored elsewhere in the play. 
● Section B – Post-1914 British play or novel: ONE essay question. 
● The total number of marks available is 80. 
● Assessment duration: 1 hour and 45 minutes. 
● Closed book (texts are not allowed in the examination). 
 
The sample assessment materials can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature Sample Assessment Materials 
document. 
*See Appendix 2: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant 
to this qualification. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2019  © Pearson Education Limited 2019 
2 
 
 
The sample assessment materials can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature Sample Assessment Materials 
document. 
*See Appendix 2: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant 
to this qualification. 
Component 2: 19th-century Novel and Poetry since 1789 * 
Paper code: 1ET0/02 
● Externally assessed 
● Availability: May/June 
● First assessment: 2017 
50% of the 
total GCSE 
Overview of content 
● Study a 19th-century novel and a poetry collection from the Pearson 
Poetry Anthology. 
● Develop skills to analyse how the language, form, structure and context of 
texts can create meanings and effects. 
● Develop skills to maintain a critical style and informed personal response. 
● Develop comparison skills. 
Overview of assessment 
● Section A – 19th-century novel: a two part question, with the first part 
focussed on an extract of approximately 400 words. The second part is an 
essay question exploring the whole text.  
● Section B – Part 1: ONE question comparing a named poem from the Pearson 
Poetry Anthology collection to another poem from that collection. The named 
poem will be shown in the question paper. Part 2: ONE question comparing two 
unseen contemporary poems. 
● The total number of marks available is 80. 
● Assessment duration: 2 hours and 15 minutes. 
● Closed book (texts are not allowed in the examination). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2019  © Pearson Education Limited 2019 
3 
Set texts at a glance 
Component 1 
One text from: Shakespeare 
Macbeth 
The Tempest 
Romeo and Juliet 
Much Ado About Nothing 
Twelfth Night 
The Merchant of Venice 
One text from: Post-1914 British play or novel 
An Inspector Calls – J B Priestley 
Hobson’s Choice – Harold Brighouse 
Blood Brothers – Willy Russell 
Journey’s End – R C Sherriff 
Animal Farm – George Orwell 
Lord of the Flies – William Golding 
Anita and Me – Meera Syal 
The Woman in Black – Susan Hill 
The Empress - Tanika Gupta* 
Refugee Boy - Benjamin Zephaniah (adapted for stage by Lemm Sissay)* 
Coram Boy - Jamila Gavin* 
Boys Don't Cry - Malorie Blackman* 
 
Component 2 
One text from: 19th-century novel 
Jane Eyre – Charlotte Brontë 
Great Expectations – Charles Dickens 
Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde – R L Stevenson 
A Christmas Carol – Charles Dickens 
Pride and Prejudice – Jane Austen 
Silas Marner – George Eliot 
Frankenstein – Mary Shelley 
One collection from: Pearson Poetry Anthology Collections 
Relationships 
Conflict 
Time and Place 
Belonging* 
 
 
*NB: these texts are for first teaching from September 2019 and first assessment is 
May 2021. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2019  © Pearson Education Limited 2019 
4 
Please refer to our website for editions of texts used for extracts in the 
examinations. 
These texts will be set for the lifetime of the qualification. Examinations are closed 
book, therefore there are no prescribed editions of the set texts. 
The lists of poems in each collection are given in Appendix 3: Poetry Anthology 
lists. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2019  © Pearson Education Limited 2019 
5 
Assessment Objectives and weightings 
 
Students must: 
% in 
GCSE 
AO1 Read, understand and respond to texts 
Students should be able to: 
● maintain a critical style and develop an informed 
personal response 
● use textual references, including quotations, to 
support and illustrate interpretations 
37 
AO2 Analyse the language, form and structure used by a 
writer to create meanings and effects, using relevant 
subject terminology where appropriate 
42 
AO3 Show understanding of the relationships between texts 
and the contexts in which they were written 16 
AO4 Use a range of vocabulary and sentence structures for 
clarity, purpose and effect, with accurate spelling and 
punctuation 
5 
Total 100% 
 
Comparison requirement – there is a requirement that 20-25% of the marks for 
this qualification are achieved through comparison questions across AO1, AO2 and 
AO3. The table below illustrates how these marks have been allocated. 
 
Allocation of marks for comparison 
Raw 
marks 
% in 
GCSE 
AO2 Anthology poetry (Component 2, Section B, 
Part 1) 
15 9.5 
AO3 Anthology poetry (Component 2, Section B, 
Part 1) 
5 3 
AO1 Unseen poetry (Component 2, Section B,  
Part 2) 
8 5 
AO2 Unseen poetry (Component 2, Section B,  
Part 2) 
12 7.5 
Total 40 25% 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2019  © Pearson Education Limited 2019 
6 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2019  © Pearson Education Limited 2019 
7 
Knowledge, skills and understanding 
Component 1: Shakespeare and Post-1914 
Literature 
Overview 
Students will study the following texts: 
● Section A – a Shakespeare play 
● Section B – a post-1914 British play or novel. 
 
The learning outcomes below are drawn from the GCSE Subject Level Conditions 
and Requirements for English Literature, published April 2014. 
 
Learning outcomes Students will: 
Literal and inferential 
comprehension 
1.1 understand a word, phrase, sentence or whole text in 
context; explore aspects of plot, characterisation, 
events and settings; distinguish between what is 
stated explicitly and what is implied; explain 
motivation, sequence of events, and the relationship 
between actions or events 
Critical reading 1.2 identify the theme and distinguish between themes; 
support a point of view by referring to evidence in 
the text; recognise the possibility of and evaluate 
different responses to a text, use understanding of 
writer’s social, historical and cultural contexts to 
inform evaluation; make an informed personal 
response that derives from analysis and evaluation of 
the text 
Evaluation of a 
writer’s choice of 
vocabulary, 
grammatical and 
structural features 
1.3 analyse and evaluate how language (including 
figurative language), structure, form and 
presentation contribute to quality and impact; use 
linguistic and literary terminology for such evaluation 
(such as, but not restricted to, phrase, metaphor, 
meter, irony and persona, synecdoche, pathetic 
fallacy) 
Writing – producing 
clear and coherent 
text 
1.4 write effectively about literature for a range of 
purposes such as: to describe, explain, summarise, 
argue, analyse and evaluate; discuss and maintain a 
point of view; select and emphasise key points; use 
relevant quotation and detailed textual references 
Writing – accurate 
Standard English 
1.5 use accurate spelling, punctuation and grammar. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2019  © Pearson Education Limited 2019 
8 
Content 
Students will study two set texts for this component: one Shakespeare play and 
EITHER one British play OR novel from the following lists. 
Shakespeare 
A choice of one text from the following: 
Macbeth 
The Tempest 
Romeo and Juliet 
Much Ado About Nothing 
Twelfth Night 
The Merchant of Venice 
 
Post-1914 British play or novel 
A choice of one text from the following: 
An Inspector Calls – J B Priestley 
Hobson’s Choice – Harold Brighouse 
Blood Brothers – Willy Russell 
Journey’s End – R C Sherriff 
Animal Farm – George Orwell 
Lord of the Flies – William Golding 
Anita and Me – Meera Syal 
The Woman in Black – Susan Hill 
The Empress - Tanika Gupta 
Refugee Boy - Benjamin Zephaniah  (adapted for stage by Lemm Sissay) 
Coram Boy - Jamila Gavin 
Boys Don't Cry - Malorie Blackman 
 
Teaching should focus on the study of whole texts, developing students’ 
comprehension, critical reading and analytical skills, and their ability to write with 
clarity and coherence using accurate Standard English. Wider reading of literary 
texts is also encouraged to help students develop their skills. 
Understanding the relationship between a text and its context (AO3) 
There are different kinds, or categories, of context which affect authors’ work and 
the reader’s response to it. Teaching should include: 
● the author's own life and individual situation, including the place and time of 
writing, only where these relate to the text 
● the historical setting, time and location of the text 
● social and cultural contexts (e.g., attitudes in society; expectations of different 
cultural groups) 
● the literary context of the text, for example, literary movements or genres 
● the way in which texts are received and engaged with by different audiences, at 
different times (for example, how a text may be read differently in the twenty-
first century from when it was written). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2019  © Pearson Education Limited 2019 
9 
Component 2: 19th-century Novel and Poetry 
since 1789 
Overview 
Students will study the following texts: 
● Section A – a 19th-century novel 
● Section B – one collection of 15 poems from the Pearson Poetry Anthology. 
The learning outcomes below are drawn from the GCSE Subject Level Conditions 
and Requirements for English Literature, published April 2014. 
Learning outcomes Students will: 
Literal and inferential 
comprehension 
2.1 understand a word, phrase, sentence or whole text 
in context; explore aspects of plot, characterisation, 
events and settings; distinguish between what is 
stated explicitly and what is implied; explain 
motivation, sequence of events, and the 
relationship between actions or events 
Critical reading 2.2 identify the theme and distinguish between themes; 
support a point of view by referring to evidence in 
the text; recognise the possibility of and evaluate 
different responses to a text, use understanding of 
writer’s social, historical and cultural contexts to 
inform evaluation; make an informed personal 
response that derives from analysis and evaluation 
of the text 
Evaluation of a writer’s 
choice of vocabulary, 
grammatical and 
structural features 
2.3 analyse and evaluate how language (including 
figurative language), structure, form and 
presentation contribute to quality and impact; use 
linguistic and literary terminology for such 
evaluation (such as, but not restricted to, phrase, 
metaphor, meter, irony and persona, synecdoche, 
pathetic fallacy) 
Comparing texts 2.4 compare and contrast texts studied, refer where 
relevant to theme, characterisation, context (where 
known), style and literary quality; compare two 
texts critically with respect to the above 
Writing – producing 
clear and coherent text 
2.5 write effectively about literature for a range of 
purposes such as: to describe, explain, summarise, 
argue, analyse and evaluate; discuss and maintain 
a point of view; select and emphasise key points; 
use relevant quotation and detailed textual 
references. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2019  © Pearson Education Limited 2019 
10 
Content 
Teaching will cover two set texts: one 19th-century novel and one collection of 
poems from the Pearson Poetry Anthology. The full list of set texts for this 
component is as follows. 
19th-century novel 
A choice of one text from the following: 
Jane Eyre – Charlotte Brontë 
Great Expectations – Charles Dickens 
Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde – R L Stevenson 
A Christmas Carol – Charles Dickens 
Pride and Prejudice – Jane Austen 
Silas Marner – George Eliot 
Frankenstein – Mary Shelley 
 
Pearson Poetry Anthology* 
A choice of one collection from the following: 
Relationships 
Conflict 
Time and Place 
Belonging 
 
Each collection contains 15 poems and includes Romantic, Literary Heritage and 
Contemporary poetry. All 15 poems must be studied. 
Using the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) Poetry Anthology, students 
should be prepared to compare language, structure, form and contextual features 
of two poems from the anthology. Teachers should ensure that students are aware 
of the context in which the poems were written and the influence this context may 
have had on the poems. Teachers are welcome to use the examples of 
contemporary poetry from any collection to help prepare their students for the 
unseen poetry task in Section B, Part 2. Students should also read poems beyond 
the anthology. Students will need to be able to analyse the ideas, language, form 
and structure of two unseen poems and compare them. It is possible that works 
from anthology poets could be used as unseen poems, however these works will be 
selected from outside of the anthology. Works by authors who are not in the 
anthology could also be used as unseen poems. 
Teaching should focus on the study of whole texts, developing students’ 
comprehension, critical reading and comparison skills, as well as their ability to 
produce clear and coherent writing using accurate Standard English. Wider reading 
of literary texts is also encouraged to help students develop their skills. 
 
 
*See Appendix 3: Poetry Anthology lists for the lists of poems in each collection. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2019  © Pearson Education Limited 2019 
11 
Understanding the relationship between a text and its context (AO3) 
There are different kinds, or categories, of context which affect authors’ work and 
the reader’s response to it. Teaching should include: 
● the author's own life and individual situation, including the place and time of 
writing, only where these relate to the text 
● the historical setting, time and location of the text 
● social and cultural contexts (e.g., attitudes in society; expectations of different 
cultural groups) 
● the literary context of the text, for example, literary movements or genres 
● the way in which texts are received and engaged with by different audiences, at 
different times (for example, how a text may be read differently in the twenty-
first century from when it was written). 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2019  © Pearson Education Limited 2019 
12 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2019  © Pearson Education Limited 2019 
13 
Assessment 
Assessment summary tables 
 
Students must complete all assessment in May/June in any single year. 
 
Component 1: Shakespeare and Post-1914 Literature  
*Paper code: 1ET0/01 
● Availability: May/June 
● First assessment: 2017 
● Assessed through a 1 hour and 45 minute examination. 
● Closed book (texts are not allowed in the examination). 
● The total number of marks available is 80. 
50% of the 
total GCSE 
 
● Section A – Shakespeare: students complete a two-part question. 
● Part a) is focused on the close language analysis of an extract (AO2). The 
extract will be approximately 30 lines in length.  
● Part b) is focused on how a theme from the extract is explored elsewhere in 
the play (AO1 and AO3). The focus will be on maintaining a critical style and 
demonstrating an understanding of the relationship between the text and the 
context in which it was written. 
● Assessment Objectives covered are AO1, AO2 and AO3. 
● Section B – Post-1914 British play or novel: students answer ONE essay 
question from a choice of two on their studied text. 
● Each question will be preceded by a short quotation from the text, to provide a 
stimulus for the response. 
● Questions will focus on one of more of the following areas: plot, setting(s), 
character(s) and theme(s) and will require students to explore the question in 
relation to the context. 
● Marks will also be given for accurate use of spelling, punctuation and grammar. 
● Assessment Objectives covered are AO1, AO3 and AO4. 
 
The sample assessment materials can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature Sample Assessment Materials 
document. 
*See Appendix 2: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant 
to this qualification. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2019  © Pearson Education Limited 2019 
14 
 
Component 2: 19th-century Novel and Poetry since 1789  
*Paper code: 1ET0/02 
● Availability: May/June 
● First assessment: 2017 
● Assessed through a 2 hour and 15 minute examination. 
● Closed book (texts are not allowed in the examination). 
● The total number of marks available is 80. 
50% of the 
total GCSE 
 
● Section A – 19th-century novel: students complete a two part question. 
● Part 1 is focussed on a close language analysis of an extract of approximately 
400 words. 
● Part 2 questions may focus on different aspects of the text, requiring 
exploration of one of more of the following areas: plot, setting(s), character(s), 
theme(s). 
● Assessment Objectives covered are AO1 and AO2. 
● Section B – Poetry since 1789 
● Part 1: students answer ONE question on one named poem from the poetry 
anthology collection, reproduced in the question paper, and one poem of choice. 
Students will compare the poems. Questions will focus on the language, form, 
structure of the poem (AO2) and the contexts in which the poems were written 
(AO3). 
● Part 2: students answer ONE question comparing two unseen contemporary 
poems that are linked by a theme. Students are required to compare the poets’ 
portrayals of the theme through their use of language, form and structure (AO1 
and AO2). 
 
The sample assessment materials can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature Sample Assessment Materials 
document. 
*See Appendix 2: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant 
to this qualification. 
 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2019  © Pearson Education Limited 2019 
15 
Assessment Objectives and weightings 
 
Students must: 
% in 
GCSE 
AO1 Read, understand and respond to texts 
Students should be able to: 
● maintain a critical style and develop an informed 
personal response 
● use textual references, including quotations, to 
support and illustrate interpretations 
37 
AO2 Analyse the language, form and structure used by a 
writer to create meanings and effects, using relevant 
subject terminology where appropriate 
42 
AO3 Show understanding of the relationships between texts 
and the contexts in which they were written 16 
AO4 Use a range of vocabulary and sentence structures for 
clarity, purpose and effect, with accurate spelling and 
punctuation 
5 
Total 100% 
 
Comparison requirement – there is a requirement that 20-25% of the marks for 
this qualification are achieved through comparison questions across AO1, AO2 and 
AO3. The table below illustrates how these marks have been allocated. 
 
Allocation of marks for comparison 
Raw 
marks 
% in 
GCSE 
AO2 Anthology poetry (Component 2, Section B, 
Part 1) 
15 9.5 
AO3 Anthology poetry (Component 2, Section B, 
Part 1) 
5 3 
AO1 Unseen poetry (Component 2, Section B,  
Part 2) 
8 5 
AO2 Unseen poetry (Component 2, Section B,  
Part 2) 
12 7.5 
Total 40 25% 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2019  © Pearson Education Limited 2019 
16 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives by component 
Raw mark distribution 
 Assessment Objectives Total  
Component AO1 AO2 AO3 AO4 
Component 1: Shakespeare and Post-1914 
Literature      
Questions 1a to 6a  20   20 
Questions 1b to 6b 15  5  20 
Questions 7 to 30 16  16 8 40 
Component 2: 19th-century Novel and Poetry since 
1789      
Questions 1a to 7a  20   20 
Questions 1b to 7b 20    20 
Questions 8 to 11  15 5  20 
Question 12 8 12   20 
      
Total for this qualification 59 67 26 8 160 marks 
Total % Assessment Objectives for this 
qualification 37 42 16 5 100 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2019  © Pearson Education Limited 2019 
17 
Entry and assessment information 
Student entry 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for 
this qualification can be found in our UK Information 
Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations 
officers and is available on our website at: 
www.edexcel.com/iwantto/Pages/uk-information-
manual.aspx 
Forbidden combinations and discount code 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more 
than one GCSE, or other Level 2 qualifications with the 
same discount code, will have only the grade for their 'first 
entry' counted for the purpose of the school and college 
performance tables (please see Appendix 2: Codes).  
For further information about what constitutes 'first entry' 
and full details of how this policy is applied, please refer  
to the DfE website: 
www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-
education 
 
Students should be advised that if they take two GCSEs 
with the same discount code, schools and colleges they 
wish to progress to are likely to take the view that this 
achievement is equivalent to only one GCSE. The same 
view may be taken if students take two GCSEs or other 
Level 2 qualifications that have different discount codes but 
have significant overlap of content. Students or their 
advisers who have any doubts about their subject 
combinations should check with the institution they wish to 
progress to before embarking on their programmes. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2019  © Pearson Education Limited 2019 
18 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, 
special consideration and malpractice 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. 
They allow students with special educational needs, 
disabilities or temporary injuries to: 
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the 
demands of the assessment. 
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the 
particular needs of an individual student with a disability 
without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding 
bodies comply with the duty under the Equality Act 2010 to 
make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the 
start of the course. Students will then know what is 
available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for 
assessment. 
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to 
make reasonable adjustments where a person with a 
disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in 
undertaking an assessment. The awarding organisation is 
required to take reasonable steps to overcome that 
disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be 
unique to that individual and therefore might not be in the 
list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will 
depend on a number of factors, which will include: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with 
the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves 
unreasonable costs to the awarding organisation, 
timeframes or affects the security or integrity of the 
assessment. This is because the adjustment is not 
‘reasonable’. 
In most cases it will not be reasonable for adjustments to 
be made to assessment objectives within a qualification. To 
do so would be likely to undermine the effectiveness of the 
qualification in providing a reliable indication of the 
knowledge, skills and understanding of the student. There is 
no duty to make adjustments which the qualifications 
regulators have specified should not be made. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2019  © Pearson Education Limited 2019 
19 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a 
student's mark or grade to reflect temporary injury, illness 
or other indisposition at the time of the examination/ 
assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have 
had, a material effect on a candidate’s ability to take an 
assessment or demonstrate his or her level of attainment in 
an assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to 
apply for access arrangements and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, 
reasonable adjustments and special consideration, please 
refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk. 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of 
assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in examinations must be reported to 
Pearson using a JCQ Form M1 (available at 
www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form should 
be emailed to candidatemalpractice@pearson.com. Please 
provide as much information and supporting documentation 
as possible. Note that the final decision regarding 
appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice constitutes staff or centre 
malpractice. 
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate 
malpractice and maladministration of our qualifications. As 
with candidate malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is 
any act that compromises or seeks to compromise the 
process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of 
the qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and 
maladministration must be reported immediately, before 
any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson 
on a JCQ Form M2(a) (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-
office/malpractice).  
The form, supporting documentation and as much 
information as possible should be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com. or posted to Investigations 
Team, Pearson,  
190 High Holborn, London, WC1V 7BH. Note that the final 
decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2019  © Pearson Education Limited 2019 
20 
More detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the 
latest version of the document General and Vocational 
Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments Policies and Procedures, available at 
www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice. 
Equality Act 2010 and Pearson equality policy 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality 
policy requires all students to have equal opportunity to 
access our qualifications and assessments, and our 
qualifications to be awarded in a way that is fair to every 
student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by 
the Equality Act 2010) are not, when they are 
undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in 
comparison to students who do not share that 
characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for 
undertaking a qualification and that this achievement 
can be compared fairly to the achievement of their 
peers. 
You can find details on how to make adjustments for 
students with protected characteristics in the policy 
document Access Arrangements, Reasonable Adjustments 
and Special Considerations, which is on our website, 
www.edexcel.com/Policies. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2019  © Pearson Education Limited 2019 
21 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to 
comply with the requirements of the current Code of 
Practice, published by the Office of Qualifications and 
Examinations Regulation (Ofqual). 
The GCSE (9–1) qualification will be graded and certificated 
on a nine-grade scale from 9 to 1 using the total subject 
mark where 9 is the highest grade. Individual components 
are not graded. 
The first certification opportunity for the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature will be 
2017. 
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum 
judged by Pearson to be of sufficient standard to be 
recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U 
result. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be available in English. 
All student work must be in English. 
Grade descriptions 
The grade descriptions for this qualification are published by 
Ofqual and will be available on its website. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2019  © Pearson Education Limited 2019 
22 
Other information 
Student recruitment 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to 
our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of 
reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and 
progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this 
qualification. 
Progression from GCSE 
This qualification prepares students for progression to 
further study of English Literature at AS and A level and to 
the study of AS and A level English Language and 
Literature. These Level 3 qualifications will prepare students 
for a variety of further progression routes. Students should 
seek advice about which of these qualifications best 
prepares them for their intended progression routes. 
Students can progress from this qualification to Level 3 
qualifications in similar disciplines, such as drama, theatre 
studies, media studies and film studies, and to other 
qualifications that require literacy skills, knowledge and 
understanding. 
This qualification also supports further training, and 
employment where literacy skills are required. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2019  © Pearson Education Limited 2019 
23 
 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Transferable skills 25 
Appendix 2: Codes 27 
Appendix 3: Poetry Anthology lists 29 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2019  © Pearson Education Limited 2019 
24 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2019  © Pearson Education Limited 2019 
25 
Appendix 1: Transferable skills 
 
The need for transferable skills  
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently 
flagged the need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable 
them to respond with confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the 
world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines 
skills, or competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that 
can be learned and that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform 
an activity or task and can be built upon and extended through learning.’ 1 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected 
and evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this 
process, we identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the 
most evidence-based and robust skills framework. We adapted the framework 
slightly to include the Program for International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT 
Literacy and Collaborative Problem Solving (CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves: 2 
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve 
general cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy - access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and 
communicate3. 
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, oral communication, written 
communication, assertive communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, 
service orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and 
negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared 
understanding, taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team 
organisation. 
                                           
 
1 OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012) 
2 Koenig J A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop 
(National Academies Press, 2011) 
 
3 PISA – The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy (2011) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2019  © Pearson Education Limited 2019 
26 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work 
stress, adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, 
and physical adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual 
teams, work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and 
able to acquire new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher 
education, as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the 
teaching and learning of this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning 
materials, developed with stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2019  © Pearson Education Limited 2019 
27 
Appendix 2: Codes 
 
Type of code Use of code Code number 
 Every qualification is assigned to a 
discount code indicating the subject 
area to which it belongs. Discount 
codes are published by DfE. 
Please see the 
GOV.UK website* 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an 
Ofqual Regulated Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) code. 
The RQF code is known as a 
Qualification Number (QN). This is the 
code that features in the DfE Section 
96 and on the LARA as being eligible 
for 16–18 and 19+ funding, and is to 
be used for all qualification funding 
purposes. The QN is the number that 
will appear on the student’s final 
certification documentation. 
The QN for this 
qualification is: 
601/4789/1 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to 
enter students for a qualification. 
Centres will need to use the entry 
codes only when claiming students’ 
qualifications. 
GCSE (9–1) – 1ET0 
 
Paper/component 
code 
These codes are provided for 
reference purposes. Students do not 
need to be entered for individual 
papers/components. 
Paper 1: 1ET0/01 
Paper 2: 1ET0/02 
 
*www.gov.uk/government/publications/2018-performance-tables-discount-codes 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2019  © Pearson Education Limited 2019 
28 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2019  © Pearson Education Limited 2019 
29 
 
Appendix 3: Poetry Anthology lists 
 
Relationships Poet Poem 
Romantic John Keats La Belle Dame Sans Merci:  
A Ballad 
Romantic Joanna Baillie A Child to his Sick Grandfather 
Romantic Lord Byron She Walks in Beauty 
Romantic William Wordsworth A Complaint 
Lit Heritage Thomas Hardy Neutral Tones 
Lit Heritage Robert Browning My Last Duchess 
Lit Heritage Elizabeth Barrett 
Browning 
How do I love thee? (Sonnet 43) 
Contemporary Wendy Cope 1st Date – She & 1st Date – He 
Contemporary Carol Ann Duffy Valentine 
Contemporary Elizabeth Jennings One Flesh 
Contemporary John Cooper Clarke i wanna be yours 
Contemporary Jen Hatfield Love’s Dog 
Contemporary Vernon Scannell Nettles 
Contemporary Simon Armitage The Manhunt (Laura’s Poem) 
Contemporary Ingrid de Kok My Father Would Not Show Us 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2019  © Pearson Education Limited 2019 
30 
 
Conflict Poet Poem 
Romantic William Blake A Poison Tree 
Romantic Lord Byron The Destruction of Sennacherib 
Romantic William Wordsworth Extract from The Prelude ‘Boating’ 
Lit Heritage Thomas Hardy The Man He Killed 
Lit Heritage Christina Rossetti Cousin Kate 
Lit Heritage Wilfred Owen Exposure 
Lit Heritage Alfred, Lord Tennyson The Charge of the Light Brigade 
Contemporary John Agard Half-caste 
Contemporary Gillian Clarke Catrin 
Contemporary Carole Satyamurti War Photographer 
Contemporary Ciaran Carson Belfast Confetti 
Contemporary Mary Casey The Class Game 
Contemporary Jane Weir Poppies 
Contemporary Benjamin Zephaniah No Problem 
Contemporary Denise Levertov What Were They Like? 
 
Time and Place Poet Poem 
Romantic John Keats To Autumn 
Romantic William Wordsworth Composed upon Westminster 
Bridge, September 3, 1802 
Romantic William Blake London 
Lit Heritage Emily Dickinson I started Early – Took my Dog 
Lit Heritage Thomas Hardy Where the Picnic was 
Lit Heritage Edward Thomas Adlestrop 
Lit Heritage Robert Browning Home Thoughts from Abroad 
Contemporary U A Fanthorpe First Flight 
Contemporary Fleur Adcock Stewart Island 
Contemporary Moniza Alvi Presents from my Aunts in Pakistan 
Contemporary Grace Nichols Hurricane Hits England 
Contemporary Tatamkhulu Afrika Nothing’s Changed 
Contemporary Sophie Hannah Postcard from a Travel Snob 
Contemporary John Davidson In Romney Marsh 
Contemporary Elizabeth Jennings Absence 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Literature 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2019  © Pearson Education Limited 2019 
31 
 
Belonging Poet Poem 
Romantic William Wordsworth To My Sister   
Romantic John Clare The Sunday Dip 
Romantic Emily Brontë Mild the Mist Upon the Hill  
Romantic Letitia Elizabeth Landon Captain Cook (To My Brother)  
Lit Heritage Robert Bridges Clear and Gentle Stream  
Lit Heritage Thomas Hood I Remember, I Remember  
Contemporary Grace Nicholls  Island Man 
Contemporary Amy Blakemore  Peckham Rye Lane 
Contemporary Benjamin Zephaniah We Refugees 
Contemporary Zaffar Kunial  Us 
Contemporary Imtiaz Dharker  In Wales, Wanting to be Italian 
Contemporary Kayo Chingonyi  Kumukanda 
Contemporary Raymond Antrobus Jamaican British  
Contemporary Choman Hardi My Mother’s Kitchen 
Contemporary Carol Rumens The Émigrée 
 
Db240519 9781446914359_GCSE_2015_L12_ENGLIT_ISS2.DOC.1–42/0 
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office:  80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121