This dra/f_t   qualiﬁ  cation has not yet been accredited by Ofqual. It is published to enable teachers to have early sight of our 
proposed approach to Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9 - 1) in Music (1MU0). Further changes may be required 
and no assurance can be given at this time that the proposed qualiﬁ  cation will be made available in its current form, or 
that it will be accredited in time for ﬁ  rst teaching in September 2016 and ﬁ  rst award in 2018.
GCSE (9-1)
Persian
Issue 4
Persian
Speciﬁ  cation
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9 - 1) in Persian (1PN0)
First teaching from September 2018
First certiﬁ  cation from June 2020
 
 
Summary of Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2  
GCSE (9-1) in Persian specification 
Issue 4 changes  
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this current 
issue 
Page 
number 
Removal of Subject Advisor name: 
‘Our subject advisor service and online community’ 
3 
Update to Foundation tier paper timing: 
‘Foundation tier: 1 hour 20 minutes…’ 
6 and 39 
Clarification of question titles appearing in English added: 
‘The instructions to students are in Persian. The question titles appear in 
English.’ 
38 
Update to Foundation tier Assessment Information for Paper 4, bullet point 5: 
‘Question 2 has two options from which students have to select one. This 
question assesses students on their ability to note down key points and 
convey information. Students must use the formal register.’ 
39 
Reference to ‘GCE AS’ removed in the following sentence: 
This qualification offers a suitable progression route to GCE A level in Persian.  
68 
 
If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, contact us via our 
website at: qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/contact-us.html. 
 
 
 
Contents 
1 Introduction 2 
Why choose Edexcel GCSE Persian? 2 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this qualification 3 
Qualification at a glance 4 
2 Subject content 7 
Themes and topics 8 
Paper 1: Listening and understanding in Persian 10 
Paper 2: Speaking in Persian 12 
Paper 3: Reading and understanding in Persian 36 
Paper 4: Writing in Persian 38 
Assessment Objectives 64 
3 Administration and general information 65 
Entries 65 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special consideration and 
malpractice 65 
Student recruitment and progression 68 
Appendix 1: Candidate speaking examination record form 
(CS2) 71 
Appendix 2: Grammar list 72 
Appendix 3: Vocabulary list 76 
Appendix 4: The context for the development of this 
qualification 148 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 150 
Appendix 6: Codes 151 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
2 
1 Introduction 
Why choose Edexcel GCSE Persian? 
We believe languages should be accessible for all students. Our new Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Persian has been developed to help students of all abilities 
progress and develop a passion for languages, through culturally engaging content. 
We’ve listened to feedback from the languages community and have developed an engaging 
and inspirational course of study that will enable your students to manipulate and use the 
target language effectively, independently and creatively, so that they have a solid basis 
from which to progress to A Level or employment. 
Engaging and popular topics 
Our specification includes both familiar and new topics that you have told us you like and 
that motivate your students. 
Manageable content 
Our content has been structured across five themes. This flexible programme of study allows 
time for a focused revision period at the end of the course. 
Content and assessments that provide an engaging real-world focus 
The authentic situations and stimuli enable students to see language in context and learn 
about the culture of the target language countries. Our assessments allow for spontaneity 
and test grammar as well as providing plenty of opportunities for students to apply their 
knowledge independently, creatively and in authentic situations. 
Straightforward assessments that are accessible to all students 
Special care has been taken to ensure that all our papers are designed to be clear and 
concise and, where appropriate, questions feature scaffolding to help all students’ progress 
through the assessments confidently. Reading and listening papers are structured so that 
questions set in the target language are in a separate section from those questions requiring 
responses in English. Both papers are also structured so that they are progressive in their 
level of demand with the most demanding question being the final question in the paper. 
Translation tasks are progressive in their level of difficulty and are of appropriate demand at 
each tier. 
Carefully selected texts 
We have worked closely with teachers and expert practitioners to ensure we include 
interesting and relevant texts at the right level for students at each tier and that will 
encourage the use of a wide range of texts in the classroom. 
Clear and precise assessment criteria 
Our mark schemes have been trialled with sample student answers to ensure they reward 
students appropriately and that it is clear what is expected of students at each band. 
Continuous progression 
Our content builds on the understanding developed at prior language learning experience at 
Key Stage 3 while also ensuring that students new to the subject are appropriately 
supported, and provides a firm foundation for students to make a smooth transition to 
A Level. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
3 
Supporting you in planning and implementing 
this qualification 
Planning 
● To support you in delivering this specification, our Getting Started guide, available on 
our website, gives you an overview of the new GCSE qualification. 
● We will give you an editable course planner and scheme of work that you can adapt to 
suit your department. 
Teaching and learning 
There are lots of free teaching and learning support to help you deliver the new qualification, 
including: 
● a guide to questions in the target language 
● student guide 
● online and face-to-face training events. 
Preparing for exams 
We also provide a range of resources to help you prepare your students for the assessments, 
including: 
● marked exemplars of student work with examiner commentaries 
ResultsPlus 
ResultsPlus provides the most detailed analysis available of your students’ exam 
performance. It can help you identify the topics and skills where further learning would 
benefit your students. 
Get help and support 
Our subject advisor service and online community will ensure you receive help and guidance 
from us and that you can share ideas and information with other teachers. You can sign up 
to receive e-newsletters to keep up to date with qualification updates and product and 
service news. 
Learn more at qualifications.pearson.com 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
4 
Qualification at a glance 
Content and assessment overview 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Persian consists of four externally 
examined papers based on the following skills: listening, speaking, reading and writing. 
Students must complete their speaking assessment in April/May and all other assessments in 
May/June in any single year. 
Each paper is available at Foundation tier or Higher tier. Students must be entered for a 
single tier across all papers. 
The use of dictionaries is not permitted. For Paper 2 this includes during the 
preparation time. 
 
Paper 1: Listening and understanding in Persian (*Paper code: 1PN0/1F and 1H) 
Written examination 
Foundation tier: 35 minutes, including 5 minutes’ reading time; 50 marks 
Higher tier: 45 minutes, including 5 minutes’ reading time; 50 marks 
25% of the total qualification 
Content overview 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes and topics. 
Assessment overview 
Students are assessed on their understanding of standard spoken Persian by one or more 
speakers in a range of public and social settings. Students will respond to multiple-response 
and short-answer open-response questions based on a recording featuring male and female 
Persian speakers. 
Students must answer all questions in both sections. 
There is no requirement for students to produce written responses in Persian. 
Foundation tier 
● Section A is set in English. The instructions to students are in English. 
● Section B is set in Persian. The instructions to students are in Persian. 
Higher tier 
● Section A is set in Persian. The instructions to students are in Persian. 
● Section B is set in English. The instructions to students are in English. 
 
The listening audio files are available on our website. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
5 
 
Paper 2: Speaking in Persian (*Paper code: 1PN0/2F and 2H) 
Internally conducted and externally assessed 
Foundation tier: 7–9 minutes plus 12 minutes’ preparation time; 70 marks 
Higher tier: 10–12 minutes plus 12 minutes’ preparation time; 70 marks 
25% of the total qualification 
Content overview 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes and topics. 
Assessment overview 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate and interact effectively through 
speaking in Persian for different purposes and in different settings. 
There are three tasks which must be conducted in the following order: 
Task 1 – a role play based on one topic that is allocated by Pearson 
Task 2 – questions based on a picture stimulus and based on one topic that is allocated by 
Pearson 
Task 3 – conversation based on two themes. The first theme is based on the topic chosen by 
the student in advance of the assessment. The second theme is allocated by Pearson. 
The assessments are conducted by teachers in one session within a prescribed assessment 
window, the recordings are then submitted to Pearson for external marking. 
 
Paper 3: Reading and understanding in Persian (*Paper code: 1PN0/3F and 3H) 
Written examination 
Foundation tier: 50 minutes; 50 marks. Higher tier: 1 hour 5 minutes; 50 marks 
25% of the total qualification 
Content overview 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes and topics. 
Assessment overview 
Students are assessed on their understanding of written Persian across a range of different 
types of texts, including advertisements, emails, letters, articles and literary texts. Students 
are required to respond to multiple-response and short-answer questions based on these texts. 
Students must answer all questions in each of the three sections: 
Section A is set in English. The instructions to students are in English 
Section B is set in Persian. The instructions to students are in Persian 
Section C includes a translation passage from Persian into English with instructions in English. 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
6 
 
Paper 4: Writing in Persian (*Paper code: 1PN0/4F and 4H) 
Written examination 
Foundation tier: 1 hour 20 minutes; 60 marks 
Higher tier: 1 hour 25 minutes; 60 marks 
25% of the total qualification 
Content overview 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes and topics. 
Assessment overview 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate effectively through writing in Persian for 
different purposes and audiences. Students are required to produce responses of varying 
lengths and types to express ideas and opinions in Persian. The instructions to students are in 
Persian. Word counts are specified for each question. Students must answer all questions. 
Foundation tier – three open-response questions and one translation into Persian. 
Higher tier – two open-response questions and one translation into Persian. 
 
*See Appendix 6: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to this 
qualification. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
7 
2 Subject content 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Persian allows students to develop their 
ability to communicate with Persian native speakers in both speech and writing. Students will 
study a variety of contexts relevant to their age and interests and will also develop a greater 
awareness of the culture of Persian-speaking communities and countries. These contexts are 
listed under Themes and topics. 
Students will need to develop and use their knowledge and understanding of Persian 
grammar progressively through their course of study. Grammar requirements are given in 
the grammar list (see Appendix 2: Grammar list). 
To help students build on their range of vocabulary, a list is provided of words that students 
are expected to use and understand (see Appendix 3: Vocabulary list). These lists are not 
exhaustive but are intended as a guide; students at both tiers will be required to understand 
and respond to familiar words (appropriate to the tier) that are not on the lists. 
Qualification aims and objectives 
The aims and objectives of this qualification are to enable students to: 
● develop their ability to communicate confidently and coherently with native speakers in 
speech and writing, conveying what they want to say with increasing accuracy 
● express and develop thoughts and ideas spontaneously and fluently 
● listen to and understand clearly articulated, standard speech at near normal speed 
● deepen their knowledge about how language works and enrich their vocabulary in order 
for them to increase their independent use and understanding of extended language in a 
wide range of contexts 
● acquire new knowledge, skills and ways of thinking through the ability to understand and 
respond to a rich range of authentic spoken and written material, adapted and abridged, 
as appropriate, including literary texts 
● develop awareness and understanding of the culture and identity of the countries and 
communities where the language is spoken 
● be encouraged to make appropriate links to other areas of the curriculum to enable 
bilingual and deeper learning, where the language may become a medium for constructing 
and applying knowledge 
● develop language-learning skills both for immediate use and to prepare them for further 
language study and use in school, higher education or employment 
● develop language strategies, including repair strategies. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
8 
Themes and topics 
Questions across all four language skills are set in common contexts, addressing a range of 
relevant contemporary and cultural themes. They are organised into five themes, each 
broken down into topics and sub-topics. 
The five themes are: 
1. Identity and culture 
2. Local area, holiday, travel 
3. School 
4. Future aspirations, study and work 
5. International and global dimension. 
All themes and topics must be studied in the context of both the students’ home 
country and that of countries and communities where Persian is spoken. 
For listening and reading assessments, the majority of contexts are based on the culture and 
countries where the assessed language is spoken. Students may also refer to the culture of 
the assessed language country/countries or communities in the speaking and writing papers. 
It is, therefore, important that students are exposed to materials relating to  
Persian -speaking countries throughout the course. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
9 
Each topic has been highlighted in bold. 
All topics must be studied in the context of both the students’ home country and 
that of countries and communities where Persian is spoken. 
 
Theme 1: Identity and culture 
● Who am I?: relationships; when I was younger; what my friends and family are like; 
what makes a good friend; interests; socialising with friends and family; role models 
● Daily life: customs and everyday life; food and drink; shopping; social media and 
technology (use of, advantages and disadvantages) 
● Cultural life: celebrations and festivals; reading; music; sport; film and television 
 
Theme 2: Local area, holiday and travel 
● Holidays: preferences; experiences; destinations 
● Travel and tourist transactions: travel and accommodation; asking for help and 
dealing with problems; directions; eating out; shopping 
● Town, region and country: weather; places to see; things to do 
 
Theme 3: School 
● What school is like: school types; school day; subjects; rules and pressures;  
celebrating success 
● School activities: school trips; events and exchanges 
 
Theme 4: Future aspirations, study and work 
● Using languages beyond the classroom: forming relationships; travel; employment 
● Ambitions: further study; volunteering; training 
● Work: jobs; careers and professions 
 
Theme 5: International and global dimension 
● Bringing the world together: sports events; music events; campaigns and good causes 
● Environmental issues: being ‘green’; access to natural resources 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
10 
Paper 1: Listening and understanding in Persian 
Content 
Students are assessed on their understanding of standard spoken Persian in a variety of 
scenarios. 
Students will need to:  
● identify the overall message, key points, details and opinions 
● deduce meaning from a variety of spoken texts 
● recognise the relationship between past, present and future events 
● recognise and respond to key information, important themes and ideas in spoken text, 
including authentic sources, adapted and abridged, as appropriate 
● be able to answer questions, extract information, evaluate and draw conclusions. 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes (see Themes and 
topics). 
Students are presented with recorded scenarios involving one or more speakers in public and 
social settings. Recordings include authentic sources and are based on the themes. Recorded 
material features both male and female voices and represents different age groups. 
Students should be given the opportunity to become accustomed to hearing the Persian 
language spoken in a range of styles and registers. 
Recordings for individual questions within the assessment vary in length, including both short 
and longer spoken passages, using both familiar language and, where appropriate, more 
complex language and abstract material, as appropriate to the tier. 
To prepare students adequately for this assessment, teachers should present and exploit a 
range of vocabulary relevant to each theme listed and build on the Key Stage 3  
Programme of Study, where appropriate. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
11 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2020. 
● The assessment is out of 50 marks. 
● Students must be allocated five minutes in which to read through the paper before the 
first extract of the recording starts. This gives students an opportunity to familiarise 
themselves with the length and the layout of the paper and to read the questions before 
hearing the first extract. 
● Students will listen to the recording featuring Persian-language speakers who will speak at 
a rate appropriate to the expected level of student understanding. 
● Each passage is recorded twice, with pauses following the second hearing to allow each 
student sufficient time to write or note their response to each question (or part of a 
question) and to read the next question before the related extract is played. 
● Recordings will be issued as digital sound files accessed via a secure download. 
● Each question is set in a context drawn from the topics. The assessment tasks will feature 
general content that is familiar and accessible to all students. 
● Students must answer all questions in both sections.  
● Foundation tier 
o 35 minutes is given for the assessment, including 5 minutes’ reading time. 
o Section A contains 12 questions set in English. Question types comprise both multiple-
response and short-answer open-response questions. The instructions to students are 
in English. 
o Section B contains two questions set in Persian. The question type is multiple-response. 
The instructions to students are in Persian. 
● Higher tier 
o 45 minutes is given for the assessment, including 5 minutes’ reading time. 
o Section A contains two questions set in Persian. The question type is multiple-response. 
The instructions to students are in Persian. 
o Section B contains eight questions set in English. Question types comprise both 
multiple-response and short-answer open-response questions. The instructions to 
students are in English. 
● Four of the questions will be common to both tiers. 
● For both tiers, there is no requirement for students to produce written responses in 
Persian. 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and mark scheme for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Persian Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
12 
Paper 2: Speaking in Persian 
Content 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate and interact effectively through 
speaking in Persian for different purposes. 
Students will need to: 
● convey information and narrate events coherently and confidently, using and adapting 
language for different purposes 
● speak spontaneously, responding to unpredictable questions, points of view or situations, 
sustaining communication by using rephrasing or repair strategies, as appropriate 
● use a range of vocabulary and grammatical structures accurately, including some more 
complex forms, with reference to past, present and future events 
● make creative and more complex use of the language, as appropriate, to express and 
justify their own thoughts and points of view 
● use accurate pronunciation and intonation in order to be understood by a native speaker, 
however they will be able to access the highest marks available for each task without a 
‘perfect’ command of Persian. 
These are assessed through a series of three consecutive tasks. 
Task 1 – Role play 
The role play is an interaction requiring the student to ask and answer questions, to 
exchange information and to use different registers (see definition of registers beneath the 
Role play mark grid within the marking guidance section of the specification). The role play 
relates to either formal or informal scenarios, in turn inviting the student to use either formal 
or informal language relevant to the scenario. The task is set in the register that the student 
is required to use, so students should use that register in their responses. All role plays are 
marked for communication only. 
The role plays are set and provided by Pearson at the time of assessment together with a 
sequencing grid and instructions. For an example, please see the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Persian Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document – 
Paper 2: Speaking in Persian, General instructions to the teacher section. 
Scenarios require an exchange of information. Some scenarios are transactional in nature. 
The scenarios are based on any of the topics from themes 1 to 4 (listed on page 9), i.e. not 
on the theme International and global dimension as this theme lends itself better to the 
picture-based task and the conversation. 
Task 2 – Picture-based task 
The assessment scenario is based on any of the topics (listed on page 9). The topic is 
allocated by Pearson at the time of assessment together with a sequencing grid and 
instructions. For an example, please see the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in 
Persian Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document – Paper 2: Speaking in Persian, 
General instructions to the teacher section. 
This assessment allows students to: 
● describe and narrate events 
● give information 
● express, justify and exchange opinions. 
Students are required to refer to past, present and future events in this assessment at both 
Foundation and Higher tiers, using different timeframes. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
13 
Task 3 – Conversation 
The conversation allows students to cover all of the requirements outlined in the Content 
section on page 12, including conveying information, giving points of view, developing and 
initiating conversation and discussion and producing extended sequences of speech. 
The conversation is based on any two themes (see Themes and topics) and is in two parts. 
For the first part of the conversation, the student selects one topic from one theme in 
advance of the assessment. The choice of topic must be agreed between the student and the 
teacher and must be selected no later than two weeks before the assessment takes place. 
This part of the conversation task starts with this first topic and then may move on to other 
topics within the same theme. 
The second part of the conversation must be on a different theme. This will be prescribed by 
Pearson through instructions on a sequencing grid. For an example, please see the Pearson 
Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Persian Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) 
document – Paper 2: Speaking in Persian, General instructions to the teacher section. 
This part of the conversation may focus on one or more topics from within the selected 
theme (see page 9). 
Students are required to refer to past, present and future events in this assessment, using a 
range of tenses and timeframes. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
14 
Assessment information 
General information  
● First assessment: April/May 2020. 
● The entire assessment must be conducted in Persian. 
● Students complete three tasks. 
o Task 1 – a role play based on one topic. This is allocated by Pearson at the time of 
assessment. 
o Task 2 – a task containing a picture and questions drawn from one topic. This is 
allocated by Pearson at the time of assessment. 
o Task 3 – conversation based on two themes. The first theme is based on the topic 
chosen by the student in advance of the assessment. The second theme is selected by 
the teacher from a choice of two themes allocated by Pearson. 
● Task 1 is set in the register that the student is required to use. 
At the time of assessment, Pearson will issue a prescribed order per student for their role 
play, picture-based task and two themes for the second part of the conversation. The 
teacher does not choose the order of the cards. Pearson will provide instructions on 
sequencing and a sequencing grid. For an example, please see the Pearson Edexcel  
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Persian Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document – 
Paper 2: Speaking in Persian, General instructions to the teacher section. 
This grid has been designed to help ensure that each student covers a broad range of 
themes from this specification. 
● Assessments are conducted by centres within a five-week assessment period in April and 
May in any single year. Dates for the assessment period will be confirmed in the  
UK Information Manual at the start of each academic year. The assessment period will not 
always be continuous or be the same period each year, for example it will need to 
accommodate the Easter break which changes each year. 
● The assessment materials provided by Pearson for all tasks may be accessed by the 
teacher no more than three working days before the prescribed five week assessment 
period. This is to enable the teacher to prepare for the assessment. The assessment 
materials in this pack must not be removed from the centre premises.   
● Assessments are conducted by teachers in one session within a prescribed assessment 
window and then submitted to Pearson for external marking. 
● Students are presented with instructions in English but must communicate entirely in 
Persian for the duration of the assessment. 
● Complete, unedited recordings of all assessments must be submitted to Pearson via the 
online Learner Work Transfer (LWT) portal. 
● Each question is set in a context drawn from the topics. The assessment tasks will feature 
general content that is familiar and accessible to all students. 
● Students must be permitted 12 minutes’ preparation time to consider the questions and 
stimulus cards for Tasks 1 and 2. 
● Students are assessed on the quality of responses rather than length of assessment, 
however the assessment times are different to reflect the demand of each tier. 
● All assessments are marked against assessment criteria, please see Marking Guidance for 
Paper 2. 
● Centres must have procedures in place to verify the identity of all students at the time of 
the assessment and confirm this on the Candidate speaking examination record form 
(CS2) (see Appendix 1). Centres are required to submit to Pearson one completed  
CS2 form for all students for each tier. 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted during the preparation time or during the 
assessment. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
15 
Foundation tier assessment time and marks 
● The total assessment for the three tasks is 7 to 9 minutes plus 12 minutes’ preparation 
time. 
● The assessment is worth 70 marks. 
● The assessment consists of the following three tasks, which must be conducted in the 
following order: 
o Task 1 – one role play recommended to last between one to one-and-a-half minutes for 
10 marks 
o Task 2 – one picture-based task recommended to last between two-and-a-half to  
three minutes for 24 marks 
o Task 3 – a conversation recommended to last between three-and-a-half to 
four-and-a-half minutes for 36 marks. 
Higher tier assessment time and marks 
● The total assessment for the three tasks is 10 to 12 minutes plus 12 minutes’ preparation 
time. 
● The assessment is worth 70 marks. 
● The assessment consists of the following three tasks, which must be conducted in the 
following order: 
o Task 1 – one role play recommended to last between two to two-and-a-half minutes for 
10 marks 
o Task 2 – one picture-based task recommended to last between three to  
three-and-a-half minutes for 24 marks 
o Task 3 – a conversation recommended to last between five to six minutes for 36 marks. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
16 
Preparation time 
Students are allocated 12 minutes’ preparation time, under supervised conditions, 
immediately prior to the assessment for Tasks 1 and 2. The purpose is to consider the 
questions and stimulus for the role play and picture-based scenarios allocated. 
Students are permitted to make notes (up to a maximum of one side of A4 for both Tasks 1 
and 2) during this period and they can refer to them during the role play and picture-based 
assessment, but not during the conversation task. Students must return their notes to the 
teacher before commencing Task 3 (conversation). 
The notes should be for reference only and students must not read out whole, prepared 
sentences in answer to questions. 
Any notes made during the preparation time must be kept securely by the centre until the 
end of October in the year the assessment is completed, after which time they should be 
securely destroyed. 
Students cannot have access to a dictionary, or any other resource, during the preparation 
time. 
Task 1 – Role play 
Pearson will set and provide ten different sets of role plays for each tier. Each role play 
consists of two cards – one for the teacher and one for the student. 
Teacher cards 
The teacher cards contain instructions on how to conduct the role play and the exact 
questions to ask. 
Each role play opens with an introduction from the teacher who then asks the first question. 
Candidate cards 
The candidate cards include prompts as a guide and highlight where the candidate needs to 
ask a question (indicated by the symbol ‘?’), and where an unpredictable question is posed 
to them by the teacher (indicated by the symbol ‘!’). 
Students have access to this during their preparation time to help in preparing for the 
assessment. 
Each candidate card contains instructions in English and the task is in Persian. The context of 
the role play is provided in both sections. Candidates must read both sections fully to 
support understanding of each bullet point. 
At Foundation tier, the candidate cards contain five bullet points, eliciting five utterances. 
Students need to ask one question and respond to one unpredictable question. Students are 
required to speak only in the present tense or they may use a conditional tense where it is 
more natural to do so. 
At Higher tier, the candidate cards contain five bullet points, eliciting five utterances. 
Students need to ask two questions and respond to one unpredictable question. For four of 
the prompts, students are required to speak in the present tense or they may use a 
conditional tense if it is more natural to do so. They must respond to one question set in a 
past tense. 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
17 
Task 2 – Picture-based task 
Pearson will provide ten different sets of picture-based tasks for each tier. Each task consists 
of two cards – one for the teacher and one for the student. 
Teacher cards 
The teacher cards contain instructions on how to conduct this task and the five questions to 
ask the student. Teachers are allowed to repeat questions and use set prompts to enable 
students to give a developed response. They are not allowed to deviate from the set 
prompts. 
Each task opens with the teacher asking the first question, which is based on the picture. 
The first question is directly based on the picture; the remaining questions extend beyond 
the picture, but are based on the overall topic from which the picture is drawn, inviting an 
exchange of views or opinions. 
Candidate cards 
At Foundation tier, students are provided with a picture and five bullets in Persian to help in 
preparing for the five questions that will be asked during the assessment. Students are 
allowed to ask for questions to be repeated. 
Students have access to this during their preparation time. 
At Higher tier, students are provided with a picture and five bullets in Persian to help in 
preparing for the five questions that will be asked during the assessment. The final bullet is 
marked by the symbol ‘!’ to denote one unpredictable question. Students are allowed to ask 
for questions to be repeated. 
Students have access to this during their preparation time. 
Task 3 – Conversation 
The first part of the conversation opens with the topic chosen by the student. The student 
may choose to focus on any aspect(s) of the topic as each has a number of different 
features. For example, a student who has selected the topic What school is like may: 
● choose to focus on ‘school types’ and ‘rules and pressures’, or 
● choose to focus only on ‘rules and pressures’. 
To enable them to make a confident start, the teacher should allow the student to state their 
chosen aspect(s) from their nominated topic and to talk about this aspect/these aspects for 
up to one minute. 
The teacher continues the conversation on the chosen topic and then may move on to other 
topics within the same theme, if necessary, to ensure that students use the recommended 
time for this task most effectively. 
The second part of the conversation is based on a different theme allocated by Pearson and 
covers any of the topics across that single theme. 
Teachers must ensure that an equal amount of time is allocated to both parts of the 
conversation. 
Throughout the conversation, in order to facilitate a genuine and spontaneous interaction, 
the nature of questions from the teacher should enable students to: 
● answer questions freely, in turn allowing them to produce extended sequences of speech 
● develop conversations and discussions 
● give and justify own thoughts and opinions 
● refer to past, present and future events. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
18 
Administration and general information about the conduct of the 
speaking assessment 
Preparation time and notes for Tasks 1 and 2 only 
● The notes made during the preparation time should be a reference only, and students 
should not read out whole, prepared sentences. 
● The preparation time must be supervised. It can take place either in the examination 
room with the teacher or outside of the room with an invigilator. 
● Students are not permitted to write on the candidate cards. 
● Students must return their notes and candidate cards to the teacher at the end of the 
second task (picture-based task). 
● Any notes made during the preparation time must be kept securely by the centre until the 
end of October in the year the assessment is completed, after which time they should be 
securely destroyed. 
● Students cannot have access to a dictionary, or any other resource, during the preparation 
time. 
Sample assessment materials 
Sample candidate and teacher cards for the role plays and picture-based tasks and 
accompanying marking guidance and assessment criteria can be found in the Pearson 
Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Persian Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) 
document. 
Marking guidance and assessment criteria are also provided in this document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
19 
Marking guidance for Paper 2: Speaking in Persian 
This marking guidance is for the use of Pearson-appointed external examiners. The guidance 
has been included for teacher reference to aid understanding of how the assessment criteria 
will be applied. 
General guidance on using levels-based mark schemes 
Step 1 Decide on a band 
● The examiner will first of all consider the answer as a whole and then decide which 
descriptors most closely match the answer and place it in that band. The descriptors for 
each band indicate the different features that will be seen in the student’s answer for that 
band. 
● When assigning a band they will look at the overall quality of the answer and not focus 
disproportionately on small and specific parts of the answer where the student has not 
performed quite as well as the rest. If the answer covers different aspects of different 
bands of the mark scheme they will use a ‘best fit’ approach for defining the band and 
then use the variability of the response to help decide the mark within the band,  
for example if the response is predominantly band 5–8 with a small amount of band 9–12 
material, it would be placed in band 5–8 but be awarded a mark near the top of the band 
because of the band 9–12 content. 
Step 2 Decide on a mark 
● Once they have decided on a band they will then need to decide on a mark within the 
band. 
● They will decide on the mark to award based on the quality of the answer; they will award 
a mark towards the top or bottom of that band depending on how the student has 
evidenced each of the descriptor bullet points. 
● They will modify the mark based on how securely the trait descriptors are met at that 
band. 
● They will need to go back through the answer as they apply the mark scheme to clarify 
points and assure themselves that the band and the mark are appropriate. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
20 
Assessment criteria for the Foundation tier – Part 1 
Role play – Foundation tier (10 marks) 
For this task, students’ work is marked by Pearson using the following assessment criteria. 
The mark grid is applied once to each individual response to the prompts. There is a 
maximum of 2 marks for each of the five prompts on the role-play cards. 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable communication; highly ambiguous OR pronunciation prevents 
communication 
1 Partially clear/ambiguous OR partially appropriate within the context of the role 
play; pronunciation may affect clarity of communication 
2 Clearly communicated; appropriate within the context of the role play; 
unambiguous; pronunciation supports clear communication 
 
Exemplification of how to apply the role-play mark grid can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Persian Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Additional guidance 
Appropriate: relevant response related to the prompt, uses appropriate register for the 
scenario.  
Informal register: includes language that students would use with friends and people of a 
similar age; informal greetings, endearments and forms of address. Informal register also 
requires the use of informal structures when using, for example, verbs and possessive 
adjectives. 
Formal register: includes language that students would use with adults, for example 
teachers, employers, customers, officials, in a formal context. It includes avoidance of slang, 
over-familiar language, exaggeration and endearments. It also includes the use of formal 
greetings and forms of address where appropriate. Formal register requires formal structures 
when using, for example, verbs, personal pronouns and possessive adjectives. 
Partially clear/pronunciation may affect clarity of communication: makes speech 
difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is eventually understood)/forces the 
listener to strain to understand what is meant. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
21 
Assessment criteria for the Foundation tier – Part 2 
Picture-based task – Foundation tier (24 marks) 
There are two mark grids to be applied to this task: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
Picture-based task: communication and content – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–4 ● Limited response to set questions, likely to consist of single-word answers 
● Minimal success in adapting language to describe, narrate, inform using 
individual words/phrases; sometimes unable to respond 
● A straightforward opinion may be expressed but without justification 
● Pronunciation and intonation are inconsistently intelligible with inaccuracies 
that lead to frequent impairment in communication 
5–8 ● Responds briefly to set questions, there is much hesitation and continuous 
prompting needed 
● Some limited success in adapting language, to describe, narrate and inform in 
response to the set questions; may occasionally be unable to respond 
● Straightforward, brief opinions are given but without justification 
● Pronunciation and intonation are mostly intelligible but inaccuracies lead to 
some impairment in communication 
9–12 ● Responds to set questions with some development, some hesitation and some 
prompting necessary 
● Some effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform in 
response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions with occasional, brief justification 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, occasionally inaccuracies affect 
clarity of communication 
13–16 ● Responds to set questions with frequently developed responses, occasional 
hesitation, occasional prompting necessary 
● Frequently effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform in 
response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions and gives justification with some development 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, inaccuracies are minimal and 
have no impact on clarity of communication 
Additional guidance 
Adaptation of/adapting language to describe, narrate and inform: adapts language to 
achieve different purposes in the language; students may adapt language more effectively 
for one purpose than another, for example they may use language effectively to inform but 
less effectively to narrate. 
Straightforward opinions and justification are those that form part of a 
minimum/standard/predictable response. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
22 
Picture-based task: linguistic knowledge and accuracy – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Limited accuracy when responding to set questions; minimal success when 
referring to past, present and future events 
● Individual words and phrases are coherent when responding to set 
questions; high frequency of errors prevent meaning throughout most of the 
conversation 
3–4 ● Occasionally accurate grammatical structures when responding to set 
questions; occasional success when referring to present events, limited 
success when referring to future or past events, much ambiguity 
● Some coherent phrases and sentences within responses to set questions; 
regular errors prevent coherent overall speech and frequently prevent 
meaning 
5–6 ● Some accurate grammatical structures, including some successful references 
to past, present and future events in response to the set questions, some 
ambiguity 
● Responses are partially coherent, errors occur that sometimes hinder clarity 
of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
7–8 ● Generally accurate grammatical structures, generally successful references to 
past, present and future events in response to the set questions, occasional 
ambiguity 
● Responses are generally coherent although errors occur that occasionally 
hinder clarity of communication 
Additional guidance 
Errors: the mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on 
clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example using a plural noun after numbers, 
repeating the subject 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the listener from the content of what is being said. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make speech difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force listeners to strain to understand what is meant, 
for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the possessive 
adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the listener from the content of what is 
being said. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
23 
Assessment criteria for the Foundation tier – Part 3 
Conversation – Foundation tier (36 marks) 
There are three mark grids to be applied to this task: 
● communication and content 
● interaction and spontaneity 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
Conversation: communication and content – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Communicates limited information relevant to the topics and questions 
● Uses language to express limited, straightforward ideas and thoughts; 
occasional straightforward opinion expressed without justification 
● Uses limited, familiar vocabulary and expression with much repetition; 
communication is disjointed and frequently breaks down because of restricted 
range of vocabulary 
● Pronunciation and intonation are inconsistently intelligible with inaccuracies 
that lead to frequent impairment in communication 
4–6 ● Communicates brief information relevant to the topics and questions 
● Uses language to produce straightforward ideas and thoughts; expresses 
straightforward opinions with limited justification 
● Uses repetitive, familiar vocabulary and expression; communication is often 
constrained and occasionally breaks down because of restricted range of 
vocabulary 
● Pronunciation and intonation are mostly intelligible but inaccuracies lead to 
some impairment in communication 
7–9 ● Communicates information relevant to the topics and questions, with 
occasionally extended sequences of speech 
● Uses language to produce straightforward ideas, thoughts and opinions with 
occasional justification 
● Uses a limited variety of mainly straightforward vocabulary, communication 
for some purposes is constrained because of restricted range of vocabulary 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, occasionally inaccuracies affect 
clarity of communication 
10–12 ● Communicates information relevant to the topics and questions, with some 
extended sequences of speech 
● Occasionally uses language creatively to express some individual thoughts, 
ideas and opinions, some of which are justified 
● Occasional variety in use of vocabulary, including some examples of 
uncommon language with some variation of expression, fulfils most purposes 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, inaccuracies are minimal and 
have no impact on clarity of communication 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
24 
Additional guidance 
Uses language creatively – examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● manipulating language, including familiar, high-frequency and simple language, to 
respond to unfamiliar/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to maintain 
interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, to 
convince. 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view which go 
beyond the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
Straightforward ideas, thoughts and opinions are those that give the 
minimum/standard/predictable response. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
25 
Conversation: interaction and spontaneity – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Basic exchange where only some questions are responded to; answers rely 
on rehearsed language that is frequently irrelevant to the question 
● Short, undeveloped responses, many incomplete 
● Isolated examples of ability to sustain communication, pace is slow and 
hesitant throughout 
4–6 ● Responds with limited spontaneity; answers rely on rehearsed language that 
is occasionally irrelevant to the question 
● Short responses, any development depends on teacher prompting 
● Limited ability to sustain communication, pace is mostly slow and hesitant 
7–9 ● Occasionally able to respond spontaneously with some examples of natural 
interaction although often stilted 
● Occasionally able to initiate and develop responses independently but regular 
prompting needed 
● Occasionally able to sustain communication, using rephrasing/repair 
strategies if necessary to continue the flow; frequent hesitation 
10–12 ● Responds spontaneously to some questions, interacting naturally for parts of 
the conversation 
● Sometimes able to initiate and develop the conversation independently, 
some prompting needed 
● Sometimes able to sustain communication, using rephrasing/repair strategies 
if necessary to continue the flow; some hesitation 
 
Additional guidance 
Rephrasing/repair strategies: strategies that aid communication and allow the 
conversation to be sustained, for example rephrasing, circumlocution, adjusting the 
message, asking for clarification/repetition, repair strategies such as self-correction; these 
strategies enable students to deliver the message when exact vocabulary or expressions are 
not known. 
Responds/responding spontaneously: gives a relevant, impromptu response based on 
what they have heard. 
Rehearsed language: language learned by heart, which may not give a relevant, 
impromptu response based on what has been heard (not spontaneous). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
26 
Conversation: linguistic knowledge and accuracy – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Uses straightforward, individual words/phrases; limited evidence of language 
manipulation 
● Limited accuracy, minimal success when referring to past, present and future 
events 
● Individual words and phrases are coherent; high frequency of errors prevent 
meaning throughout much of the conversation 
4–6 ● Uses straightforward, repetitive, grammatical structures 
● Occasionally accurate grammatical structures, occasional success when 
referring to present events, limited success when referring to future or past 
events, much ambiguity 
● Some coherent phrases and sentences; regular errors prevent coherent 
overall speech and frequently prevent meaning 
7–9 ● Manipulates a limited variety of mainly straightforward grammatical 
structures, minimal use of complex structures 
● Some accurate grammatical structures, some successful references to past, 
present and future events, some ambiguity 
● Sequences of coherent speech although errors occur that often hinder clarity 
of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
10–12 ● Manipulates grammatical structures with occasional variation, complex 
structures used but repetitive 
● Generally accurate grammatical structures, generally successful references to 
past, present and future events 
● Generally coherent speech although errors occur that sometimes hinder 
clarity of communication 
 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be:  
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language. 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: the mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on 
clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example using a plural noun after numbers, 
repeating the subject 
● Infrequent errors that do not distract the listener from the content of what is being said. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
27 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make speech difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force listeners to strain to understand what is meant, 
for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the possessive 
adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the listener from the content of what is 
being said. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
28 
Assessment criteria for the Higher tier – Part 1 
Role play – Higher tier (10 marks) 
For this task, students’ work is marked by Pearson using the following assessment criteria. 
The mark grid is applied once to each individual response to the prompts. There is a 
maximum of 2 marks for each of the five prompts on the role-play cards. 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable communication; highly ambiguous OR pronunciation prevents 
communication 
1 Partially clear/ambiguous OR partially appropriate within the context of the role 
play; pronunciation may affect clarity of communication 
2 Clearly communicated; appropriate within the context of the role play; 
unambiguous; pronunciation supports clear communication 
 
Exemplification of how to apply the role-play mark grid can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Additional guidance 
Appropriate: relevant response related to the prompt, uses appropriate register for the 
scenario.  
Informal register: includes language that students would use with friends and people of a 
similar age; informal greetings, endearments and forms of address. Informal register also 
requires the use of informal structures when using, for example, verbs and possessive 
adjectives. 
Formal register: includes language that students would use with adults, for example 
teachers, employers, customers, officials, in a formal context. It includes avoidance of slang, 
over-familiar language, exaggeration and endearments. It also includes the use of formal 
greetings and forms of address where appropriate. Formal register requires formal structures 
when using, for example, verbs, personal pronouns and possessive adjectives. 
Partially clear/pronunciation may affect clarity of communication: makes speech 
difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is eventually understood)/forces the 
listener to strain to understand what is meant. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
29 
Assessment criteria for the Higher tier – Part 2 
Picture-based task – Higher tier (24 marks) 
There are two mark grids to be applied to this task: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
Picture-based task: communication and content – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–4 ● Responds to set questions with some development, some hesitation and 
some prompting necessary 
● Some effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform in 
response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions with occasional, brief justification 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, occasionally inaccuracies affect 
clarity of communication 
5–8 ● Responds to set questions with frequently developed responses, occasional 
hesitation, occasional prompting necessary 
● Frequently effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform 
in response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions and gives justification with some development 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, inaccuracies are minimal and 
have no impact on clarity of communication 
9–12 ● Responds to set questions with mostly developed and fluent responses, 
minimal hesitation and minimal prompting necessary 
● Predominantly effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and 
inform, in response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions effectively and gives justification which is mostly 
developed  
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible and predominantly accurate  
13–16 ● Responds to the set questions with consistently fluent and developed 
responses 
● Consistently effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and 
inform, in response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions with ease and gives fully-developed justification 
● Pronunciation and intonation are consistently accurate and intelligible 
Additional guidance 
Adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform: adapts language to achieve 
different purposes in the language; students may adapt language more effectively for one 
purpose than another, for example they may use language effectively to inform but less 
effectively to narrate. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
30 
Picture-based task: linguistic knowledge and accuracy – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Some accurate grammatical structures, including some successful 
references to past, present and future events in response to the set 
questions, some ambiguity 
● Responses are partially coherent, errors occur that sometimes hinder clarity 
of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Generally accurate grammatical structures, generally successful references 
to past, present and future events in response to the set questions, 
occasional ambiguity 
● Responses are generally coherent although errors occur that occasionally 
hinder clarity of communication 
5–6 ● Predominantly accurate grammatical structures, mostly successful 
references to past, present and future events in response to the set 
questions 
● Responses are predominantly coherent, errors occur but they rarely hinder 
clarity of communication 
7–8 ● Consistently accurate grammatical structures, successful references to 
past, present and future events in response to the set questions 
● Responses are coherent, any errors do not hinder the clarity of the 
communication 
Additional guidance 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free speech in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example using a plural noun after numbers, 
repeating the subject 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the listener from the content of what is being said. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make speech difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force listeners to strain to understand what is meant, 
for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the possessive 
adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the listener from the content of what is 
being said. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
31 
Assessment criteria for the Higher tier – Part 3 
Conversation – Higher tier (36 marks) 
There are three mark grids to be applied to this task: 
● communication and content 
● interaction and spontaneity 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
Conversation: communication and content – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Communicates information relevant to the topics and questions, with 
occasionally extended sequences of speech 
● Uses language to produce straightforward ideas, thoughts and opinions with 
occasional justification 
● Uses a limited variety of mainly straightforward vocabulary, communication 
for some purposes is constrained because of restricted range of vocabulary 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, occasionally inaccuracies affect 
clarity of communication  
4–6 ● Communicates information relevant to the topics and questions, with some 
extended sequences of speech 
● Occasionally uses language creatively to express some individual thoughts, 
ideas and opinions, some of which are justified 
● Occasional variety in use of vocabulary, including some examples of 
uncommon language with some variation of expression, fulfils most purposes 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, inaccuracies are minimal and 
have no impact on clarity of communication 
7–9 ● Communicates detailed information relevant to the topics and questions, 
usually with extended sequences of speech 
● Frequently uses language creatively to express and justify a variety of 
individual thoughts, ideas and opinions 
● Uses a variety of vocabulary, including frequent use of uncommon language, 
to regularly vary expression for different purposes 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible and predominantly accurate  
10–12 ● Communicates detailed information relevant to the topics and questions, 
consistently extended sequences of speech 
● Consistently uses language creatively to express and justify a wide variety of 
individual thoughts, ideas and opinions 
● Consistently uses a wide variety of vocabulary, including uncommon 
language, to consistently vary expression for different purposes 
● Pronunciation and intonation are consistently accurate and intelligible 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
32 
Additional guidance 
Uses language creatively: examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● manipulating language, including familiar, high-frequency and simple language, to 
respond to unfamiliar/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to maintain 
interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, to 
convince. 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view that go beyond 
the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
Straightforward ideas, thoughts and opinions are those that give the 
minimum/standard/predictable response. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
33 
Conversation: interaction and spontaneity – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Occasionally able to respond spontaneously with some examples of natural 
interaction although often stilted 
● Occasionally able to initiate and develop responses independently but 
regular prompting needed 
● Occasionally able to sustain communication, using rephrasing/repair 
strategies if necessary to continue the flow; frequent hesitation 
4–6 ● Responds spontaneously to some questions, interacting naturally for parts 
of the conversation 
● Sometimes able to initiate and develop the conversation independently, 
some prompting needed 
● Sometimes able to sustain communication, using rephrasing/repair 
strategies if necessary to continue the flow; some hesitation 
7–9 ● Responds to most questions spontaneously, resulting in mostly natural 
interaction 
● Mostly able to initiate and develop the conversation independently 
● Able to sustain communication throughout most of the conversation, using 
rephrasing/repair strategies if necessary to continue the flow, occasional 
hesitation 
10–12 ● Responds spontaneously and with ease to questions, resulting in natural 
interaction 
● Consistently able to initiate and develop the conversation independently 
● Able to sustain communication throughout, using rephrasing/repair 
strategies if necessary to continue the flow 
Additional guidance 
Respond(s) spontaneously: gives a relevant, impromptu response based on what they 
have heard. 
Rephrasing/repair strategies are strategies that aid communication and allow the 
conversation to be sustained, for example rephrasing, circumlocution, adjusting the 
message, asking for clarification/repetition, repair strategies such as self-correction; these 
strategies enable students to deliver the message when exact vocabulary or expressions are 
not known. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
34 
Conversation: linguistic knowledge and accuracy – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Manipulates a limited variety of mainly straightforward grammatical 
structures, minimal use of complex structures 
● Some accurate grammatical structures, some successful references to past, 
present and future events, some ambiguity 
● Sequences of coherent speech although errors occur that often hinder clarity 
of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
4–6 ● Manipulates grammatical structures with occasional variation, complex 
structures used but repetitive 
● Generally accurate grammatical structures, generally successful references to 
past, present and future events 
● Generally coherent speech although errors occur that sometimes hinder 
clarity of communication 
7–9 ● Manipulates a variety of grammatical structures, some variety of complex 
structures 
● Predominantly accurate grammatical structures, mostly successful references 
to past, present and future events 
● Predominantly coherent speech; errors occur but they rarely hinder clarity of 
communication 
10–12 ● Manipulates a wide variety of grammatical structures, frequent use of 
complex structures 
● Consistently accurate grammatical structures, consistently successful 
references to past, present and future events 
● Fully coherent speech; any errors do not hinder the clarity of the 
communication 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● all grammar and structures included in the grammar list that are specific to 
Higher tier GCSE 
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free speech in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on clarity. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
35 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example using a plural noun after numbers, 
repeating the subject 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the listener from the content of what is being said. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make speech difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force listeners to strain to understand what is meant, 
for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the possessive 
adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the listener from the content of what is 
being said. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
36 
Paper 3: Reading and understanding in Persian 
Content 
Students are assessed on their understanding of written Persian across a range of different 
types of texts. 
Students need to: 
● identify the overall message, key points, details and opinions in texts 
● deduce meaning from a variety of written texts 
● recognise the relationship between past, present and future events 
● understand texts, organise and present relevant details, and, where appropriate, draw 
inferences in context and recognise implicit meaning 
● recognise and respond to key information, important themes and ideas in more extended 
written text, including authentic sources, adapted and abridged as appropriate, by being 
able to extract information and answer questions. 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes (see Themes and 
topics). 
Texts for individual questions within the assessment use high-frequency language and vary 
in length, including both short- and longer written passages. Texts include authentic sources 
that introduce more complex language and unfamiliar materials. 
The range of text types include: 
● advertisements, emails, letters, articles and literary texts 
● a short passage to be translated from Persian into English. 
Literary texts consist of short extracts from texts that may have been adapted and abridged 
from authentic sources to be appropriate to this level – from letters, short stories, novels or 
plays to contemporary and historical sources. Students are also expected to translate a short 
passage of written Persian into English to demonstrate an ability to transfer meaning 
accurately into English. 
Scenarios in the texts are set either at home or, more frequently, in a Persian -speaking 
country, allowing students to develop appropriate cultural awareness and understanding. 
To prepare students adequately for this assessment, teachers should present and exploit  a 
range of vocabulary relevant to each theme listed, building on the Key Stage 3  
Programme of Study, where appropriate. 
Students should be presented with Persian language in a range of styles or registers and in a 
variety of different contexts, as appropriate to their age and level of understanding. Students 
should also be presented with different fonts and formats, for example short, printed 
messages, articles and email messages. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
37 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2020. 
● The assessment time is: 
o Foundation tier – 50 minutes in length 
o Higher tier – 1 hour 5 minutes in length. 
● The assessment is out of 50 marks. 
● The assessment consists of 10 questions. 
● Students must answer all questions from each of the three sections. 
● Students are required to respond to questions based on passages of text from a range of 
sources. Each question is set in a context drawn from the themes. 
● Section A has six questions set in English. Question types comprise both multiple-response 
and short-answer open response questions. The instructions to students are in English. 
● Section B contains three questions set in Persian. The instructions to students are in 
Persian: 
o for the Foundation tier there are three multiple-response questions 
o for the Higher tier, there are two multiple-response questions and one short-answer 
open-response question. 
● Section C contains one translation passage from Persian into English. The instructions to 
students are in English. 
● Four of the questions are common to both tiers. 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and mark scheme for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel  
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Persian Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
38 
Paper 4: Writing in Persian 
Content 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate effectively through writing in Persian. 
Students need to: 
● communicate effectively in writing for a variety of purposes across a range of specified 
contexts 
● write short texts, using simple sentences and familiar language accurately to convey 
meaning and exchange information 
● produce clear and coherent text of extended length to present facts and express ideas and 
opinions appropriately for different purposes and in different settings 
● make accurate use of a variety of vocabulary and grammatical structures, including some 
more complex forms, to describe and narrate with reference to past, present and future 
events 
● manipulate the language, using and adapting a variety of structures and vocabulary with 
increasing accuracy and fluency for new purposes, including using appropriate style and 
register 
● make independent, creative and more complex use of the language, as appropriate, to 
note down key points, express and justify individual thoughts and points of view, in order 
to interest, inform or convince 
● translate sentences and short texts from English into the assessed language to convey key 
messages accurately and to apply grammatical knowledge of language and structures in 
context. 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2020. 
● The assessment is out of 60 marks. 
● Each question is set in a context drawn from the themes and topics. The assessment tasks 
feature general content that is familiar and accessible to all students. 
● Students are required to produce responses of varying lengths and types to express facts, 
ideas and opinions in Persian. 
● The length of each response required and complexity of language increases across the 
paper. Recommended word counts are specified for each question. Students will not be 
penalised for writing more or fewer words than recommended in the word count or for 
going beyond the mandatory bullets. 
● One question is a translation of a short passage from English into Persian. 
● All assessments are marked against assessment criteria, please see Marking guidance for 
Paper 4: Writing in Persian. 
● The instructions to students are in Persian. The question titles appear in English. 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
39 
● Foundation tier 
o The assessment time is 1 hour and 20 minutes in length. 
o The paper consists of three open questions and one translation from English into 
Persian. 
o Students must answer all questions. 
o Question 1 assesses students on their ability to write to describe and to express 
opinions. 
o Question 2 has two options from which students have to select one. This question 
assesses students on their ability to note down key points and convey information. 
Students must use the formal register, please see the definition in Marking guidance for 
Paper 4: Writing in Persian. 
o Question 3 has two options from which students have to select one. This question 
assesses students on their ability to convey information, narrate, express opinions, 
interest, and convince the reader about a certain point. Students must use the informal 
register, please see the definition in Marking guidance for Paper 4: Writing in Persian. 
This question is common to the Higher tier. 
o Question 4 is the translation question. Students are required to translate five sentences 
from English to Persian. The sentences are ordered by increasing level of difficulty. 
● Higher tier 
o The assessment time is 1 hour and 25 minutes in length. 
o The paper consists of two questions and one translation from English into Persian. 
o Students must answer all questions. 
o Question 1 has two options from which students have to select one. This question 
assesses students on their ability to convey information, narrate, express opinions, 
interest, and convince the reader about a certain point. Students must use the informal 
register, please see the definition in Marking guidance for Paper 4: Writing in Persian. 
This question is common to the Foundation tier. 
o Question 2 has two options from which students have to select one. This question 
assesses students on their ability to convey information, narrate, express and justify 
ideas and opinions, and interest or convince the reader. Students must use the formal 
register, please see the definition in Marking guidance for Paper 4: Writing in Persian. 
o Question 3 is the translation question. Students are required to translate a short 
paragraph from English into Persian. The individual sentences are ordered by increasing 
level of difficulty. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample question paper and accompanying marking guidance and assessment criteria can 
be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Persian Sample Assessment 
Materials (SAMs) document. 
Marking guidance and assessment criteria are also provided in this document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
40 
Marking guidance for Paper 4: Writing in Persian 
This marking guidance is for the use of Pearson-appointed external examiners. The guidance 
has been included for teacher reference to aid understanding of how the assessment criteria 
will be applied. 
General guidance on using levels-based mark schemes 
Step 1 Decide on a band 
● The examiner will first of all consider the answer as a whole and then decide which descriptors 
most closely match the answer and place it in that band. The descriptors for each band 
indicate the different features that will be seen in the student’s answer for that band. 
● When assigning a band they will look at the overall quality of the answer and not focus 
disproportionately on small and specific parts of the answer where the student has not 
performed quite as well as the rest. If the answer covers different aspects of different 
bands of the mark scheme they will use a ‘best fit’ approach for defining the band and 
then use the variability of the response to help decide the mark within the band, 
for example if the response is predominantly band 5–8 with a small amount of band 9–12 
material, it would be placed in band 5–8 but be awarded a mark near the top of the band 
because of the band 9–12 content. 
Step 2 Decide on a mark 
● Once they have decided on a band they will then need to decide on a mark within the 
band. 
● They will decide on the mark to award based on the quality of the answer; they will award 
a mark towards the top or bottom of that band depending on how the student has 
evidenced each of the descriptor bullet points. 
● They will modify the mark based on how securely the trait descriptors are met at that band. 
● They will need to go back through the answer as they apply the mark scheme to clarify 
points and assure themselves that the band and the mark are appropriate. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
41 
Assessment criteria for the Foundation tier 
Question 1 – Foundation tier (12 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria given in two 
mark grids: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
The student is expected to produce 20–30 words for this task. The number of words is 
approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer words than 
recommended in the word count. All work produced by the student must be marked. 
Question 1: communication and content mark grid – Foundation tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Some relevant, basic information without development 
● Uses language to inform, give short descriptions and express opinions with limited 
success 
● Uses limited selection of common, familiar vocabulary and expression with frequent 
repetition 
3–4 ● Mostly relevant information, minimal extra detail 
● Uses language to give short descriptions, simple information and opinions with 
variable success 
● Uses small selection of common, familiar vocabulary and expression with some 
repetition 
5–6 ● Relevant information with occasional extra detail 
● Uses language to give short descriptions, simple information and opinions with 
some success 
● Uses small selection of common, familiar vocabulary and expression with little 
repetition 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
42 
Question 1: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Foundation tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Produces simple, short sentences in isolation 
● Limited accurate application of a small selection of straightforward grammatical 
structures, limited success in referring to present events; frequently errors 
prevent meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Produces simple, short sentences with little linking 
● Inconsistently accurate application of a small selection of straightforward 
grammatical structures, inconsistently successful reference to present events; 
often errors occur that hinder clarity of communication and occasionally prevent 
meaning 
5–6 ● Produces simple sentences with some linking 
● Accurate application of a small selection of straightforward grammatical 
structures, refers successfully to present events as appropriate to the task; 
occasionally errors occur that hinder clarity of communication 
Additional guidance 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: the mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on 
coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example using a plural noun after numbers, 
repeating subject 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the 
possessive adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
43 
Question 2 – Foundation tier (16 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria given in two 
mark grids: 
● communication and content  
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
This question requires students to write in a formal style/register (see Additional guidance). 
The student is expected to produce 40–50 words for this task. The number of words is 
approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer words than 
recommended in the word count. All work produced by the student must be marked. 
Question 2: communication and content mark grid – Foundation tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Limited information given likely to consist of single words and phrases 
● Limited ability to use language to present simple facts, inform and note down key 
points; expression is frequently constrained and communication often breaks 
down 
● Repetitive use of a limited selection of common words and phrases; heavy reliance 
on language of the stimulus material to express thoughts 
● Knowledge of register and style is rarely evident because of restricted use of 
vocabulary and expression 
3–4 ● Some brief information given, basic points made without development 
● Occasional success in using language to present simple facts, information and to 
note down key points but expression is sometimes constrained and 
communication occasionally breaks down 
● Limited use of common, familiar vocabulary and expression with frequent 
repetition; some reliance on language of the stimulus material to express thoughts 
● Occasional appropriate use of register and style 
5–6 ● Some relevant information given appropriate to the task, basic points made with 
little development 
● Uses language with some success, to present simple facts, information and to 
note down key points, expression is occasionally constrained 
● Uses a small range of, common, familiar vocabulary and expression, mostly 
independently selected, with some repetition; mostly goes beyond the language of 
the stimulus material 
● Mostly appropriate use of register and style, mostly sustained 
7–8 ● Relevant information given appropriate to the task, basic points made with some 
development 
● Uses language mostly with success, to present simple facts, information and to 
note down key points using simple ideas 
● Uses independently selected, common, familiar vocabulary and expression with 
little repetition; goes beyond the language of the stimulus material 
● Appropriate use of register and style sustained 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
44 
 
Additional guidance 
Independently selected vocabulary and expression: students may use key words from 
the stimulus material but to demonstrate their knowledge of vocabulary and ability to 
express themselves independently they must be able to use vocabulary and expression that 
is not in the stimulus material. 
Register and style definition: formal register and style includes, for example, avoidance 
of slang, over-familiar language, exaggeration, ‘text-speak’, inappropriate colloquialisms or 
writing in a conversational style. Formal register and style require the use of the formal 
structure when using, for example, verbs, personal pronouns and possessive adjectives. 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
45 
Question 2: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Foundation tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Repetitive use of minimal selection of straightforward grammatical structures 
● Produces individual words/set phrases 
● Limited accuracy in grammatical structures used, limited success in referring to 
present and future events; regular errors prevent meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Use of a restricted range of straightforward grammatical structures, frequent 
repetition 
● Produces simple, short sentences, which are not linked 
● Occasional accuracy in grammatical structures used, occasional success in 
referring to present and future events; sometimes errors prevent meaning being 
conveyed 
5–6 ● Uses straightforward grammatical structures, some repetition 
● Produces simple, short sentences; minimal linking 
● Some accurate use of straightforward grammatical structures, some success in 
referring to present and future events to meet the requirements of the task; 
occasionally errors prevent meaning being conveyed 
7–8 ● Uses straightforward grammatical structures, occasional repetition 
● Produces predominantly simple sentences occasionally linked together 
● Mostly accurate use of straightforward grammatical structures, mostly successful 
references to present and future events to meet the requirements of the task; 
occasionally errors hinder clarity of communication 
Additional guidance 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: the mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on 
coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example using a plural noun after numbers, 
repeating subject 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the 
possessive adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
46 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
47 
Question 3 – Foundation tier (20 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria given in two 
mark grids: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
This question contains four bullet points that form part of the task. Failure to cover all four 
bullet points will impact on the marks that can be awarded against the requirements of the 
two mark grids for this question. There is no requirement for even coverage of the bullet 
points in any band. However, in order to access marks in the top band, students must refer 
to all bullet points and meet the other assessment criteria in the top band. 
This question requires students to write in an informal style (see Additional guidance). 
The student is expected to produce 80–90 words for this task. The number of words is 
approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer words than 
recommended in the word count. All work produced by the student must be marked. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
48 
Question 3: communication and content mark grid – Foundation tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Communicates brief information relevant to the task with little development 
● Limited adaptation of language to narrate, inform and interest; straightforward 
personal opinions are given with limited justification 
● Expresses straightforward thoughts and ideas; uses common, familiar language 
with repetition 
● Variable use of appropriate register and style 
4–6 ● Communicates information relevant to the task, with development of the 
occasional key point and idea 
● Some effective adaptation of language to narrate and inform; attempts are 
made to interest and give convincing personal opinions which are occasionally 
successful 
● Expresses mainly straightforward thoughts and ideas with the occasional 
individual thought/idea; some different examples of common, familiar language 
● Appropriate use of register and style is evident but with inconsistencies 
7–9 ● Communicates information relevant to the task, with development of some key 
points and ideas 
● Mostly effective adaptation of language to narrate and inform, some effective 
language to interest and give convincing personal opinions 
● Some examples of creative language use to express individual thoughts and 
ideas; a variety of mainly common, familiar language with the occasional 
example of uncommon language 
● Appropriate use of register and style is evident but with occasional 
inconsistency 
10–12 ● Communicates information relevant to the task with expansion of key points 
and ideas 
● Effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest and give convincing 
personal opinions 
● Frequent examples of creative language use to express individual thoughts and 
ideas; a variety of vocabulary and expression, some examples of uncommon 
language 
● Appropriate use of register and style throughout with minimal inconsistency 
Additional guidance 
Creative language use – examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● using language, including familiar, high-frequency and simple language, to respond to 
unfamiliar/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to maintain 
interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, to 
convince. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
49 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view which go 
beyond the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
Register and style definition: informal register and style – examples of informal style 
include colloquial, conversational language that students would use with friends. It also 
requires use of the informal structure when using, for example, verbs, personal pronouns 
and possessive adjectives. 
Adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest and give convincing opinions: 
adapts language to achieve different purposes in the language; students may adapt language 
more effectively for one purpose than another, for example they may use language 
effectively to narrate but less effectively to interest or give a convincing opinion. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
50 
Question 3: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Foundation tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Uses straightforward grammatical structures, some repetition 
● Produces brief, simple sentences, limited linking of sentences 
● Variable accuracy with language and structures, variable success when referring 
to past, present and future events, regular ambiguity; often errors prevent 
meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Uses mostly straightforward grammatical structures, occasional repetition 
● Produces occasionally extended sentences linked with familiar, straightforward 
conjunctions 
● Some accurate language and structures, including some successful references to 
past, present and future events, some ambiguity; often errors occur that hinder 
clarity of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
5–6 ● Different examples of straightforward grammatical structures are evident 
● Produces some extended sentences that are linked with familiar, straightforward 
conjunctions 
● Frequently accurate language and structures, including mostly successful 
references to past, present and future events, occasional ambiguity; sometimes 
errors occur that hinder clarity of communication 
7–8 ● Some variation of grammatical structures, occasional complex structure 
● Produces frequently extended sentences, well linked together 
● Generally accurate language and structures, including successful references to 
past, present and future events; occasionally errors occur that hinder clarity of 
communication 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language. 
Straightforward grammatical structures is considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example using a plural noun after numbers, 
repeating subject 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
51 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the 
possessive adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
52 
Question 4 – Foundation tier (12 marks) 
Translation mark grids 
Mark grid for sentences (a), (b) and (c), which are worth 2 marks each. The 
mark grid will be applied to each individual sentence. 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1 ● Meaning partially communicated with errors that hinder clarity or prevent meaning 
being conveyed 
2 ● Meaning fully communicated with occasional errors that do not hinder clarity 
 
Mark grid for sentences (d) and (e), which are worth 3 marks each. The mark 
grid will be applied to each individual sentence. 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1 ● Some words are communicated but the overall meaning of the sentence is not 
communicated 
2 ● The meaning of the sentence is partially communicated 
● Linguistic structures and vocabulary are mostly accurate with some errors that 
hinder clarity or prevent meaning being conveyed 
3 ● The meaning of the sentence is fully communicated 
● Linguistic structures and vocabulary are accurate with only occasional errors that 
do not hinder clarity 
 
Additional guidance 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example using a plural noun after numbers, 
repeating subject 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the 
possessive adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
53 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
54 
Assessment criteria for the Higher tier 
Question 1 – Higher tier (20 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria given in two 
mark grids: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
This question contains four bullet points that form part of the task. Failure to cover all four 
bullet points will impact on the marks that can be awarded against the requirements of the 
two mark grids for this question. There is no requirement for even coverage of the bullet 
points in any band. However, in order to access marks in the top band, students must refer 
to all bullet points and meet the other assessment criteria in the top band. 
This question requires students to write in an informal style (see Additional guidance). 
The student is expected to produce 80–90 words for this task. The number of words is 
approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer words than 
recommended in the word count. All work produced by the student must be marked. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
55 
Question 1: communication and content mark grid – Higher tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Communicates brief information relevant to the task with little development 
● Limited adaptation of language to narrate, inform and interest; straightforward 
personal opinions are given with limited justification  
● Expresses straightforward thoughts and ideas; uses common, familiar language 
with repetition 
● Variable use of appropriate register and style 
4–6 ● Communicates information relevant to the task, with development of the 
occasional key point and idea 
● Some effective adaptation of language to narrate and inform; attempts are made 
to interest and give convincing personal opinions which are occasionally 
successful 
● Expresses mainly straightforward thoughts and ideas with the occasional 
individual thought/idea; some different examples of common, familiar language 
● Appropriate use of register and style is evident but with inconsistencies 
7–9 ● Communicates information relevant to the task, with development of some key 
points and ideas 
● Mostly effective adaptation of language to narrate and inform, some effective 
language to interest and give convincing personal opinions 
● Some examples of creative language use to express individual thoughts and 
ideas; a variety of mainly common, familiar language with the occasional 
example of uncommon language 
● Appropriate use of register and style is evident but with occasional inconsistency 
10–12 ● Communicates information relevant to the task with expansion of key points and 
ideas 
● Effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest and give convincing 
personal opinions 
● Frequent examples of creative language use to express individual thoughts and 
ideas; a variety of vocabulary and expression, some examples of uncommon 
language 
● Appropriate use of register and style throughout, with minimal inconsistency 
Additional guidance 
Creative language use: examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● using language, including familiar, high frequency and simple language, to respond to 
unfamiliar/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to maintain 
interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, to 
convince. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
56 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view that go beyond 
the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
Register and style definition: informal register and style – examples of informal style 
include colloquial, conversational language that students would use with friends. It also 
requires use of the informal structure when using, for example, verbs, personal pronouns 
and possessive adjectives. 
Adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest and give convincing opinions: 
adapts language to achieve different purposes in the language; students may adapt language 
more effectively for one purpose than another, for example they may use language 
effectively to narrate but less effectively to interest or give a convincing opinion. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
57 
Question 1: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Higher tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Uses straightforward grammatical structures, some repetition 
● Produces brief, simple sentences, limited linking of sentences 
● Variable accuracy with language and structures, variable success when referring 
to past, present and future events, regular ambiguity; often errors prevent 
meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Uses mostly straightforward grammatical structures, occasional repetition 
● Produces occasionally extended sentences linked with familiar, straightforward 
conjunctions 
● Some accurate language and structures, including some successful references to 
past, present and future events, some ambiguity; often errors occur that hinder 
clarity of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
5–6 ● Different examples of straightforward grammatical structures are evident 
● Produces some extended sentences that are linked with familiar, straightforward 
conjunctions 
● Frequently accurate language and structures, including mostly successful 
references to past, present and future events, occasional ambiguity; sometimes 
errors occur that hinder clarity of communication 
7–8 ● Some variation of grammatical structures, occasional complex structure 
● Produces frequently extended sentences, well linked together 
● Generally accurate language and structures, including successful references to 
past, present and future events; occasionally errors occur that hinder clarity of 
communication 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● all grammar and structures included in the grammar list that are specific to 
Higher tier GCSE 
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language. 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
58 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example using a plural noun after numbers, 
repeating subject 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the 
possessive adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
59 
Question 2 – Higher tier (28 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria contained in 
two mark grids: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
This question contains four bullet points that form part of the task. Failure to cover all four 
bullet points will impact on the marks that can be awarded against the requirements of the 
two mark grids for this question (see below). There is no requirement for even coverage of 
the bullet points in any band. However, in order to access marks in the top band, students 
must refer to all bullet points and meet the other assessment criteria in the top band. 
This question requires students to write in a formal register/style (see Additional guidance). 
The student is expected to produce 130–150 words for this task. The number of words is 
approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer words than 
recommended in the word count. All work produced by the student must be marked. 
Question 2: communication and content mark grid – Higher tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–4 ● Communicates occasionally detailed information relevant to the task with 
occasionally effective development of key points and ideas 
● Some effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest/convince 
● Occasional examples of creative use of language to express individual thoughts, 
ideas and points of view, occasional justification; variety of mainly common, 
familiar language, occasional examples of uncommon language 
● Appropriate use of register and style with the occasional inconsistency 
5–8 ● Communicates some detailed information relevant to the task, frequently effective 
development of key points and ideas 
● Frequently effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest/convince 
● Examples of creative use of language to express some individual thoughts, ideas 
and points of view, some justified; some variation of vocabulary and expression 
with some examples of uncommon language 
● Appropriate use of register and style with few inconsistencies 
9–12 ● Communicates detailed information relevant to the task, with mostly effective 
development of key points and ideas 
● Mostly effective adaptation of language, to narrate, inform, interest/convince 
● Creative use of language to express a range of individual thoughts, ideas and 
points of view, most of which are justified; variety of vocabulary and expression, 
frequent examples of uncommon language 
● Predominantly appropriate use of register and style 
13–16 ● Communicates detailed information relevant to the task, with consistently effective 
development of key points and ideas 
● Consistently effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest/convince 
● Creative use of language to express and fully justify a wide range of individual 
thoughts, ideas and points of view; wide variety of vocabulary and expression, 
many examples of uncommon language 
● Consistent use of appropriate register and style throughout 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
60 
Additional guidance 
Creative use of language: examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● using language, including familiar, high frequency and simple language, to respond to 
unfamiliar/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to maintain 
interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, to 
convince. 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view that go beyond 
the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
Adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest/convince: adapts language to 
achieve different purposes in the language; students may adapt language more effectively 
for one purpose than another, for example they may use language effectively to narrate but 
less effectively to interest/convince. 
Register and style definition: formal register and style includes, for example, avoidance 
of slang, over-familiar language, exaggeration, ‘text-speak’, inappropriate colloquialisms or 
writing in a conversational style. Formal register and style require the use of the formal 
structure when using, for example, verbs, personal pronouns and possessive adjectives. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
61 
Question 2: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Higher tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Uses a variety of mainly straightforward grammatical structures, occasional 
examples of repetitive complex language 
● Occasional sequences of fluent writing, occasionally extended, well-linked 
sentences 
● Straightforward grammatical structures are largely accurate with occasional 
accurate use of complex language, some successful references to past, present 
and future events but some ambiguity; errors occur that sometimes hinder clarity 
of communication 
4–6 ● Some variation of grammatical structures, including some repetitive instances of 
complex language 
● Prolonged sequences of fluent writing, some extended, well-linked sentences 
● Generally accurate language and structures, frequently successful references to 
past, present and future events, occasional ambiguity; errors occur that 
occasionally hinder clarity of communication 
7–9 ● Uses a variety of grammatical structures including some different examples of 
complex language 
● Predominantly fluent response; frequent extended sentences, mostly well linked 
● Mostly accurate language and structures, mostly successful references to past, 
present and future events; errors occur but they rarely hinder clarity of 
communication 
10–12 ● Uses a wide variety of grammatical structures, including complex language 
● Fluent response throughout with extended, well-linked sentences 
● Consistently accurate language and structures, consistently successful references 
to past, present and future events; any errors do not hinder the clarity of the 
communication 
 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● all grammar and structures included in the grammar list that are specific to 
Higher tier GCSE 
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language. 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
62 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example using a plural noun after numbers, 
repeating subject 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the 
possessive adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
63 
Question 3 – Higher tier (12 marks) 
Translation mark grid 
The translation mark grid assesses both communication and content and linguistic knowledge 
and accuracy. When awarding marks, the student’s response across the whole paragraph 
should be considered. 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Meaning of some individual words or phrases is conveyed; frequent 
omissions/incorrectly communicated words and phrases/mother-tongue 
interference 
● Some straightforward structures are accurate but regular errors prevent meaning 
of individual phrases/sentences being conveyed 
4–6 ● The meaning of the passage is partially communicated, some words and phrases 
are omitted/incorrectly communicated 
● Language and structures are accurate in some phrases and sentences but some 
errors prevent meaning being conveyed 
7–9 ● The meaning of the passage is mostly communicated, occasional words are 
omitted/incorrectly communicated 
● Mostly accurate language and structures; errors occur that occasionally hinder 
clarity and in rare instances prevent meaning being conveyed 
10–12 ● The meaning of the passage is fully communicated 
● Consistently accurate language and structures, any errors do not hinder clarity 
Additional guidance 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example using a plural noun after numbers, 
repeating subject 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the 
possessive adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
64 
Assessment Objectives 
 
Students must: % in GCSE 
AO1 Listening – understand and respond to different types of spoken 
language 
25 
AO2 Speaking – communicate and interact effectively in speech 25 
AO3 Reading – understand and respond to different types of written 
language 
25 
AO4 Writing – communicate in writing 25 
Total 100% 
 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
 
Paper 
Assessment Objectives Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives AO1 % AO2 % AO3 % AO4 % 
Paper 1: Listening and 
understanding in Persian 
25 0 0 0 25% 
Paper 2: Speaking in Persian 0 25 0 0 25% 
Paper 3: Reading and 
understanding in Persian 
0 0 25 0 25% 
Paper 4: Writing in Persian 0 0 0 25 25% 
Total for GCSE 25% 25% 25% 25% 100% 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
65 
3 Administration and general information 
Entries 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for this qualification can be found in 
our UK Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations officers and is 
available on our website: qualifications.pearson.com 
Discount code and performance tables 
Students taking the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Persian must take all 
assessments in either the Foundation tier or the Higher tier only. 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more than one GCSE, or other Level 2 
qualifications with the same discount code, will have only the grade for their 'first entry' 
counted for the purpose of the school and college performance tables (please see 
Appendix 6: Codes). For further information about what constitutes 'first entry' and full 
details of how this policy is applied, please refer to the DfE website: 
www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-education 
Students should be advised that if they take two GCSEs with the same discount code, 
schools and colleges they wish to progress to are likely to take the view that this 
achievement is equivalent to only one GCSE. The same view may be taken if students take 
two GCSEs or other Level 2 qualifications that have different discount codes but have 
significant overlap of content. Students or their advisers who have any doubts about their 
subject combinations should check with the institution they wish to progress to before 
embarking on their programmes. 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, 
special consideration and malpractice 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality policy requires all students to 
have equal opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our qualifications 
to be awarded in a way that is fair to every student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the Equality Act 2010) are not, 
when they are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in comparison to 
students who do not share that characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification and that 
this achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their peers. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be available in English, with the exception of specific 
questions in the listening, reading and writing assessments. 
For speaking and writing assessments, all student work must be in Persian. For listening and 
reading, all student work must follow the instruction provided for the individual question. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
66 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with special 
educational needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to: 
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the assessment. 
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an individual 
student with a disability, without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding bodies comply with the duty under the 
Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students will 
then know what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for assessment. 
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable adjustments 
where a person with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in undertaking an 
assessment. The awarding organisation is required to take reasonable steps to overcome 
that disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be unique to that individual and 
therefore might not be in the list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of factors, 
including: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding 
organisation, or affects timeframes or the security or integrity of the assessment. This is 
because the adjustment is not ‘reasonable’. 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student's mark or grade to 
reflect temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the 
examination/assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a material 
effect on a candidate’s ability to take an assessment or demonstrate their level of attainment 
in an assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to apply for access arrangements 
and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special 
consideration, please refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
67 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that compromises or seeks to 
compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in examinations must be reported to Pearson using a JCQ Form M1 
(available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to Investigations Team, Pearson, 190 High Holborn, 
London, WC1V 7BH. Please provide as much information and supporting documentation as 
possible. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice constitutes staff or centre malpractice. 
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and maladministration of 
our qualifications. As with candidate malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is any act that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the 
integrity of the qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported 
immediately, before any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson on a 
JCQ Form M2(a) (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form, 
supporting documentation and as much information as possible can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to Investigations Team, Pearson, 
190 High Holborn, London, WC1V 7BH. Note that the final decision regarding 
appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the document 
General and Vocational Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments Policies and Procedures, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice. 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to comply with the requirements of 
Ofqual's General Conditions of Recognition. 
The raw marks for papers 1, 3 and 4 in this qualification will be scaled by Pearson to 
represent the relative weighting of 25% for each paper. 
Foundation and Higher tier 
Paper  Weighting  Raw marks Scaling factor Scaling mark 
1 25% 50 1.400 70 
2 25% 70 1.000 70 
3 25% 50 1.400 70 
4 25% 60 1.167 70 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
68 
This GCSE qualification will be graded and certificated on a nine-grade scale from 9 to 1 
using the total subject mark where 9 is the highest grade. Individual papers are not graded. 
For Foundation tier, grades 1–5 are available and for Higher tier, grades 4–9 are available, 
however if the mark achieved is a smaller number of marks below the 4/3 grade boundary, 
then a grade 3 may be awarded. 
The first certification opportunity for this qualification will be 2020. 
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum judged by Pearson to be of 
sufficient standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U result. 
Student recruitment and progression 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this qualification. 
Progression 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Persian builds on the programme of 
study at Key Stages 2 and 3, focusing on the development of all four language skills, 
listening, speaking, reading and writing. Grammar and the mastering of linguistic features 
are key elements of this specification as is the inclusion of authentic written and spoken 
sources. 
Students will be expected to be able to talk about themselves as well as matters that go 
beyond their immediate experience. They should be able to express and justify their own 
opinions in speech and writing, building on the fluency and spontaneity developed at 
Key Stage 3. 
The skill of translation will be developed from those skills initiated from Key Stage 3. The 
broader range of topics promotes a clear progression in grammar and vocabulary from  
Key Stage 3 and will increase linguistic and cognitive demand. The grammar and vocabulary 
lists illustrate the level required for this qualification. 
This qualification offers a suitable progression route to GCE A Level in Persian. In addition, 
the study of one language at GCSE can facilitate and help promote the learning of other 
languages. The qualification may also add to an individual’s employability profile. 
Students will be able to apply their knowledge, skills and understanding to authentic, real-life 
contexts. They will develop transferable skills that support higher education study and the 
transition to employment, together with an understanding and appreciation of  
Persian-speaking countries and their cultures. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
69 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Candidate speaking examination record form (CS2) 71 
Appendix 2: Grammar list 72 
Appendix 3: Vocabulary list 76 
Appendix 4: The context for the development of this qualification 148 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 150 
Appendix 6: Codes 151 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
70 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
71 
Appendix 1: Candidate speaking examination record form (CS2) 
A separate form must be submitted for Foundation-tier and Higher-tier candidates. Please indicate the tier below. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 1PN0:       2F/2H*                     (*Please delete as appropriate) 
Centre name:  Centre number:  
 
Candidate name and number Declaration and permissions signature 
and date* 
Role play Picture-
based 
discussion 
Conversation 
(1)                  (2) 
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
Teacher name Declaration and permissions signature 
and date* 
        
            
 
*I declare that the above examinations have been carried out in line with Pearson and JCQ documentation for the conduct of the examinations and agree to 
this work being used to support teachers and examiners. 
Please photocopy and continue on a separate sheet as necessary. Please do not write in shaded boxes – these areas are for Pearson Examiner use 
only. A ‘Word’ version of this form is available on our website to facilitate administration in centres. 
 

 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
72 
Appendix 2: Grammar list 
GCSE students will be expected to have acquired knowledge and understanding of Persian 
grammar during their course. In the examination they will be required to apply their 
knowledge and understanding, drawing from the following lists. The examples in brackets are 
indicative, not exclusive. For structures marked (R) only receptive knowledge is required. 
Persian (Foundation tier) 
Nouns: 
● verbal nouns (gerunds) 
● simple and compound nouns 
● abstract nouns and concrete nouns 
● plural and singular, marker for plural and irregular plurals, plural noun 
● Ezafe (genitive) used as a possessive/adjectival link/prepositional marker 
● definite/indefinite 
Articles: 
definite – including use of را marker for definite direct object) 
indefinite (ﮏ ﻣرد ، ﻣردی ﯾ ) 
partitive (ﺗﻣﺎمِ –ﺑﻌﺿﯽ از)  
Adjectives: 
position of adjectives 
demonstrative (اﯾن ،آن ) 
compound adjective (دلﺳﻧﮓ -ﺳرﺑﻠﻧد ) 
comparative and superlative 
irregular forms of comparative and superlative (ﺧوب -ﺑﮭﺗر/ زﯾﺎد، ﺑﺳﯾﺎر -ﺑﯾﺷﺗر ) 
expressing ‘ﺗﺎafter a comparative (ﯽآﻓﺗﺎﺑ)در ﺗﺎﺑﺳﺗﺎن ھوا ﺑﯾﺷﺗر ﺑﺎراﻧﯽ ﺑود ﺗﺎ!R) 
expressing ‘ازafter a superlative (ﺗرﯾن ﺧواھرھﺎی روی زﻣﯾن اﺳت.ﺧواھرم از ﻣﮭرﺑﺎنR) 
Adverbs: 
adverbs of time and place 
position of adverbs 
Numbers, quantity, dates and time: 
all cardinal and ordinal numbers 
addition, division, multiplication, subtraction 
dates and times (months, seasons, days of the week) 
expressing age 
Quantifiers/intensifiers: 
(ﭼﻧد، ﭼﻧدﯾن، ﺗﻌدادی، ﻣﻘداری )
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
73 
Pronouns: 
personal: all subjects 
possessive pronouns 
object personal pronouns: direct and indirect 
position and order of object pronouns 
demonstrative pronouns 
Verbs: 
infinitive/present stem/past stem 
all persons of the verb, singular and plural 
conjugation of verbs and verbal ending 
mode of address: formal and informal 
negative forms 
past simple/past continuous 
present simple/present continuous 
future 
auxiliary verbs (
 ﺧواﺳﺗن/ داﺷﺗن ﺑودن  )
Prepositions: 
common prepositions 
prepositional phrases (R) 
Conjunctions: 
common coordinating conjunctions (ﺎ و/اﻣﺎ/ ﯾ ) 
common subordinating conjunctions درﺻورﺗﯽ ﮐﮫ / از آﻧﺟﺎﯾﯾﮑﮫ/ وﻗﺗﯽ(R) 
interjection (/ای ی/ﯾﺎ آ R) 
Word order: 
● sentence (interrogative, negative, affirmative) 
● simple and compound sentences 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
74 
Persian (Higher tier) 
All grammar and structures listed for Foundation tier, as well as: 
Adjectives: 
participle (R) 
interrogative ( ﮐﺗﺎب ﮐدام )
used as adverbs )ﻣدآ ﺑﭼﮫ، ﺗﺷﻧﮫ از ﻣدرﺳﮫ(R) 
expressing ‘ﺗﺎafter a comparative ( )ﺑﺎراﻧﯽ ﺑود ﺗﺎ آﻓﺗﺎﺑﯽدر ﺗﺎﺑﺳﺗﺎن ھوا ﺑﯾﺷﺗر!  
expressing ‘ازafter a superlative (ﺗرﯾن ﺧواھرھﺎی روی زﻣﯾن اﺳتﺧواھرم از ﻣﮭرﺑﺎن. ) 
Adverbs: 
common adverbial phrases )ﺷﺑﺎﻧﮫ روز/ ﺳﺎل ﺗﺎ ﺳﺎل(  
Numbers, quantity, dates and time: 
fractions, decimals 
percentage 
recurring numerals  
( )ھﻔﺗﮫ ای ﯾﮑﺑﺎر، ھر دو ﻣﺎه ﯾﮏ ﺑﺎر، ﯾﮏ روز در ﻣﯾﺎن، ﺳﮫ ﺳﺎﻋت ﺑﮫ ﺳﮫ ﺳﺎﻋت   
approximate numbers (دو ﺳﮫ روز/ ﯾﮑﯽ دو روز )
measures (length, width, height) 
classifiers used with numbers (R) 
دوﯾﺳت دﺳﺗﮕﺎه آﭘﺎرﺗﻣﺎن، ﯾﮏ دﺳت ﮐت وﭼﮭﺎر ﺗﺎ ﻗﻠم، ﭘﻧﺞ ﺟﻠد ﮐﺗﺎب، ده ﻓروﻧد ھواﭘﯾﻣﺎ، ﺷﻠوار  
Pronouns: 
reflexive pronouns )ﺧود، ﺧوﯾش، ﺧوﯾﺷﺗن(  
interrogative pronouns )/ﮐدام/ ﭼﻧد/ ﭼﮫ  ﮐﮫ/ ﮐِﯽ/ ﭼﮫ ﮐﺳﯽ/ ﮐﺟﺎ/ ﭼرا(  
Verbs: 
infinitive/past participle/present participle 
passive voice 
present perfect 
past perfect 
imperative 
impersonal verbs (ﺑﺎﯾﺳﺗن/ ﺗواﻧﺳﺗنR) 
subjunctive forms (past, present and perfect) )رﻓﺗم / ﺑﺎﯾد ﺑروم/ ﺷﺎﯾد رﻓﺗﮫ ﺑﺎﺷدﺑﺎﯾد ﻣﯽ(R) 
relative clause (ﻣردی ﮐﮫ آﻧﺟﺎ ﻧﺷﺳﺗﮫ اﺳت، ﭘدر ﻣن اﺳت )
Conditionals: 
possible present/future (ﮔوﯾم. اﮔر او را دﯾدی، ﺑﮫ او ﺑﮕوﻣﯽاﮔر او را ﺑﺑﯾﻧم، ﺑﮫ او. ) 
impossible past )ﮔﻔﺗمدﯾدم / دﯾده ﺑودم ﺑﮫ او ﻣﯽو را ﻣﯽاﮔر ا (R) 
Prepositions: 
● verb preposition )آﻣوﺧﺗن ﺑﮫ / آﻣوﺧﺗن از(  
● prepositional phrases ) درﻣﻘﺎﺑل/ درﺑﺎره/ ﺑﮫ ﺟﺎی/ ﺑﺎ وﺟود/ در ﻣﯾﺎن(   
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
75 
Conjunctions: 
common subordinating conjunctions درﺻورﺗﯽ ﮐﮫ / از آﻧﺟﺎﯾﯾﮑﮫ/ وﻗﺗﯽ( ) 
interjection (ای/ آی/ ﯾﺎ )
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
76 
Appendix 3: Vocabulary list 
The following vocabulary list is intended to assist teachers in planning their work. It provides 
the core generic vocabulary that all students will need to acquire. It is an essential 
vocabulary list that students should refer to and build on when preparing for the duration of 
their study for the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Persian. 
However, students entered for the Foundation tier are required to understand and respond to 
common or familiar words and/or forms of words that are not on the vocabulary list. 
Similarly, students entered for the Higher tier are required to understand and respond to 
common or familiar words and/or forms of words that are not on the vocabulary list and 
which are less common or familiar than those used in relation to Foundation-tier 
assessments. 
Word lists 
Section 1: High-frequency language 
Common verbs 
Common adjectives 
Common adverbs 
Prepositions 
Colours 
Numbers 
Ordinal numbers 
Quantities and measures 
Some useful connecting words 
Time expressions 
Times of day 
Days of the week 
Months and seasons of the year 
Question words 
Other useful expressions 
Other high-frequency words 
Countries 
Continents 
Nationalities 
Administrative regions of Iran with English equivalents 
Areas/mountains/seas 
Social conventions 
Language used in dialogue and messages 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
77 
Section 2: Topic-specific language 
Although words are listed under specific topic headings, the words are not exclusive to those 
particular headings. Many words also relate to other themes but may be listed in only one 
theme. Many common verbs are given in the verb list, with a few others included under a 
specific topic. 
Each topic has been highlighted in bold. 
All topics must be studied in the context of both the student’s home country and 
that of countries and communities where Persian is spoken. 
 
Theme 1: Identity and culture 
Who am I?: relationships; when I was younger; what my friends and family are like; what 
makes a good friend; interests; socialising with friends and family; role models 
Daily life: customs and everyday life; food and drink; shopping; social media and 
technology (use of, advantages and disadvantages) 
Cultural life: celebrations and festivals; reading; music; sport; film and television 
 
Theme 2: Local area, holiday and travel 
Holidays: preferences, experiences and destinations 
Travel and tourist transactions: travel and accommodation; asking for help and dealing 
with problems; directions; eating out; shopping 
Town, region and country: weather; places to see; things to do 
 
Theme 3: School 
What school is like: school types; school day; subjects; rules and pressures; celebrating 
success 
School activities: school trips; events and exchanges 
 
Theme 4: Future aspirations, study and work 
Using languages beyond the classroom: forming relationships; travel; employment 
Ambitions: further study; volunteering; training 
Work: jobs; careers and professions 
 
Theme 5: International and global dimension 
Bringing the world together: sports events; music events; campaigns and good causes 
Environmental issues: being ‘green’; access to natural resources 
 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
78 
Section 1: High-frequency language 
Common verbs 
to achieve ﺑدﺳت آوردن 
to accept ﭘذﯾرﻓﺗن/ﻗﺑولﮐردن  
to ache درد ﮐردن  
to add ﺟﻣﻊﮐردن/اﺿﺎﻓﮫﮐردن/اﻓزودن   
to advise ﻧﺻﯾﺣتﮐردن/راھﻧﻣﺎ ﯾﯽ ﮐردن  
to affect ﺗﺄﺛﯾرﮔذاﺷﺗن 
to agree ﻣواﻓﻘت ﮐردنراﺿﯽ ﺷدن  
to allow اﺟﺎزه دادن/ ﮔُذاﺷﺗن 
to announce اِﻋﻼم ﮐردن 
to answer/reply ﺟواب دادن/ﭘﺎﺳﺦ دادن  
to argue اﺳﺗدﻻل/دﻋواﮐردن/دﻟﯾل آوردن/ ﺟرو ﺑﺣث  
ﮐردن  
to arrest دﺳﺗﮕﯾر ﮐردن 
to arrive رﺳﯾدن 
to ask ﺳوالﮐردن/ﭘُرﺳﯾدن  
to ask (for something) درﺧواﺳتﮐردن   
to ask pardon/to apologise ﻋذر ﺧواﺳﺗن 
to attempt ﮐوﺷش ﮐردن 
to bathe ﺣﻣﺎمﮐردن/آﺑﺗﻧﯽﮐردن  
to be ﺑودن 
to be able to ﻗﺎدرﺑودن/ﺗواﻧﺳﺗن 
to be accepted ﻗﺑول ﺷدن 
to be afraid ﺗرﺳﯾدن 
to bear ﺗﺣﻣل ﮐردن 
to beat زدن/ﮐﺗﮏ زدن 
to be born ﻣﺗوّﻟد ﺷدن  
to be careful اﺣﺗﯾﺎط  ﮐردن  
to be ecstatic/over the moon ﺳر از ﭘﺎ ﻧﺷﻧﺎﺧﺗن 
to be ill ﺑﯾﻣﺎرﺷدن/ﻣرﯾض ﺷدن 
to be in a hurry ﻋﺟﻠﮫ ﮐردن  
to be keen to learn ﻣﺷﺗﺎق ﻓراﮔﯾر ی ﺑودن  
to be expected از ﮐﺳﯽ اﻧﺗظﺎرداﺷﺗن 
to beg   ﻋﺎﺟزاﻧﮫ ﺧواھش ﮐردن/ اﻟﺗﻣﺎس ﮐردن 
to begin ﺷُروع ﮐردن 
to behave رﻓﺗﺎر ﮐردن 
to be interested in ﻋﻼﻗﮫﻣﻧد ﺑودن  
to believe ﺑﺎور ﮐردن 
to be lucky ﺧوش ﺷﺎﻧس  ﺑودن  
to be missing ﮔُم ﺷدن 
to be of use ﺑﮫ درد ﺧوردن 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
79 
Common verbs (continued)  
to be situated واﻗﻊﺷدن/ ﻗرار داﺷﺗن / ﻗرار ﮔرﻓﺗن  
to be sleepy, tired ﺧواب آﻟود ﺑودنﺧﺳﺗﮫ ﺑودن  
to be sorry ﻣﺗﺎﺳف ﺑودن  
to bet ﺷرط ﺑﺳﺗن 
to be thirsty ﺗﺷﻧﮫ ﺑودن  
to become ﺷدن ﺗﺑدﯾل  ﺷدن  
to believe ﺑﺎورﮐردن 
to betray ﺧﯾﺎﻧت ﮐردن 
to book از ﻗﺑل ﺟﺎ ﮔرﻓﺗن رزرو ﮐردن  
to borrow ﻗرض ﮐردن/  وام ﮔرﻓﺗن   
to break ﺷﮑﺳﺗن 
to breath ﻧﻔس ﮐﺷﯾدن 
to bring up/to raise ﺑزرگ ﮐردن 
to build ﺳﺎﺧﺗن 
to buy ﺧرﯾدن 
to call ﺻدا ﮐردن  ﺻدا زدن  
to camp اردو زدن 
to call (telephone call) ﺗﻣﺎس ﮔرﻓﺗن  
to care ﻣواظﺑت اﻋﺗﻧﺎ  ﮐردن  
to carry ﺑُردن ﺣﻣل ﮐردن  
to cancel ﻣﻧﺳوخ ﮐردن /ﻟﻐو ﮐردن /ﻓﺳﺦ  ﮐردن  
to catch ﮔرﻓﺗن 
to catch cold ﺳرﻣﺎ ﺧوردن 
to cause inconvenience ﻣزاﺣم ﺷدن 
to change ﺗﻐﯾﯾر دادن/ ﻋوض ﮐردن  
to chat ﮔﻔﺗﮕوﮐردن  
to check ﺑررﺳﯽﮐردن/ رﺳﯾدﮔﯽ ﮐردن  
to choose اﻧﺗﺧﺎبﮐردن  
to clean ﺗﻣﯾزﮐردن ﭘﺎک ﮐردن  
to click (ICT) ﮐﻠﯾﮏ ﮐردن  
to close/shut  ﺑﺳﺗن/ ﺗﻌطﯾل ﮐردن  
to collect ﺟﻣﻊآوردن/ﺟﻣﻊﮐردن  
to come آﻣدن/ﺗﺷرﯾف آوردن 
to complain ﺷِﮑﺎﯾت ﮐردن 
to complete ﺗﻣﺎم ﮐردن/ﮐﺎﻣل ﮐردن/ﭘُر ﮐردن 
to congratulate ﺗﺑرﯾﮏ ﮔُﻔﺗن ﺷﺎدﺑﺎش ﮔﻔﺗن  
to consider درﻧظرﮔرﻓﺗن 
to contact ﺗﻣﺎسﮔرﻓﺗن  
to continue اداﻣﮫدادن  
to continue/carry on اداﻣﮫ دادن/دﻧﺑﺎل ﮐردن 
to converse ﮔﻔﺗﮕو ﮐردن 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
80 
Common verbs (continued)  
to convince ﻗﺎﻧﻊ ﻣﺗﻘﺎﻋد  ﮐردن  
to cook آﺷﭘزیﮐردن/ﭘﺧﺗن  
to cope/manage/get by اِداره ﮐردن/ ﻣدﯾرﯾت ﮐردن  
to cooperate ھﻣﮑﺎری ﮐردن 
to copy روﻧوﯾﺳﯽ ﮐردن   
to cost ھزﯾﻧﮫ داﺷﺗن  
to cough ﺳرﻓﮫ ﮐردن 
to count on (someone) ﺷﻣردن/ روی ﮐﺳﯽ ﺣﺳﺎب ﮐردن 
to cross, go across ﻋُﺑورﮐردن 
to cry    ﮔرﯾﮫ ﮐردن  
to cut ﺑُرﯾدن/ﻗطﻊ ﮐردن 
to deceive ﮔول زدن/ ﻓرﯾب دادن 
to decide ﺗﺻﻣﯾم ﮔرﻓﺗن/ﻋزم  ﮐردن  
to decrease ﮐﺎھش ﯾﺎﻓﺗن / ﮐم ﺷدن  
to damage ﺻدﻣﮫ زدن/ﺿرر زدن 
to dare ﺟُرات ﮐردن 
to denote دِﻻﻟت ﮐردن 
to deny اﻧﮑﺎر ﮐردن 
to depart/leave ﺗرک ﮐردن  
to depart/leave رواﻧﮫ ﺷدن/ﻋزﯾﻣت ﮐردن 
to depend ﺑﺳﺗﮕﯽ داﺷﺗن 
to describe ﺗوﺻﯾفﮐردن  
to deserve ﺳزاوار ﺑودن /  اﺳﺗﺣﻘﺎق  داﺷﺗن  
to destroy ﺧراب ﮐردن/ﻧﺎﺑُود ﮐردن 
to die ﻣُردن/ﻓوت ﮐردن/وﻓﺎت ﯾﺎﻓﺗن 
to disagree ﻣُﺧﺎﻟﻔت ﮐردن 
to disappear ﻧﺎﭘدﯾد ﺷُدن 
to discourage دِﻟﺳرد ﮐردن 
to discover ﮐﺷف ﮐردن 
to discuss/to negotiate ﺑﺣث/ﻣذاﮐره ﮐردن 
to divide ﺗﻘﺳﯾم ﮐردن 
to do ﮐردن/اﻧﺟﺎم دادن 
to draw ﻧﻘﺎﺷﯽ ﮐردن/ ﮐﺷﯾدن  
to draw a match در ﻣﺳﺎﺑﻘﮫ ﻣﺳﺎوی ﺷدن 
to drink ﻧوﺷﯾدن / آﺷﺎﻣﯾدن 
to drive راﻧﻧدﮔﯽﮐردن/ راﻧدن  
to earn ﮐﺳب ﮐردن/   ﺑدﺳت آوردن  
to eat ﺧوردن 
to emphasise/to stress ﺗﺎﮐﯾد ﮐردن 
to employ اﺳﺗﺧدام ﮐردن 
to encourage دِﻟﮕرم ﮐردن/ﺗﺷوﯾﻖ ﮐردن 
to end ﭘﺎﯾﺎندادن  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
81 
Common verbs (continued)  
to enjoy ﻟذتﺑُردن/  ﺑرﺧوردار/ﺑﮭرهﻣﻧد ﺷدن  
to enjoy oneself ﻟذتﺑُردن  
to enter/go in واردﺷدن 
to escape ﮔرﯾﺧﺗن/  ﻓرار ﮐردن  
to examine اِﻣﺗﺣﺎن ﮐردن 
to exercise ورزِش ﮐردن/ ﺗﻣرﯾن ﮐردن    
to expect اﻧﺗظﺎر داﺷﺗن / ﺗوﻗﻊ داﺷﺗن 
to explain ﺗوﺿﯾﺢ دادن / ﺷرح دادن  
to exploit اﺳﺗﺧراج ﮐردن/ ﺑﮭرهﺑرداری ﮐردن از  
to fall/to fall over اﻓﺗﺎدن/ زﻣﯾن ﺧوردن  
to fail (exam) ﻣردودﺷدن  
to fall asleep ﺑﮫ ﺧوابرﻓﺗن  
to fear ﺗرﺳﯾدن 
to feed, nourish ﺧوراک دادن/ ﻏذا دادن  
to feel اِﺣﺳﺎس ﮐردن/ِﺣس ﮐردن 
to fight ﺟﻧﮕﯾدن/ﻣﺑﺎرزه ﮐردن 
to fill/fill in ﭘُرﮐردن )ﻓرم 
to find ﺟُﺳﺗن ﭘﯾدا ﮐردن   
to find out ﯾﺎﻓﺗن/ﮐﺷفﮐردن  
to finish ﺑﮫ ﭘﺎﯾﺎنرﺳﺎﻧدن/ﺗﻣﺎم ﮐردن  
to fly ﭘرﯾدن/ﭘر زدن 
to foresee ﭘﯾش ﺑﯾﻧﯽ ﮐردن 
to forget ازﯾﺎد ﺑُردن/ ﻓراﻣوشﮐردن  
to forgive ﺑﺧﺷﯾدن 
to fulfil  ﻣﺣﻘﻖ ﮐردن/ اﻧﺟﺎم دادن/ ﺗﮑﻣﯾل ﮐردن  
to get ﮔرِﻓﺗن / ﺑﮫ دﺳت آوردن  
to get angry ﻋﺻﺑﺎﻧﯽﺷدن/ﺧﺷﻣﮕﯾن ﺷدن  
to get dressed ﻟﺑﺎس)ﺑﯾرون(ﭘوﺷﯾدن 
to get fed up ﺑﮫﺗﻧﮓ آﻣدن/ ﺧﺳﺗﮫ ﺷدن  
to get in/on to (bus, car, train) ﺳوار)اﺗوﺑوس/ﻣﺎﺷﯾن/ﻗطﺎر(ﺷدن  
to get off (bus, car, train) از)اﺗوﺑوس/ﻣﺎﺷﯾن/ﻗطﺎر(ﺧﺎرج/ﭘﯾﺎده ﺷدن    
to get changed ﻟﺑﺎسﻋوض ﮐردن  
to get up ﺑﻠﻧدﺷدن/ازﺟﺎ ﺑرﺧﺎﺳﺗن/ﺑﯾدارﺷدن 
to get used to ﻋﺎدت ﮐردن 
to give دادن/اراﺋﮫﮐردن  
to give (a gift/present) )ھدﯾﮫ دادن  
to give back ﭘس دادن 
to give up دﺳت ﺑرداﺷﺗن/ دﺳت ﮐﺷﯾدن 
to go رﻓﺗن ﺗﺷرﯾف ﺑُردن  
to go (in a car) ﺗوﺳط ﺑﺎ ﻣﺎﺷﯾن رﻓﺗن/)ﺳﻔر( رﻓﺗن  
to go down ﭘﺎﯾﯾن رﻓﺗن  
to go for a walk/stroll ﭘﯾﺎده روی ﮐردن  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
82 
Common verbs (continued)  
to go out ﺑﯾرون رﻓﺗن 
to go to bed ﺑﮫ ﺑﺳﺗر/ ﺑﮫ ﺧواب رﻓﺗن   
to go up ﺑﺎﻻ رﻓﺗن 
to greet ﺳﻼم ﮐردن و اﺣواﻟﭘرﺳﯽ ﮐردن  
to grow up ﺑزرگ ﺷدن  رُﺷد  ﮐردن  
to haggle ﭼﺎﻧﮫ زدن )ﺑرای ﮔرﻓﺗن ﺗﺧﻔﯾف 
to happen ﭘﯾش آﻣدن/ اﺗﻔﺎقاﻓﺗﺎدن  
to hang آوﯾزان ﮐردن 
to harm/damage آﺳﯾب زدن  رﺳﺎﻧدن  
to hate ﺗﻧﻔرداﺷﺗن 
to have داﺷﺗن 
to have an accident ﺗﺻﺎدُف ﮐردن 
to have breakfast ﺻﺑﺣﺎﻧﮫ ﺧوردن  
to have lunch ﻧﺎھﺎرﺧوردن 
to have dinner/supper ﺷﺎم ﺧوردن  
to have to/must ﻧﺎﮔزﯾر ﺑودن  /  ﺑﺎ ﯾد   
to hear ﺷﻧﯾدن 
to help ﮐﻣﮏ ﮐردن  
to hire ﮐِراﯾﮫ ﮐردن/ ﺑﮫ ﺧدﻣت ﮔرﻓﺗن  
to hit زدن 
to hold ﮔرﻓﺗن 
to honour ﮔِراﻣﯽ داﺷﺗن 
to hope اُﻣﯾد داﺷﺗن  
to hurry ﻋﺟﻠﮫ ﮐردن  
to hurt (oneself) آزاررﺳﺎﻧدن/ ﺑدردآوردن/ اذﯾتﮐردن  
to imagine اﻧﮕﺎﺷﺗن/ﺗﺻور ﮐردن 
to improve ﺑﮭﺗرﮐردن/  ﭘﯾ ﺷرﻓت ﮐردن  
to increase اﻓزاﯾ ش دادن / زﯾﺎد ﮐردن  
to inform ﺧﺑردادن/آﮔﺎهﮐردن  
to insist ﭘﺎﻓﺷﺎری ﮐردن/ اﺻرار ﮐردن 
to intend اِرادهﮐردن/ ﻗﺻد داﺷﺗن  
to interest ﺑﮫﭼﯾزیﻋﻼﻗﮫ داﺷﺗن  
to introduce (a person) ﻣﻌرﻓﯽﮐردن/آﺷﻧﺎ ﮐردن  
to invite دﻋوت ﮐردن  
to iron اُﺗُوﮐردن 
to join ﭘﯾوﺳﺗن 
to jump ﭘرﯾدن 
to justify ﺗوﺟﯾﮫ ﮐردن 
to keep ﻧﮕﮫ داﺷﺗن 
to knock ﺿرﺑﮫ زدن  
to knock over واژﮔون ﮐردن/ ﺑر اﻧداﺧﺗن  
to know داﻧﺳﺗن/  ﺷﻧﺎﺧﺗن 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
83 
Common verbs (continued)  
to know how to ﺷﻧﺎﺧﺗن 
to land ﻓرودآﻣدن 
to last ﻣﺎﻧدن / طول ﮐﺷﯾدن 
to laugh ﺧﻧدﯾدن 
to learn ﯾﺎدﮔرﻓﺗن/ﻓرا ﮔرﻓﺗن 
to learn thoroughly  ﺑطور ﮐﺎﻣل ﯾﺎدﮔرﻓﺗن/ ﺑﮫ ﻧﺣو اﺣﺳن آﻣوﺧﺗن 
to leave (behind) ﺟﺎ ﻣﺎﻧدن/ﺑﺎﻗﯽ ﮔُذاﺷﺗن/ ﺟﺎ ﮔذاﺷﺗن 
to leave, to depart ﺗرکﮐردن/ ﻋﺎزم ﺷدن/ﻋزﯾﻣت ﮐردن  
to leave, to depart ﻋﺎزم ﺷدن/ﻋزﯾﻣت ﮐردن/ ﺗرک ﮐردن 
to lend ﻗرض دادن/ وام دادن  
to lie دروغ  ﮔﻔﺗن  
to let ﮔُذاﺷﺗن/اِﺟﺎزه/اِﺟﺎره دادن 
to lie down ﻟﻣﯾدن دِراز ﮐﺷﯾدن  
to light, turn/switch on روﺷنﮐردن  
to like دوﺳتداﺷﺗن/  ﻣﯾل داﺷﺗن  
to listen ﺷﻧﯾدن/ﮔوشدادن  
to live زﯾﺳﺗن/زﻧدﮔﯽﮐردن  
to look at ﻧِﮕﺎه ﮐردن 
to look after/mind (child, dog) ﻣواظﺑتﮐردن/ﻧﮕﮭداﺷﺗن/ﻧﮕﮭداری ﮐردن  
to look for دُﻧﺑﺎلﭼﯾزیﮔﺷﺗن/ ﺟﺳﺗﺟو ﮐردن  
to look like, to resemble ﺷﺑﺎھت داﺷﺗن/ ﻣﺎﻧﻧد ﺑودن  
to lose ﮔُمﮐردن  
to lose ازدﺳتدادن  
to love ﻋِﺷﻖ ﮐردن/ ﻋِﺷﻖ ورزﯾدن / دوﺳت داﺷﺗن  
to make mistake اِﺷﺗﺑﺎه ﮐردن 
to manage (business) اِدارهﮐردن/ﻣدﯾرﯾت ﮐردن  
to manage, to cope ازﻋﮭده ﺑرآﻣدن / ﺗﺣﻣل ﮐردن  
to marry اِزدواج ﮐردن 
to mean to (do) ﻗﺻد داﺷﺗن/  ﺧﯾﺎل داﺷﺗن  
to meet ﻣُﻼﻗﺎت ﮐردن  
to mention اِﺷﺎره ﮐردن 
to miss  ﻓﺎﻗد ﺑودن /  دﻟﺗﻧﮓ ﺷدن 
to miss (train, bus etc) ازدﺳتدادن )اﺗوﺑوس/ﺗرن(  
to move ﺣرﮐت ﮐردن 
to name ﻧﺎم ﮔُذاﺷﺗن 
to need اﺣﺗﯾﺎج داﺷﺗن/  ﻧﯾﺎز داﺷﺗن  
to notice ﻣﻼﺣظﮫ ﮐردن ﺷﻧﺎﺧﺗن/ ﻣﺗوﺟﮫ ﺷدن  
to offer ﺗﻘدﯾم ﮐردن/ ﭘﯾﺷﻧﮭﺎد دادن  
to obey اِطﺎﻋت ﮐردن 
to observe ﻣﺷﺎھده ﮐردن  
to obtain ﺑﮫ دﺳت آوردن/ﮔﯾر آوردن  
to occur واﻗﻊ ﺷدن/ﭘﯾش آﻣدن 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
84 
Common verbs (continued)  
to open ﺑﺎزﮐردن 
to order دﺳﺗُوردادن 
to organise  ﻧظم دادن/ﺳﺎزﻣﺎﻧدھﯽﮐردن  
to park ﭘﺎرک ﮐردن /اﯾﺳﺗﺎدن  
to pass ﮔُذﺷﺗن 
to pay ﭘرداﺧﺗن ﭘُولدادن  
to permit اِﺟﺎزه دادن 
to persist ﭘﺎﻓِﺷﺎری ﮐردن 
to phone ﺗﻠﻔن ﮐردن  
to pick up ﺑرداﺷﺗن 
to place ﮔذاﺷﺗن/  ﺟﺎ ی دادن  
to play ﺑﺎزیﮐردن  
to please ﺧوﺷﺣﺎل ﮐردن/  ﺷﺎد ﮐردن  /ﺧرﺳﻧد  ﮐردن  
to point out ﻧﺷﺎن دادن/ )ﺑﺎ دﺳت و اﻧﮕﺷت( اﺷﺎره ﮐردن 
to pop in ﺳر زدن 
to possess ﻣﺎﻟﮏ ﺑودن/ در اﺧﺗﯾﺎر داﺷﺗن دارا ﺑودن  
to pour رﯾﺧﺗن 
to prefer ﺗرﺟﯾﺢ دادن  
to present اراﺋﮫ دادن/اھدا ﮐردن 
to press ﻓِﺷﺎر دادن 
to pretend واﻧﻣود ﮐردن 
to prevent ﺑﺎز داﺷﺗن/ﺟﻠوﮔﯾری ﮐردن 
to print ﭼﺎپ ﮐردن 
to progress ﭘﯾﺷرﻓت ﮐردن 
to produce ﺗوﻟﯾد ﮐردن  
to promise ﻗُول دادن 
to provoke ﺑراﻧﮕﯾﺧﺗن 
to pull ﮐﺷﯾدن  
to punish ﺗﻧﺑﯾﮫ ﮐردن 
to push  ﻓﺷﺎر دادن/  ﻓﺷردن/ ھل دادن  
to put ﮔُذاﺷﺗن 
to put back ﺳر ﺟﺎﯾش ﮔذاﺷﺗن  
to put on ﭘوﺷﯾدن 
to put out ﺧﺎﻣوش ﮐردن 
to put up with ﺳﺎﺧﺗن/ ﺗﺣﻣل ﮐردن 
to question ﺳوال ﮐردن 
to rain )ﺑﺎران( ﺑﺎرﯾدن 
to raise ﺑُﻠﻧد ﮐردن 
to reach رﺳﯾدن 
to read ﺧواﻧدن 
to receive ﺑدﺳت آﻣدن  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
85 
Common verbs (continued)  
to recognise ﺷِﻧﺎﺧﺗن 
to recommend ﺳﻔﺎرش/ﺗوﺻﯾﮫ ﮐردن 
to recover ﺑﮭﺑود ﯾﺎﻓﺗن/ ﺗرﻣﯾم ﮐردن/ دوﺑﺎره ﺑدﺳت آوردن 
to refund ﻣﺟدداً ﭘرداﺧﺗن/ ﭘول ﭘس ﮔرﻓﺗن/ﭘس دادن  
to refuse رد ﮐردن 
to regret, be sorry ﭘﺷﯾﻣﺎن ﺷدن/ﺗﺎﺳف ﺧوردن/اﻓﺳوس ﺧوردن  
to remain/remain behind ﻣﺎﻧدن/ﻋﻘب ﻣﺎﻧدن  
to remember ﺑﮫﺧﺎطرآوردن/ ﺑﮫﺧﺎطرداﺷﺗن/ﺑﮫ ﯾﺎد ﭼﯾزی 
اﻓﺗﺎدن  
to remind ﯾﺎد آوری ﮐردن 
to rent/to hire ﮐراﯾﮫ دادن/  اﺟﯾر ﮐردن  
to repair ﺗﻌﻣﯾرﮐردن 
to repeat ﺗﮑرارﮐردن 
to replace ﻋوض ﮐردن  
to reply ﺟواب ﭘﺎﺳﺦ دادن  
to request ﺧواھش ﮐردن/ درﺧواﺳت ﮐردن 
to require ﻻزم داﺷﺗن 
to research ﭘژوھش ﮐردن  
to reserve رزرو ﮐردن/  اﻧدوﺧﺗن  
to resign اِﺳﺗﻌﻔﺎ ﮐردن دادن  
to resist اﯾﺳﺗﺎدﮔﯽ ﮐردن )در ﺑراﺑر 
to respect اِﺣﺗرام ﮔُذاﺷﺗن ﻣﺣﺗرم داﺷﺗن  
to rest اﺳﺗراﺣت ﮐردن  
to return/to go back ﺑﺎز ﮔﺷﺗن ﻋﻘب رﻓﺗن  
to return, to take back ﭘس ﮔرﻓﺗن/ ﭘس دادن 
to ride a horse اﺳب ﺳواریﮐردن  
to ring (a bell) زﻧﮓ زدن  
to rise ﺑُﻠﻧد ﺷُدن ﺑﺎﻻ آﻣدن  
to run دوﯾدن 
to save ﭘساﻧدازﮐردن/ ﻧﮕﺎه داﺷﺗن  
to say ﮔﻔﺗن 
to say prayer ﻧﻣﺎزﮔُذاﺷﺗن/ ﻧﻣﺎز ﺧواﻧدن  
to see دﯾدن 
to seem/to appear ﺑﻧظرآﻣدن/ ﺑﮫ ﻧظررﺳﯾدن  
to sell ﻓروﺧﺗن 
to send ﻓرﺳﺗﺎدن 
to serve ﮐﺷﯾدنﻏذا /  ﺧدﻣت ﮐردن  
to shake ﺗﮑﺎن دادن ﻟرزاﻧدن  
to show ﻧﺷﺎن دادن/ ﻧﻣﺎﯾش دادن  
to sign اﻣﺿﺎﮐردن 
to sing آواز ﺧواﻧدن 
to sit ﻧِﺷَ ﺳﺗَ ن  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
86 
Common verbs (continued)  
to sit down ﻧِﺷَ ﺳﺗَ ن  
to skate اﺳﮑﯾت ﮐردن 
to ski اﺳﮑﯽ ﮐردن 
to sleep ﺧواﺑﯾدن 
to smile ﻟﺑﺧﻧد زدن  
to smoke ﺳﯾﮕﺎر ﮐﺷﯾدن  
to sneeze ﻋطﺳﮫ ﮐردن 
to solve (a problem) ﺣل ﮐردن 
to speak ﺻﺣﺑت ﮐردن 
to spend (money) ﺻرف ﮐردنﺧرج ﮐردن  
to spend (time) ﮔذراﻧدن وﻗت 
to squash ل◌ه ﮐردن  /   ﮐوﺑﯾدن و ﻧرم  ﮐردن  
to stand ﺑﮫ ﭘﺎ اﯾﺳﺗﺎدن/ اﯾﺳﺗﺎدن 
to stand up از ﺟﺎ ﺑرﺧﺎﺳﺗن 
to start ﺷُروع ﮐردن 
to stay اﻗﺎﻣت ﮐردن/  ﻣﺎﻧدن/  ﺗوﻗف ﮐردن  
to steal دزدﯾدن 
to stop ﻣﺗوﻗف ﺳﺎﺧﺗن 
to stroll, go for a walk ﻗدم زدن  
to study (a subject) درس ﺧواﻧدن ﻣطﺎﻟﻌﮫ ﮐردن  
to study (be a student) ﺑررﺳﯽ ﮐردن / ﻓرا ﮔرﻓﺗن  
to succeed ﻣوﻓﻖ  ﺷدن/  ﮐﺎﻣﯾﺎب ﺷدن  
to sue ﺗﻌﻘﯾب ﮐردن/ ﻗﺎﻧوﻧﯽ ﭘﯾﮕﯾری ﮐردن  
to sunbathe ﺣﻣﺎم آﻓﺗﺎب ﮔرﻓﺗن  
to suppose ﭘﻧداﺷﺗن/ ﻓرض ﮐردن/ ﺧﯾﺎل ﮐردن  
to spread ﭘﮭن ﮐردن ﻣﻧﺗﺷر ﺷدن  
to swim ﺷﻧﺎ ﮐردن 
to switch on روﺷن ﮐردن وﺳﺎﯾل ﺑرﻗﯽ 
to switch off ﺧﺎﻣوش ﮐردن 
to take ﺑرداﺷﺗن/ ﮔرﻓﺗن   
to take off (clothes etc) ﻟﺑﺎس ﮐﻧدن  
to take off (plane) از ﺟﺎ ﺑرﺧﺎﺳﺗن )ھواﭘﯾﻣﺎ 
to talk ﺻﺣﺑت ﮐردن/ﺣرف زدن 
to taste ﻣزه داﺷﺗنﻣزه ﮐردن/ ﭼﺷﯾدن  
to teach ﻣﻌﻠﻣﯽ ﯾﺎ  ﺗدرﯾس ﮐردن/  آﻣوﺧﺗن  
to tell/recount ﺗﻌرﯾف ﮐردن  
to tell the truth راﺳت ﮔُﻔﺗن 
to tell/to say ﺑﯾﺎن ﮐردن/   ﺻﺣﺑت ﮐردن  
to thank ﺳﭘﺎﺳﮕزاری ﮐردن/  ﺗﺷﮑر  ﮐردن  
to think (about) ﻓﮑر ﮐردن/  ﺧﯾﺎل داﺷﺗن  
to throw ﭘرﺗﺎب ﮐردن/  اﻧداﺧﺗن  
to tie ﺑﺳﺗن 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
87 
Common verbs (continued)  
to touch ﻟﻣس ﮐردن/ دﺳت زدن/  ﻣﺗﺄ ﺛر ﮐردن  
to travel ﺳﻔر ﮐردن/ﻣُﺳﺎﻓرت ﮐردن 
to transfer اﻧﺗﻘﺎل دادن / ﻣﻧﺗﻘل ﮐردن  
to translate ﺗرﺟﻣﮫ ﮐردن 
to treat (medical) ﻣﻌﺎﻟﺟﮫ ﮐردن/ ﻣداوا ﮐردن 
to trouble زﺣﻣت دادن/ ﺑﮫ زﺣﻣت اﻧداﺧﺗن 
to trust اِﻋﺗﻣﺎد ﮐردن 
to try ﺳﻌﯽ ﮐردن 
to turn ﭘﯾﭼﯾدن / ﭼرﺧﯾدن  
to turn on روﺷن ﮐردن 
to understand ﻓﮭﻣﯾدن 
to use اﺳﺗﻔﺎده ﺑردن 
to utter ﺑر زﺑﺎن آوردن 
to vacuum ﺑﺎ  ﺟﺎروی ﺑرﻗ ﯽ ﺗﻣﯾز ﮐردن  
to visit (person) ﺑﺎزدﯾدﮐردن  
to visit (place) دﯾدن ﮐردن/   زﯾﺎرت ﮐردن  
to wait for در اﻧﺗظﺎر ﺑودن 
to wake up ﺑﯾدار ﺷدن / ﮐردن 
to walk راه رﻓﺗن/ ﻗدم زدن 
to want ﺧواﺳﺗن 
to warn آﮔﺎه ﮐردن / ﺧﺑردار ﮐردن ھﺷدار دادن  
to wash ﺷﺳﺗن 
to wash (oneself) ﺷﺳﺗن ﺳروﺑدن 
to wash (dishes/laundry) ﺷﺳﺗن ظروف / ﻟﺑﺎس 
to waste ﺗﻠف ﮐردن 
to watch ﺗﻣﺎﺷﺎ ﮐردن 
to wear ﭘوﺷﯾدن 
to weigh (have weight) وزن ﮐردن 
to win ﺑردن/ ﺑرﻧده ﺷدن 
to wish آرزو ﮐردن/ﺧواھش ﮐردن 
to work ﮐﺎر ﮐردن 
to wrap ﭘﯾﭼﯾدن 
to wrestle ﮐُﺷﺗﯽ ﮔرﻓﺗن 
to write ﻧوﺷﺗن 
Common adjectives 
accurate دﻗﯾﻖ 
active ﭘُر ﮐﺎر/  ﻓﻌﺎل  
alike, the same  ﯾﮑﺳﺎن/ ﻣﺎﻧﻧد/ ﻣﺷﺎﺑﮫ  
any sort of ھر ﻧوع  
bad ﺑد 
beautiful ﻗﺷﻧﮓ 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
88 
Common adjectives (continued)  
better ﺑﮭﺗر 
big, large ﺑزرگ وﺳﯾﻊ/ ﻓراوان  
boring ﺧﺳﺗﮫ ﮐﻧﻧده/ ﯾﮏ ﻧواﺧت  /ﮐﺳل  ﮐﻧﻧده  
broken ﺷﮑﺳﺗﮫ 
calm آرام ﺧُو ﺳرد  
careful ﻣواظب/ ﻣراﻗب  
careless ﺑﯽدﻗت  
cheap  ارزان/  ﮐم ارزش  
clean ﺗﻣﯾز 
common ﻣﺷﺗرک 
complete ﮐﺎﻣل  
complex, complicated  ﺑُﻐرﻧﺞ /ﭘﯾﭼﯾده 
correct دُرُﺳت/ ﺻﺣﯾﺢ  
corrupt ﻓﺎﺳد 
cosy ﮔرم و ﻧَ رم  
covered ﭘوﺷﯾده 
crowded ﺷُﻠوغ 
cruel ﺑﯽ رﺣم  
curious ﮐُﻧﺟﮑﺎو  
cut ﺑُرﯾده 
damp ﻧمدار/ ﻧﻣﻧﺎک  
dangerous  ﺧطرﻧﺎک/ ﻣﮭ ﯾب  
dark  ﺗﺎرﯾﮏ  
deep ﻋﻣﯾﻖ 
depressed اﻓﺳُرده 
desperate ﻧﺎ اﻣﯾد 
devoted ﻓداﮐﺎر 
difficult ﺳﺧت/ﻣُﺷﮑل/دُﺷوار 
dishonest ﻧﺎدرﺳت 
dry ﺧُﺷﮏ  
easy آﺳﺎن 
empty ﺧﺎﻟﯽ  
enormous ھﻧﮕﻔت 
every ھر 
exalted ارﺟﻣﻧد 
excellent ﻋﺎﻟﯽ  
exciting, entertaining ھﯾﺟﺎن اﻧﮕﯾز  
expensive ﮔران 
expert/skilled اﺳﺗﺎد/ ﮐﺎرﺷﻧﺎس/ ﻣﺎھر 
fair ﻣﻧﺻﻔﺎﻧﮫ 
famous ﻣﺷﮭور/  ﺑرﺟﺳﺗﮫ/  ﻣﺗﻣﺎ ﯾز  
fashionable ﺷﯾﮏ و ﻣد/  ﻣد روز  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
89 
Common adjectives (continued)  
fast ﺗﻧد / ﺳرﯾﻊ 
fat ﭼﺎق 
favourite ﻣطﻠوب  
final ﻧﮭﺎ ﯾﯽ  
foolish اﺣﻣﻖ/اﺣﻣﻘﺎﻧﮫ 
foreign ﺧﺎرﺟﯽ / اﺟﻧﺑﯽ 
former ﺳﺎﺑﻖ/ ﻗﺑﻠ ﯽ/ ﭘﯾﺷﯾن  
free (at no cost) ﻣﺟﺎﻧﯽ  
free (unoccupied, available) ﺧﺎﻟﯽ  
friendly دوﺳﺗﺎﻧﮫ، رﻓﺎﻗت آﻣﯾز 
frightening ﺗرﺳﻧﺎک 
full ﺗﻣﺎم، ﮐﺎﻣل، ﭘُر  
fun, amusing ﺗﻔرﯾﺣﯽ/ ﻣُ ﻔرّ ح/ ﺳرﮔرم ﮐﻧﻧده  
funny (comical) ﻣﺳﺧره، ﺧﻧده دار  
generous ﺑﺧﺷﻧده/ ﺳَ ﺧﯽ  
genuine ﺣﻘﯾﻘﯽ/ اﺻل/ واﻗﻌﯽ  
good ﺧوب/ﺧﯾر 
good (well behaved) ﻧﯾﮏ ﺷﺎ ﯾﺳﺗﮫ  
grateful ﺳﭘﺎﺳﮕزار/ ﻣﺗﺷﮑر/ ﻣﻣﻧون  
great ﻣﻌرﮐﮫ/ﻋﺎﻟﯽ ﺑزرگ  
happy, fortunate ﺧوﺷﺣﺎل/ﺧوﺷﺑﺧت/ﺧُوش  
hard (not soft) ﺳﺧت  
hard, difficult ﻣﺷﮑل 
hardworking ﺳﺧت ﮐﺎر ﭘُرﮐﺎر  
harmful ﻣوذی/ ﻣﺿر/ زﯾﺎن آور  
healthy (food/way of life) ﺳﺎﻟم / ﺑﯽ ﻋﯾب و ﻧﻘص/ ﺳﻼﻣت 
heavy ﺳﻧﮕﯾن  
high, tall (building) ﺑﺎﻻ/ ﺑﻠﻧد 
honest دُرﺳتﮐﺎر/ راﺳﺗﮕو  
hostile ﺧﺻﻣﺎﻧﮫ  
hot (of liquid) ﺧﯾﻠﯽ ﮔرم/ داغ / ﺑﺎ ﺣرارت 
hot 
hot tempered ﺗُﻧد ﺧُو 
huge/vast ﮐﻼن/ وﺳﯾﻊ/  ﭘﮭﻧﺎور  
hypocritical دو رُو/ آدم رﯾﺎﮐﺎر  
ideal اﯾده آل/ آرﻣﺎن/ آرزو  
idle ﺑﯾﮑﺎر/ ﺗﻧﺑل/ ﻋﺎطل  
ill (chronic) ﻣرﯾض 
impatient ﺑﯽ طﺎﻗت ﺑﯽ ﺣوﺻﻠﮫ/ ﻧﺎﺷﮑﯾﺑﺎ  / ﺑﯽ ﺻﺑر  
important ﻣﮭم / ﺑﺎ اھﻣﯾت 
in a good mood ﺳردﻣﺎغ ﺑودن/ ﺧوﺷﺣﺎل ﺑودن 
incorrect ﻧﺎ دُرُﺳت 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
90 
Common adjectives (continued)  
independent آزاد/ ﻣﺳﺗﻘل 
innocent ﺑﯽ ﮔُﻧﺎه 
intelligent, clever ﺑﺎھوش / ھوﺷﻣﻧد    
intense ﺷدﯾد 
interesting ﺟﺎﻟب / دﯾدﻧﯽ  
jolly, happy ﺧوﺷﺣﺎل/ ﺧﺟﺳﺗﮫ / ﻓرﺧﻧده  
kind ﻣﮭرﺑﺎن 
languid ﺑﯽﺣﺎل  
last آﺧرﯾن 
lazy ﺗﻧﺑل 
liar دُروﻏﮕو 
light ﻧُور/ ﺑرق  / روﺷن / روﺷﻧﺎﯾﯽ  
living زﻧده 
lonely ﺗﻧﮭﺎ 
long طول  
lost ﮔﻣﺷده 
loud ﺑﻠﻧد / ﭘُر ﺳر  و ﺻدا  
magnificent ﻣُﺟَ ﻠَ ل/ﻋﺎﻟ ﯽ/ ﻋظ ﯾم  
main اﺻﻠﯽ ﻣﮭم  
marvellous ﺣﯾرتآور/  ﺟﺎﻟب  
miserable ﺑﯽﻧوا / ﺑﯾﭼﺎره  
modern ﻣدرن/ ﺟدﯾد/  اِﻣروزی  
much ﺑِﺳﯾﺎر 
narrow ﺑﺎرﯾﮏ  
naughty ﺷرﯾر/ ﺳرﮐش  
necessary, needed ﻻزم 
necessary, unavoidable, obligatory واﺟب 
negative ﻣﻧﻔﯽ 
new ﻧو ﺗﺎزه/ ﺟدﯾد  
next to ﺑﻌد از / ﺟﻧب 
nice, pretty, likeable ﻗﺷﻧﮓ 
noisy ﭘر ﺳر و ﺻدا/ ﺑﻠﻧد  
normal ﻧرﻣﺎل/ طﺑﯾﻌﯽ  
old ﮐﮭﻧﮫ/ ﻗدﯾﻣﯽ  
obliged ﻣﺟﺑور/ ﻣﻣﻧون 
obstinate ﻟﺟوج  
obvious ﻣﻌﻠوم 
old (former) ﮐﮭﻧﮫ / ﻗدﯾﻣﯽ  
only ﺗﻧﮭﺎ 
open ﺑﺎز )ﻓروﺷﮕﺎه 
optimistic ﺧوش ﺑﯾن 
original اﺻﻠﯽ/اﺑﺗﮑﺎر ی  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
91 
Common adjectives (continued)  
other دﯾﮕر 
patient  ﺻﺑور 
peaceful ﺻﻠﺢ آﻣﯾز/ آرام  
pessimistic ﺑدﺑﯾن  
pleasant, nice ﻣطﺑوع ، ﺧوش 
pleased (to meet you) ﺧوﺷوﻗﺗم از ﻣﻼﻗﺎ ﺗﺗﺎن  
polite (im-) ﻣؤدب ، ﺑﺎ ﺗرﺑﯾت )ﻏﯾر، ﺑﯽ 
poor ﻓﻘﯾر 
popular ﻣﺣﺑوب/ ﻣﺗداول  
positive ﻣُﺛﺑت 
practical ﻋﻣﻠﯽ ﮐﺎرﺑردی  
pretty ﻗﺷﻧﮓ ، زﯾﺑﺎ 
quiet ﺳﺎﮐت ، آرام ﺧﻣوش  
ready آﻣﺎده 
real ﺣﻘﯾﻘﯽ 
reasonable ﻣﻌﻘول/ ﻣُﺳﺗَدَل  
recent ﺗﺎزه 
reliable ﻗﺎﺑل اﻋﺗﻣﺎد /  ﻣورد اطﻣﯾﻧﺎن  
responsible /in charge of ﻣﺳﺋول/ ﻋﮭده دار  
rich ﺛروﺗﻣﻧد 
sad ﻏﻣﮕﯾن 
safe ﺑﯽ ﺧطر/ اﻣن  
same ﯾﮑﺳﺎن/ ھﻣﺎن ﺟور  
scholar ﭘژوھﺷﮕر/ داﻧﺷﻣﻧد / ﻣﺣﻘﻖ  
selfish ﺧودﺧواه 
sensational ﺷوراﻧﮕﯾز/ ﻣﮭﯾﺞ/ اﺣﺳﺎﺳﺎﺗﯽ  
serious ﺟدی 
sharp ﺗﯾز 
short ﮐوﺗﺎه 
short (person) ﻗدِ ﮐوﺗﺎه 
shy ﺧﺟﺎﻟﺗﯽ  
silent ﺧﺎﻣوش/ ﺳﺎﮐت 
silly اﺣﻣﻘﺎﻧﮫ/ اﺑﻠﮫ  /اﺣﻣﻖ  
situated واﻗﻊ در  
skilled ﻣﺎھر  
slender, slim ﻧﺣﯾف / ﻻﻏر 
slow آھﺳﺗﮫ/ ﮐُ ﻧد  
smart ﺷﯾﮏ / ﺑﺎھوش 
small ﮐوﭼﮏ / ﺗﻧﮓ 
soft, smooth ﻧرم / ﻣﻼﯾم / ﺻﺎف 
sorrowful, sad اﻧدوھﻧﺎک 
special ﻣﺧﺻوص/ و ﯾژه  
splendid ﭘرزرق وﺑرق/ ﻣﺟﻠل/ ﺑﺎ  ﺷﮑوه  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
92 
Common adjectives (continued)  
strange ﻋﺟﯾب  /ﻏرﯾﺑﮫ / ﺑﯾﮕﺎﻧﮫ  
strict ﺳﺧت ﮔﯾر 
strong ﻣﺣﮑم / ﻗوی 
suitable ﻣﻧﺎﺳب  
surprised ﻣﺗﻌﺟب ﻣﺗﺣﯾ ر  
tall ﺑُﻠﻧد 
talkative ﭘر ﺣرف/ وراج/  ﭘُ رﮔو  
terrible ﺧﯾﻠﯽ ﺑد وﺣﺷﺗﻧﺎک/ ھوﻟﻧﺎک  
thin, slim ﻻﻏر ﺑﺎرﯾﮏ اﻧدام  
timid ﺗرﺳو 
tired ﺧﺳﺗﮫ 
typical ﻣﻌﻣول 
ugly زﺷت/ ﺑﯽ ﻗواره/ ﺑد ﻗﯾﺎﻓﮫ   
unfair ﻏﯾر ﻣﻧﺻﻔﺎﻧﮫ / ﻧﺎ  درﺳت  
unhappy ﻧﺎﺧُوش  
unhealthy ﻧﺎﺳﺎﻟم/ ﺑﯾﻣﺎر  
unique ﺑﯽ ﻧظ ﯾر/ ﺑﯽ ھﻣﺗﺎ / ﯾﮕﺎﻧﮫ  
unpleasant ﻧﺎﮔوار 
useful ﻣﻔﯾد/ﺳودﻣﻧد  
useless  ﺑﯾﮭوده/ﺑﯽ ﻓﺎﯾده  
valuable ﺑﺎ  ارزش/ ﮔراﻧﺑﮭﺎ / ارزﺷﻣﻧد  
various ﻣﺧﺗﻠف ﮔوﻧﺎﮔون  
weak ﺿﻌﯾف/ ﺑﯽ ﺣﺎل 
wealthy ﭘوﻟدار/ﺛروﺗﻣﻧد 
well equipped ﻣﺟﮭز 
well known ﻣﻌروف ﻧﯾ ﮏﻧﺎم /ﻣﺷﮭور  
well mannered ﺑﺎﺗرﺑﯾت 
well off ﻣرﻓﮫ  
wet ﺑﺎراﻧﯽ  
wise داﻧﺎ /ﺧردﻣﻧد  
witty ﺷوخ 
wonderful ﺷﮕﻔت اﻧﮕﯾز/ ﺷﮕرف/ﺣ ﯾرتآور  
worried ﻧﺎراﺣت ﻧﮕران  
worse ﺑدﺗر 
worthless ﺑﯽ ارزش 
young ﺟوان/  ﺑرﻧﺎ /  ﻧورﺳﺗﮫ  
younger ﺟوانﺗر  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
93 
Common adverbs 
(for) a long time ﺑرای ﯾﮏ ﻣدت طوﻻﻧﯽ  
again دوﺑﺎره 
almost ﺗﻘرﯾﺑﺎً 
already اﻟﺳﺎﻋﮫ/ درھﻣﯾن زﻣﺎن  
also ھﻣﭼﻧﯾن/  ﻧﯾز/  ﺑﻌﻼوه  
altogether روی ھم رﻓﺗﮫ 
always ھﻣواره،ھﻣﯾﺷﮫ 
approximately ﺗﻘرﯾﺑﺎً  
at least دﺳت ﮐم/ ﺣداﻗل 
automatically اﺗوﻣﺎﺗﯾﮏ/ ﺧود ﺑﮫ ﺧود  
badly  ﺑطور ﻧﺎﺷﺎ ﯾﺳﺗﮫ /ﺑطور  ﺑد  
below ﭘﺎﯾﯾن 
better ﺑﮭﺗر 
by chance ﺑﮫطور اﺗﻔﺎﻗﯽ  
cheap(ly) ارزان 
completely ﻣطﻠﻘﺎً ﮐﺎﻣﻼً  / ﺑﮫﮐﻠﯽ  
continually ﭘﯾوﺳﺗﮫ 
down (there) ﭘﺎﯾﯾن 
earlier ﭘﯾش ازآن 
early زود/ ﭘﯾش ازوﻗت  
especially ﺑﮫﺧﺻوص  
ever ھﻣﯾﺷﮫ/ ھﯾﭻ وﻗت 
everywhere ھرﺟﺎ 
fairly, quite ﻣﻧﺻﻔﺎﻧﮫ 
far دور 
fortunately (un-) ﺧوﺷﺑﺧﺗﺎﻧﮫ 
hardly ﺑﮫ ﺳﺧﺗﯽ/ ﺑﮫ ﺷدت   
here اﯾﻧﺟﺎ 
inexpensive(ly) ارزان 
later ﺑﻌد 
loud(ly) ﺑﺎ ﺻدای ﺑﻠﻧد 
more or less ﮐم وﺑﯾش 
naturally ﺑﮫ طور طﺑﯾﻌﯽ  
neither ھﯾﭻ ﮐدام 
never ھرﮔز 
nobody ھﯾﭻ ﮐس 
nothing ھﯾﭼﯽ  
not yet ﻧﮫ ﺗﺎ وﻗﺗﯽ ﮐﮫﻧﮫ ھﻧوز  
nowhere ھﯾﭻ ﺟﺎ 
occasionally  ﮔﺎھﯽ  
often اﻏﻠب 
only ﻓﻘط/ ﺗﻧﮭﺎ  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
94 
Common adverbs (continued)  
over there آن ور/ آن ﺳو  
perhaps ﺷﺎﯾد 
possible ﻣﻣﮑن 
quickly ﺑﺎﺳرﻋت/ ﺗُ ﻧد  
rarely ﺑﮫ ﻧدرت  
rather ﺗرﺟﯾﺣﺎً / ﺑﯾﺷﺗر/ ﻧﺳﺑﺗﺎً  
recently اﺧﯾراً 
regularly ﺑﺎﻗﺎﻋده 
similarly ﺑﮫطورﻣﺷﺎﺑﮫ  
simply ﺑﮫ ﺳﺎدﮔﯽ  
slowly آھﺳﺗﮫ، ﯾواش  
sometimes ﺑﻌﺿﯽاوﻗﺎت/  ﺑﻌﺿﯽ وﻗتھﺎ/ ﮔﺎھﯽ/ ﮔﺎه ﺑﮫﮔﺎه  
somewhere ﯾﮏ ﺟﺎﯾﯽ  
soon ﺑﮫ زودی  
still ھﻧوزھم 
straight ahead ﺑﮫ ﺳﻣت ﺟﻠو/  ﻣﻘﺎﺑل  
suddenly ﻧﺎﮔﮭﺎن 
there آﻧﺟﺎ 
to here ﺗﺎ اﯾﻧﺟﺎ 
to there / up (there) ﺗﺎ آﻧﺟﺎ 
together ﺑﺎھم 
too ﺑﯾش ازﺣد ھم / ھﻣﭼﻧﯾن/  
usually ﻣﻌﻣوﻻً 
very ﺑﺳﯾﺎر 
very ﺧﯾﻠﯽ  
well ﺧوُب  
worse ﺑدﺗر 
Prepositions 
about درﺑﺎرهی  
after ﺑﻌد 
among ﻣﺎﺑﯾن 
around اطراف  
at ﺑر/ﺑﮫ/ﺑﻧﺎﺑر ﺳر/ در  
at (someone’s house) ﺑﮫ در )ﺧﺎﻧﮫای(  
at the back درﭘُﺷت 
before ﻗﺑل/ ﭘﯾش  
because of ﭼُون/ ﺑﮫ ﺧﺎطر اﯾن ﮐﮫ 
behind درﻋﻘب 
below  زﯾر  
between ﺑﯾن / ﻣﺎﺑﯾن  
far from ﺑﻌﯾد از/ دور از 
from از 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
95 
Prepositions (continued)  
in در 
in front of در ﺟﻠو/ ﭘﯾﺷﺎﭘﯾش  
in the background در ﻋﻘب/ ﭘﺷتﭼﯾزی  
in the foreground در ﭘﯾش زﻣﯾﻧﮫ  
in the middle (of) ﺑﯾن، درﻣﯾﺎن 
near (to) ﻧزد 
near (to) ﻧزدﯾﮏ/ ﻗرﯾب  
next to ﺟﻧب/ ﮐﻧﺎر   
on  ﺑر 
onto ﺑﮫ ﺳوی  
opposite ﺑر ﻋﮑس / ﻣﺧﺎﻟف   
outside ﺧﺎرج از/ ﺑﯾرون  
through از طرﯾ ﻖ / از  ﻣﯾﺎن/ ﺑواﺳطﮫ  
to ﺑﮫ/طرف/ ﺳوی  
towards ﺑﮫﺳﻣت  
under زﯾر/ﺗﺣت/ زﯾرﯾن  
until ﺗﺎ  زﻣﺎن/ ﺗﺎ  وﻗﺗﯽ ﮐﮫ/ ﺗﺎ  اﯾﻧﮑﮫ  
with ﺑﺎ 
Colours 
black ﺳﯾﺎه ﻣﺷﮑﯽ  
blue (dark) آﺑﯽ  
brown ﻗﮭوه ای ﺗﯾره  
brown (eyes) ﺧرﻣﺎﯾﯽ  
chestnut brown ﺧرﻣﺎﯾﯽ  
colour رﻧﮓ  
dark ﺗﺎرﯾﮏ ﺗﯾره  
green ﺳﺑز 
grey ﺧﺎﮐﺳﺗری 
grey (hair) ﻣوی ﺳﻔﯾد  
light روﺷن 
light blue آﺑﯽ روﺷن / آﺑﯽ ﮐم رﻧﮓ 
orange ﻧﺎرﻧﺟﯽ  
pink ﺻورﺗﯽ 
purple ارﻏواﻧﯽ/ زرﺷﮑﯽ/ ﺑﻧﻔش  
red ﻗرﻣز/ ﺳرخ  
violet ﺑﻧﻔش  
russet ﺣﻧﺎﯾﯽ/ ﺧرﻣﺎﯾﯽﺳﻧﺟﺎﺑﯽ  
white ﺳﻔﯾد 
yellow زرد 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
96 
Numbers 
1 ﯾﮏ  
2 دو 
3 ﺳﮫ  
4 ﭼﮭﺎر  
5 ﭘﻧﺞ 
6 ﺷش 
7 ھﻔت 
8 ھﺷت 
9 ﻧُﮫ  
10 ده 
11 ﯾﺎزده 
12 دوازده 
13 ﺳﯾزده 
14 ﭼﮭﺎرده 
15 ﭘﺎﻧزده 
16 ﺷﺎﻧزده 
17 ھﻔده 
18 ھﺟده 
19 ﻧوزده 
20 ﺑﯾﺳت 
21 ﺑﯾﺳت و ﯾﮏ 
22 ﺑﯾﺳت و دو 
23 ﺑﯾﺳت و ﺳﮫ 
24 ﺑﯾﺳت و ﭼﮭﺎر 
25 ﺑﯾﺳت و ﭘﻧﺞ 
26 ﺑﯾﺳت و ﺷش 
27 ﺑﯾﺳت وھﻔت  
28 ﺑﯾﺳت و ھﺷت 
29 ﺑﯾﺳت و ﻧﮫ 
30 ﺳﯽ 
31 ﺳﯽ و ﯾﮏ 
32 etc… ﺳﯽ و دو وﻏﯾره 
40 ﭼﮭل  
50 ﭘﻧﺟﺎه  
60 ﺷﺻت 
70 ھﻔﺗﺎد  
80 ھﺷﺗﺎد 
90 ﻧود 
100 ﺻد 
101 ﺻد و ﯾﮏ 
120 ﺻد و ﺑﯾﺳت 
200 دوﯾﺳت  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
97 
Numbers (continued)  
1000 ھزار 
1001 ھزار و ﯾﮏ 
1953 ھزار و ﻧﮭﺻد وﭘﻧﺟﺎه وﺳﮫ  
1.000.000 ﯾﮏ ﻣﯾﻠﯾون 
2.000.000 etc… دو ﻣﯾﻠﯾون 
Ordinal numbers 
first اول )ﻧﺧﺳت(  
second دوم 
third ﺳوم 
fourth ﭼﮭﺎرم 
fifth ﭘﻧﺟم 
sixth ﺷﺷم 
seventh ھﻔﺗم 
eight ھﺷﺗم 
ninth ﻧﮭم 
tenth دھم 
eleventh ﯾﺎزدھم 
twelfth دوازدھم 
twenty first etc ﺑﯾﺳت و ﯾﮑم 
Quantities and measures 
a bottle ﺑطری  
a box ﺟﻌﺑﮫ 
a dozen ﯾﮏ دوﺟﯾن 
a jar  ﺷﯾﺷﮫ / ﺳﺑو  
a few/a number of ﺗﻌدادی / ﭼﻧد ﺗﺎ  
a kilo ﯾﮏ ﮐﯾﻠو 
a litre ﯾﮏ ﻟﯾﺗر 
a little ﯾﮏ ﮐم 
a lot ﯾﮏﻋﺎﻟم/ ﮐﻠﯽ زﯾﺎد/ ﺧﯾﻠﯽ زﯾﺎد  
a packet ﺑﺳﺗﮫ/ ﯾﮏ ﭘﺎﮐت  
a piece ﻗطﻌﮫ  
a slice ﺗﮑﮫ/ ﻗﺎچ  
about a hundred ﺣدود ﯾﮏ ﺻد  
centimetre ﺳﺎﻧﺗﯽﻣﺗر  
enough ﮐﺎﻓﯽ/  ﺑﺳﻧده/ ﺑس  
gramme  ﮔِرَم  
half ﻧﯾﻣﮫ 
kilometre ﮐﯾﻠوﻣﺗر 
less ﮐﻣﺗر/ ﮐوﭼﮑﺗر  
majority اﮐﺛرﯾت/ ﺑﯾﺷﺗرﯾن  
many/much ﺑﺳﯾﺎری/ ﺧﯾﻠ ﯽ/ زﯾﺎد  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
98 
Quantities and measures(continued) 
metre ﻣﺗر 
more ﺑﯾش/ ﺑﯾﺷﺗر  
percent(age) درﺻد 
quantity ﻣﻘدار/ ﭼﻧدی/ ﮐﻣﯾت  
quarter رﺑﻊ/ ﯾﮏ ﭼﮭﺎرم/ ﭼﺎرک   
several ﭼﻧد/ ﻣﺗﻌدد/  ﭼﻧدﯾن  
some/a little اﻧدﮐﯽ/ ﺗﻌدادی/ ﻗدری/ ﮐﻣﯽ  
third ﺳوم/ ﯾﮏ ﺳوم/ ﺳوﻣﯾن  
too  ھم/ ھﻣﭼﻧﯾن  
weight وزن 
Some useful connecting words 
after ﺑﻌد از آن  ﮐﮫ  
also ھﻣﭼﻧﯾن 
although اﮔرﭼﮫ 
and و 
as, since ﭼون/ ﻧظر ﺑﮫ اﯾن ﮐﮫ/ ھمﭼﻧﺎﻧﮑﮫ/ ﭼﻧﺎﻧﭼﮫ  
at all اﺻﻼً 
at first در اﺑﺗدا/ در آﻏﺎز 
at last ﺑﺎﻵﺧره 
at present ﻓﻌﻼً 
bad ﺑد/ﻧﺎﺧوشآﯾﻧد  
because of ﭼون ﺑرایاﯾنﮐﮫ/ ﺑﺧﺎطراﯾن ﮐﮫ / زﯾرا ﮐﮫ/ ﭼرا  
ﮐﮫ 
because of ﺑﮫﻋﻠت/ ﺑﮫ دﻟﯾل  
before ﭘﯾش ازآن ﮐﮫ  
but/unless اﻣﺎ / وﻟﯽ ﻣﮕر  
by ﺑﮫ وﺳﯾﻠﮫ/ ﺗوﺳط  
by no means ﺑﮫ ھﯾﭻ وﺟﮫ  
by reason of ﺑﮫ دﻟﯾل/ ﺑﮫﻋﻠت  
certainly اﻟﺑﺗﮫ ﺣﺗﻣﺎً  
even ﺣﺗﯽ  
even if ھرﭼﻧد 
finally ﺳراﻧﺟﺎم/ ﺑﺎﻻﺧره  
first of all اول / اول از ھﻣﮫ  
however ﺑﺎ اﯾن ﺣﺎل  ﺑﮫھر ﺣﺎل/ اﻣّﺎ  
if اﮔر 
in order to ﺑﮫ ﻣﻧظور  
it is obvious روﺷن اﺳت 
in spite of/notwithstanding that ﺑﺎ اﯾنﮐﮫ/ ﺑﺎ وﺟود اﯾنﮐﮫ  
more over ﻋﻼوه ﺑراﯾن 
neither… nor… ﻧﮫ... ﻧﮫ  
or ﯾﺎ 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
99 
Some useful connecting words (continued) 
perhaps ﺷﺎﯾد 
so ﺑﻧﺎﺑراﯾن 
then ﺳﭘس 
then, next ﺑﻌد/ دﯾﮕر  
therefore ﺑﻧﺎ ﺑراﯾن 
this is, here is اﯾن اﺳت/ اﯾنﺟﺎ اﺳت  
whether آﯾﺎ 
Time expressions 
after ﺑﻌد از/ ﭘس از  
already ھم اﮐﻧون  
always ھﻣﯾﺷﮫ /ھﻣواره  
as soon as ﺑﮫﻣﺣض اﯾن  ﮐﮫ / ھﻣﯾنﮐﮫ  
at night در ﺷب  
at the same time در ھﻣﺎن زﻣﺎن 
at the start در آﻏﺎز 
before ﻗﺑل، ﭘﯾش 
day روز 
day off ﻣرﺧﺻﯽ  
during در طوُل / در طﯽ  
early اواﯾل 
evening ﺷب 
ever اﺻﻼً 
every day ھر روز 
fortnight دوھﻔﺗﮫ 
from از 
from time to time ﮔﺎه ﮔﺎھﯽ 
hour ﺳﺎﻋت  
how long? ﭼﻧد وﻗت / ﭼﮫ ﻣدت 
immediately ﻓوراً 
in the afternoon ھﻧﮕﺎم ﺑﻌد ازظﮭر 
in the evening درﺷب 
in the morning ھﻧﮕﺎم ﺻﺑﺢ 
in the night در ﺷب 
last night (during the night) دﯾﺷب 
last night (yesterday evening) دﯾﺷب 
late دﯾر 
later ﺑﻌد 
midday ظﮭر  
midnight ﻧﯾﻣﮫﺷب  
minute دﻗﯾﻘﮫ 
morning ﺻﺑﺢ 
never ھرﮔز 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
100 
Time expressions (continued) 
night ﺷب 
now درﺣﺎلِ ﺣﺎﺿر ﺣﺎﻻ  
on time ﺳروﻗت 
once ﯾﮏ ﺑﺎر 
since از آﻧﺟﺎ  ﮐﮫ / ﭼون/ از وﻗﺗﯽ ﮐﮫ  
soon زُود  
the day after tomorrow ﭘس ﻓردا 
the day before yesterday ﭘرﯾروز 
the day/evening before روز ﺷب ﻗﺑل  
the next day, following day روز ﺑﻌد ﻓردا  
time زﻣﺎن 
today اﻣروز 
tomorrow ﻓردا  
twice دوﺑﺎر 
week ھﻔﺗﮫ  
weekend آﺧرھﻔﺗﮫ 
what is the time? ﺳﺎﻋت ﭼﻧده؟ 
whenever ھرﮔﺎه/ ھروﻗت 
year/s ﺳﺎل/ﺳﺎلھﺎ  
yesterday دﯾروز 
Times of day 
what is the time? ﺳﺎﻋت ﭼﻧده؟ 
a.m. ﭘﯾش از ظﮭر 
p.m. ﺑﻌد از ظﮭر 
11:15 a.m. ﺳﮫ رﺑﻊ ﺑﮫ ظﮭر ﻣﺎﻧده  
11:45 p.m. ﯾﮏ رُﺑﻊ ﺑﮫ ﻧﺻف ﺷب ﻣﺎﻧده   
12:15 p.m. ﯾﮏ رﺑﻊ از ظﮭر ﮔذﺷﺗﮫ 
it is quarter past nine ﯾﮏ رﺑﻊ ازﻧُ ﮫ ﮔذﺷﺗﮫ/ ﻧُ ﮫ و رﺑﻊ  
it is quarter to ten ده رﺑﻊ ﮐم / ﯾﮏ رﺑﻊ ﺑﮫ ده 
07:05 ﭘﻧﺞ دﻗﯾﻘﮫ از ھﻔت ﮔذﺷﺗﮫ 
02:05 دو و ﭘﻧﺞ دﻗﯾﻘﮫ 
it is ten to six ده دﻗﯾﻘﮫ ﺑﮫ ﺷش ﻣﺎﻧده 
half past eight ھﺷت و ﻧﯾم 
five to eleven ﯾﺎزده ﭘﻧﺞ دﻗﯾﻘﮫ ﮐم 
half past nine ﻧﮫ  و ﻧﯾم 
ten past three ﺳﮫ و ده دﻗﯾﻘﮫ 
ten to three ﺳﮫ ده دﻗﯾﻘﮫ ﮐم 
Days of the week 
Saturday ﺷﻧﺑﮫ 
Sunday ﯾﮏ ﺷﻧﺑﮫ 
Monday دوﺷﻧﺑﮫ 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
101 
Days of the week (continued) 
Tuesday ﺳﮫ ﺷﻧﺑﮫ  
Wednesday ﭼﮭﺎرﺷﻧﺑﮫ 
Thursday  ﭘﻧﺞ  ﺷﻧﺑﮫ  
Friday ﺟﻣﻌﮫ 
on) Monday روزدوﺷﻧﺑﮫ 
on) Monday morning ﺻﺑﺢ روز دوﺷﻧﺑﮫ 
on) Monday evening دوﺷﻧﺑﮫ ﺷب  
on Mondays دردوﺷﻧﺑﮫھﺎ  
every Monday ھر دوﺷﻧﺑﮫ 
Months and seasons of the year 
month ﻣﺎه 
January ژاﻧوﯾﮫ 
February ﻓورﯾﮫ 
March ﻣﺎرس/ ﻣﺎرچ 
April آورﯾلآﭘرﯾل  
May ﻣﮫ/ ﻣﯽ  
June ژوﺋن/ ﺟون 
July  ژوﻻی/ ﺟوﻻی/ ژوﺋﯾﮫ  
August اوت / آﮔوﺳت 
September ﺳﭘﺗﺎﻣﺑر 
October اﮐﺗﺑر 
November ﻧواﻣﺑر 
December دﺳﺎﻣﺑر 
season ﻓﺻل  
autumn (in) درﺧزان/ ﭘﺎﯾﯾز 
spring (in) درﺑﮭﺎر 
summer (in) درﺗﺎﺑﺳﺗﺎن  
winter (in) در زﻣﺳﺗﺎن 
Months of the year (Persian) 
 
Farvardin ﻓروردﯾن 
Ordibehesht اردﯾﺑﮭﺷت 
Khordad ﺧرداد 
Tir ﺗﯾر 
Mordad ﻣرداد 
Shahrivar ﺷﮭرﯾور 
Mehr ﻣﮭر 
Aban آﺑﺎن  
Azar آذر 
Day دی 
Bahman ﺑﮭﻣن 
Esfand اﺳﻔﻧد 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
102 
Question words 
(at) what time? ﮐﯽ؟ ﭼﮫ وﻗت؟ 
from where? از ﮐﺟﺎ؟ 
how much, how many? ﭼﻧد ﺗﺎ؟ﭼﻧد ﻣﯽ ارزد؟ 
how? how are you?  ﭼﮕوﻧﮫ ؟/ ﺷﻣﺎ ﭼطورﯾد؟/ ﭼطور؟  
to there? ﺑﮫ آﻧﺟﺎ؟ 
to where? ﺑﮫ ﮐﺟﺎ؟ 
what colour? ﭼﮫ رﻧﮓ؟ 
what is? ﭼﯾﮫ؟  
what like? ﺷﺑﯾﮫ ﭼﯽ؟  
what/which? ﮐدام؟ 
what? ﭼﮫ؟ ﮐدام؟ ﭼﯽ؟ 
when? ﮐﯽ؟ ﭼﮫ وﻗت؟ 
whenever ھرﻣوﻗﻊ/ھروﻗت 
where? ﮐﺟﺎ؟  
wherever ھرﺟﺎ 
whichever ھر ﮐدام 
who is? ﮐﯾﮫ؟  
who? ﭼﮫ ﮐﺳﯽ ؟ 
why? ﭼرا؟  
Other useful expressions 
agree ﻣواﻓﻘت ﮐردن/ ﻣواﻓﻖ  ﺑودن/ ھم رای ﺑودن  
all the better  ﺑﮭﺗر 
be my guest ﻗﺎﺑﻠﯽ ﻧداره 
by all means ﺧواھش ﻣﯽﮐﻧم  
doesn’t matter اﺷﮑﺎﻟﯽ ﻧدارد/ ﻣﺷﮑﻠﯽ ﻧﯾﺳت 
don’t mention اﯾن ﺣرفھﺎ   ﭼﯾﮫ؟ / ﺣرﻓش را ھم ﻧزن  
don’t worry ﻧﮕران ﻧﺑﺎﺷﯾد 
false (this is) ﻏﻠط /  دروغ/  ﻣﺻﻧوﻋﯽ  
finally, ultimately ﺳراﻧﺟﺎم/ ﺑﺎﻻﺧره  
formal (official)/informal (unofficial) رﺳﻣﯽ ﻏﯾررﺳﻣﯽ  
good bye ﺧدا ﻧﮕﮭدار 
good luck ﻣوﻓﻖ  ﺑﺎﺷﯾد  
great! excellent! ﻋﺎﻟﯽ!  
happy birthday! ﺗوﻟدﺗﺎن ﻣﺑﺎرک 
have a nice time! ﺧوش ﺑﮕذره 
here is/are اﯾﻧﺟﺎ   اﺳت  
how come? ﭼطور ﻣﮕﮫ؟ 
how do I get (to)? ﭼﮕوﻧﮫ؟  
how do you spell that? ﻣﻣﮑن اﺳت آن را ھﺟﯽ ﮐﻧﯾد؟  
how often ھر ﭼﻧد وﻗت ﯾﮏ ﺑﺎر؟ 
I am grateful ﻣﺗﺷﮑرم 
I don’t know ﻧﻣﯽداﻧم  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
103 
Other useful expressions (continued) 
I don’t mind ﺑرای ﻣن ﻣﮭم ﻧﯾﺳت 
I don’t understand ﻧﻣﯽﻓﮭﻣم  
I insist ﺧواھش ﻣﯽﮐﻧم/ اﺻرار ﻣﯽﮐﻧم  
I like it ﺧوﺷم ﻣﯽآﯾد  
I request ﺧواھش ﻣﯽﮐﻧم  
I’ve had enough ﺳﯾر ﺷدم/ ﺑﮫ اﻧدازه ﮐﺎﻓﯽ داﺷﺗم  
in any case ﺑﮫھرﺣﺎل/ ﺑﮫھرﺻورت  
in my opinion ﺑﮫ اﻋﺗﻘﺎد ﻣن  
in my view ﺑﮫ ﻧظرﻣن  
it depends ﺑﺳﺗﮕﯽ دارد 
it doesn’t matter ﻣﮭم ﻧﯾﺳت 
it makes me laugh ﺑﺎﻋث ﺧﻧده ﻣن ﻣﯽﺷود  
it’s all the same to me ﺑرای ﻣن ھﻣﮫﺷﺎن ﻣﺛل ھم ھﺳﺗﻧد  
it’s OK ﺧوﺑﮫ 
may you be in good health ﺧﺳﺗﮫ ﻧﺑﺎﺷﯾد/دﺳتِ ﯾﺎ ﺳرﺷﻣﺎ درد ﻧﮑﻧد/ ﺳﻼﻣت
ﺑﺎﺷﯾد 
much obliged ﺧﯾﻠﯽ ﻣﻣﻧون 
never mind ﻋﯾب ﻧدارد 
nothing to write home about ﺗﻌرﯾﻔﯽ ﻧدارد  
of course اﻟﺑﺗﮫ 
oh dear! ای وای 
okay (in agreement) ﺑﺎﺷﮫ/ ﺧوب  
once again ﯾﮏ ﺑﺎر دﯾﮕر / ﻣﮑرر  
one of the following ﯾﮑﯽ از ﻣوارد زﯾر  
personally ﺷﺧﺻﺎً 
so, so ﭘﻧﺟﺎه ﭘﻧﺟﺎه 
thank you دﺳت ﺷﻣﺎ درد ﻧﮑﻧﮫ / ﻣﻣﻧون/ ﻣﺗﺷﮑرم  
that doesn’t interest me ﻓرﻗﯽ ﻧدارد/ ﺑرای ﻣن ﺟذاﺑﯾﺗﯽ ﻧدارد  
that is very kind of you ﻟطف دارﯾد 
that’s enough ﮐﺎﻓﯽ/ ﺑس  
there it is/are ﺑﻔرﻣﺎﯾﯾد 
too bad! what a shame! ﺻد ﺣﯾف!/ ﺧﯾﻠﯽ ﺑد ﺷد 
true (this is), OK ﺑﺎﺷﮫ  
welcome ﺧوش آﻣدﯾد 
well done! !   آﻓرﯾن !  اﺣﺳﻧت  
what does that mean? ﭼﮫ ﻣطﻠﺑﯽ؟ / ﻣﻌﻧﯽ آن ﭼﯾﺳت؟ /ﯾﻌﻧﯽ ﭼﯽ؟  
what is it like? ﭼطورﯾﺳت؟ 
with pleasure ﺑﺎ  ﮐﻣﺎل ﻣﯾل  
without a doubt ﺑدون ﺷﮏ 
you are welcome! ﺧواھش ﻣﯽﮐﻧم  
you can (one can) ﻣﯽﺗواﻧﯾد  
you must (one must) ﺑﺎ ﯾﺳت/ ﺑﺎ ﯾد  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
104 
Other high-frequency words 
as, like ﻣﺎﻧﻧد 
end ﭘﺎ ﯾﺎن/ ﺧﺎﺗﻣﮫ/  اﻧﺗﮭﺎ  
everybody ھر ﮐﺳﯽ  
everything ھﻣﮫ ﭼﯾز  
except ﺟز/ ﺑﺟز/ ﻏﯾر از  
figure (number) ﻋدد/ ﺷﻣﺎره  
for example ﻣﺛﻼً 
Miss دوﺷﯾزه 
Mr (also sir) آﻗﺎی  
Mrs (also madam) ﻣﺎدام / ﺧﺎﻧم 
number (phone number) ﺷﻣﺎره ﺗﻠﻔن  
opinion ﻧظر/  ﻓﮑر/  ﻋﻘﯾده  
reason دﻟﯾل  /  ﺳﺑب  
someone  ﮐﺳﯽ/  ﺷﺧﺻﯽ  
something  ﭼﯾزی/  ﻗدری  
that آن 
thing ﻗطﻌﮫ/ ﭼﯾز  
time (occasion)  ﻣوﻗﻊ/ ﺑﺎر /ﻣورد 
type (kind of) ﻧوع/ ﺟور  
with ﺑﺎ 
without ﺑﯽ /ﺑدون  
Countries 
Afghanistan اﻓﻐﺎﻧﺳﺗﺎن 
America آﻣرﯾﮑﺎ 
Armenia ارﻣﻧﺳﺗﺎن 
Australia اﺳﺗراﻟﯾﺎ 
Austria  اطرﯾش  
Azerbaijan آذرﺑﺎﯾﺟﺎن  
Belarus ﺑﻼروس 
Belgium ﺑﻠژﯾﮏ  
Canada ﮐﺎﻧﺎدا 
Caucasia ﻗﻔﻘﺎز 
China ﭼﯾن  
Cyprus ﻗﺑرس 
Denmark داﻧﻣﺎرک 
England اﻧﮕﻠﺳﺗﺎن 
Egypt ﻣِﺻر 
France ﻓراﻧﺳﮫ 
Germany آﻟﻣﺎن  
Great Britain ﺑرﯾﺗﺎﻧﯾﺎ ی ﮐﺑﯾ ر  
Greece ﯾوﻧﺎن  
Holland ھﻠﻧد 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
105 
Countries (continued) 
India ھﻧدوﺳﺗﺎن 
Iran اﯾران 
Iraq ﻋراق 
Ireland اﯾرﻟﻧد  
Italy اﯾﺗﺎﻟﯾ ﺎ  
Japan ژاﭘن 
Jordan اردن 
Kazakhstan ﻗزاﻗﺳﺗﺎن 
Kyrgyzstan ﻗرﻗﯾزﺳﺗﺎن  
Lithuania ﻟﯾﺗواﻧﯽ  
Netherlands  ھﻠﻧد 
Northern Ireland اﯾرﻟﻧد ﺷﻣﺎﻟﯽ  
Norway ﻧروژ 
Pakistan ﭘﺎﮐﺳﺗﺎن 
Poland ﻟﮭﺳﺗﺎن 
Portugal ﭘرﺗﻐﺎل 
Russia روﺳﯾﮫ  
Saudi Arabia ﻋرﺑﺳﺗﺎن ﺳﻌودی  
Scotland اﺳﮑﺎﺗﻠﻧد 
Spain اﺳﭘﺎﻧﯾﺎ  
Sweden ﺳوﺋد 
Switzerland ﺳوﺋﯾس  
Tajikistan ازﺑﮑﺳﺗﺎن 
Turkey ﺗرﮐﯾﮫ  
Turkmenistan ﺗرﮐﻣﻧﺳﺗﺎن 
Ukraine اوﮐراﯾن  
United Arab Emirates اﻣﺎرات ﻣﺗﺣده  ﻋرﺑﯽ  
United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland ﭘﺎدﺷﺎھﯽ ﻣﺗﺣده ﺑرﯾﺗﺎﻧﯾﺎ ی ﮐﺑﯾر   
United States  اﯾﺎﻻت ﻣﺗﺣده  
Uzbekistan ازﺑﮑﺳﺗﺎن 
Wales وﻟز 
Continents 
Africa آﻓرﯾﻘﺎ 
Asia آﺳﯾﺎ  
Australia اﺳﺗراﻟﯾﺎ  
Europe اروﭘﺎ 
North America آﻣرﯾﮑﺎ ی ﺷﻣﺎﻟ ﯽ  
South America آﻣرﯾﮑﺎ ی ﺟﻧوﺑﯽ  
Antarctica ﻗطب ﺟﻧوب  
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
106 
Nationalities etc. 
Afghan اﻓﻐﺎﻧﺳﺗﺎﻧﯽ 
American  آﻣرﯾﮑﺎﯾﯽ 
Arab ﻋرب  
Austrian اﺗرﯾﺷﯽ  
Belorussian ﺑﻼروﺳﯽ  
Belgian ﺑﻠژﯾﮑﯽ  
British اﻧﮕﻠﯾﺳﯽ  
Canadian ﮐﺎﻧﺎداﯾﯽ  
Chinese ﭼﯾﻧﯽ   
Danish داﻧﻣﺎرﮐﯽ  
Dutch ھﻠﻧدی  
English اﻧﮕﻠﯾﺳﯽ  
European اروﭘﺎﯾﯽ  
French ﻓراﻧﺳوی  
German آﻟﻣﺎﻧﯽ  
Greek ﯾوﻧﺎﻧﯽ  
Indian ھﻧدی  
Iranian اﯾراﻧﯽ 
Iraqi ﻋراﻗﯽ 
Irish اﯾرﻟﻧدی  
Italian اﯾﺗﺎﻟﯾ ﺎ ﯾﯽ  
Lithuanian ﻟﯾﺗواﻧﯾﺎ ﯾﯽ  
Pakistani ﭘﺎﮐﺳﺗﺎﻧﯽ  
Pole (Polish) ﻟﮭﺳﺗﺎﻧﯽ  
Russian روﺳﯽ  
Scottish اﺳﮑﺎﺗﻠﻧدی  
Spanish اﺳﭘﺎﻧﯾﺎ ﯾﯽ  
Swiss ﺳوﺋﯾﺳﯽ  
Turkish ﺗرﮐﯽ  
Welsh واﻟش / وﻟزی  
Areas  
common frontiers ھم ﻣرز 
county ﺷﮭرﺳﺗﺎن/ اﺳﺗﺎن  
Alborz اﻟﺑرز 
Badakhshan ﺑدﺧﺷﺎن 
Doshanbe دوﺷﻧﺑﮫ 
East Azerbaijan Province اﺳﺗﺎن آذرﺑﺎ ﯾﺟﺎن ﺷرﻗﯽ  
Fars ﻓﺎرس  
Ferghana ﻓرﻏﺎﻧﮫ 
Kermanshah ﮐرﻣﺎﻧﺷﺎه 
Khujand ﺧﺟﻧد  
Khuzestan ﺧوزﺳﺗﺎن 
Razavi Khorasan ﺧراﺳﺎن رﺿوی  
West Azerbaijan آذرﺑﺎﯾﺟﺎن ﻏرﺑﯽ  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
107 
Places – towns  
Ahvaz اھواز 
Arak اراک 
Babalsar ﺑﺎﺑﻠﺳر 
Bandar Abbas ﺑﻧدر ﻋﺑﺎس  
Bokhara ﺑﺧﺎرا  
Chalus ﭼﺎﻟوس  
Hamadan ھﻣدان 
Isfahan اﺻﻔﮭﺎن 
Karaj ﮐرج 
Kashan ﮐﺎﺷﺎن 
Kerman ﮐرﻣﺎن 
Khorasan ﺧراﺳﺎن 
Kish ﮐﯾش  
Kurdastan ﮐردﺳﺗﺎن 
Mahabad ﻣَﮭﺎﺑﺎد 
Mashhad ﻣﺷﮭد 
Nishapor ﻧﯾﺷﺎﺑوُر  
Qazvin ﻗزوﯾن 
Qom ﻗم 
Rasht رﺷت 
Sanandaj ﺳﻧﻧدج 
Saveh ﺳﺎوه 
Shiraz ﺷﯾراز  
Somarqand ﺳﻣرﻗﻧد 
Tabriz ﺗﺑرﯾز  
Tehran ﺗﮭران 
Yazd ﯾزد  
Zahedan زاھدان 
Zanjan زﻧﺟﺎن 
Mountains/seas/rivers/deserts  
Alburz )رﺷﺗﮫ ﮐوهاﻟﺑرز  
Alvand  )رﺷﺗﮫ ﮐوهاﻟوﻧد  
Amu رودﺧﺎﻧﮫآﻣو  
Caspian Sea درﯾﺎ ی ﺧزر  
Damavand mountain )ﻗﻠﮫدﻣﺎوﻧد  
Dasht-e-Kavir دﺷت ﮐوﯾر  
Gulf of Oman ﺧﻠﯾﺞ ﻋﻣﺎن  
Hindu Kush )رﺷﺗﮫ ﮐوهھﻧدوﮐش  
Hormuz Island ﺟزﯾره ھرﻣز  
Karkheh رودﮐرﺧﮫ  
Karun رودﮐﺎرون  
Khuzestan ﺧوزﺳﺗﺎن 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
108 
Mountains/seas/rivers/deserts (continued) 
Lake Urmia درﯾﺎﭼﮫ  اروﻣﯾﮫ  
Lut Desert ﮐوﯾر ﻟوت  
Pamir ﭘﺎﻣﯾر  
Persian Gulf ﺧﻠﯾﺞ ﻓﺎرس  
Sepiddast Lorestan ﻟرﺳﺗﺎن 
Syr Darya ﺳﯾردرﯾﺎ  
Tigris دﺟﻠﮫ 
Zagros mountain )رﺷﺗﮫ ﮐوه  زاﮔرس  
Zayandeh river رودﺧﺎﻧﮫ زاﯾﻧده رود  
Social conventions 
(I’m) sorry (informal/formal) ﻣﺗﺄ ﺳﻔم  
best wishes ﺑﮭﺗرﯾن آرزوھﺎ  
by all means ﭼﺷم 
bye! ﺧدا ﺣﺎﻓظ  !  
cheers! )ﺑﮫ(ﺳﻼﻣﺗﯽ 
could you say that again, please? ﻟطﻔﺎً ﺗﮑرارش  ﮐﻧﯾد  
don’t mention it اﯾن ﺣرفھﺎ ﭼﯾﮫ!/ ﻗﺎﺑﻠﯽ ﻧداره  
good evening/good afternoon ﺷب ﺑﺧﯾر/ ﻋﺻرﺑﺧﯾر  
good morning ﺻﺑﺢ ﺑﺧﯾر 
goodbye ﺧدا ﺣﺎﻓظ 
goodnight ﺷب ﺑﺧﯾر/ﺷب ﺧوش 
have a good journey ﺧوش ﺑﮕذره 
hello اﻟو/ﺳﻼم 
hello (on the telephone) اﻟو/ﺳﻼم 
help! ﮐﻣﮏ!  
hi! ﺳﻼم 
how are you? ﭼطور ھﺳﺗﯾد ؟  
I beg your pardon? pardon? ﺑﺑﺧﺷﯾد/ ﻣﻌذرت ﻣﯽﺧواھم  
it’s a pleasure ﺑﺎﻋث اﻓﺗﺧﺎراﺳت  
I wish ای ﮐﺎش  
meeting; meeting place  ﻣﺣلﻣﻼﻗﺎت /  ﺟﻠﺳﮫ/ ﻧﺷﺳت 
much obliged ﺧﯾﻠﯽ ﻣﻣﻧون 
nightmare! ﮐﺎﺑوس!   
no problem ﻋﯾب ﻧداره 
no thank you ﻧﮫ، ﻣﺗﺷﮑرم  
of course اﻟﺑﺗﮫ 
please ﻟطﻔﺎً 
sorry ﻣﺗﺄﺳﻔم 
thank you (very much) ﻣﺗﺷﮑرم 
that doesn't matter/that's ok ﻣﮭم ﻧﯾﺳت 
what is (your) name? اﺳمِ ﺷﻣﺎ ﭼﯾﮫ ﭼﯾﺳت؟  
what can I do for you? ﭼﮫ ﻓرﻣﺎﯾﺷﯽ دارﯾد؟ 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
109 
Language used in dialogues and messages 
address آدرس  
area code ﮐد ﻣﻧطﻘﮫ  
call me (informal/formal) ﺗﻣﺎس ﺑﮕﯾرﯾد 
email اﯾﻣﯾل 
I’ll be right back ﺑرﻣﯽﮔردم/ زود ﺑرﻣﯽﮔردم  
I’m listening دارم ﮔوش ﻣﯽدم  
message ﭘﯾﺎم 
mobile phone ﺗﻠﻔن ھﻣراه 
moment ﻟﺣظﮫ  
on line آﻧﻼﯾن 
on the line/speaking روی ﺧط  / در ﺣﺎل  ﺣرف  زدن   
please repeat that ﻟطﻔﺎ  ﺗﮑرارش  ﮐﻧﯾد  
postcode ﮐد ﭘﺳﺗﯽ  
receiver ﮔوﺷﯽ 
sender ﻓرﺳﺗﻧده 
hold the receiver ﮔوﺷﯽ را ﻧﮕﮭدارﯾد 
telephone ﺗﻠﻔن 
text  ﭘﯾﺎﻣﮏ/ ﭘﯾﺎم 
tone ﻟﺣن  
voice mail ﭘﯾﺎم ﺻوﺗﯽ/ ﭘﯾﺎم ﺗﻠﻔﻧﯽ  
wait ﺻﺑر ﮐن/ ﻣﻧﺗظر ﻣﺎﻧدن  
wrong number ﺷﻣﺎره اﺷﺗﺑﺎه  
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
110 
Section 2 – Topic-specific vocabulary 
Identity and culture: daily life, food and drink, including eating out 
Foundation tier 
apple ﺳﯾب 
bakery ﻧﺎﻧواﯾﯽ 
banana ﻣوز 
beans ﻟوﺑﯾﺎ  
beef ﮔوﺷت ﮔﺎو 
beer آﺑﺟو 
beetroot  ﭼﻐﻧدر 
bill ﻗﺑض 
birthday party ﺟﺷنﺗوﻟد  
biscuit ﺑﯾﺳﮑوﯾت 
bottle ﺑطری/ ﺷﯾﺷﮫ 
bread ﻧﺎن 
breakfast ﺻﺑﺣﺎﻧﮫ 
butter ﮐره 
cabbage ﮐﻠم ﭘﯾﭻ 
café ﮐﺎﻓﮫ، ﻗﮭوه ﺧﺎﻧﮫ 
cake ﮐﯾﮏ  
carrot ھوﯾﺞ زردک  
caviar ﺧﺎوﯾﺎر  
champagne ﺷﺎﻣﭘﺎﯾن  
cheese ﭘﻧﯾر 
chicken ﻣرغ، ﺟوﺟﮫ، ﮔوﺷت ﻣرغ 
chips ﺳﯾب زﻣﯾﻧﯽ ﺳرخ ﺷده، 
chocolate (drinking chocolate) ﺷﮑﻼت ) ﻧوﺷﯾدﻧﯽ  ﺷﮑﻼﺗﯽ 
closed  ﺑﺳﺗﮫ 
cocoa ﮐﺎﮐﺎﺋو 
coffee(pot) )ﻗوری( ﻗﮭوه 
confectioner ﻗﻧﺎد  
crisps ﭼﯾﭘس/ ﺳﯾب  زﻣﯾﻧﯽ ﺳرخ ﺷده  
cucumber ﺧﯾﺎر  
cup ﻓﻧﺟﺎن 
custom ﻋﺎدت/ /رﺳم  
customer ﺧرﯾدار 
daily روزاﻧﮫ روزﻣره  
delicious ﻟذﯾذ 
dessert دﺳر 
diet رژﯾم 
dining room اطﺎق ﻧﺎھﺎر  ﺧوری  
dish ظرف/ ﺑﺷﻘﺎب  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
111 
Foundation tier (continued)  
drink ﻣﺷروب/ آﺷﺎﻣﯾدﻧﯽ/ ﻧوﺷﺎﺑﮫ/ ﻧوﺷﯾدﻧﯽ  
egg ﺗﺧم / ﺗﺧم ﻣرغ 
enjoy your meal! ازﻏذاﯾﺗﺎن ﻟذت ﺑﺑرﯾد  
Euro ﯾورو 
evening meal, dinner ﺷﺎم، ﻋﺻراﻧﮫ 
everyday ھر روز، روزاﻧﮫ 
fast food ﻓﺳت ﻓود/ ﻏذای ﺣﺎﺿری  
first course/starter ﭘﯾش ﻏذا 
fish ﻣﺎھﯽ  
fizzy water آب  ﮔﺎزدار  
flavour طﻌم / ﻣزه 
fork ﭼﻧﮕﺎل  
fresh ﺗﺎزه 
food ﻏذا، ﺧوراک 
foodstuffs ﻏذا 
fruit ﻣﯾوه 
fruit juice آب ﻣﯾوه 
glass ﺷﯾﺷﮫ، ﻟﯾوان 
grapefruit داراﺑﯽ 
grapes اﻧﮕور 
ham ﮔوﺷت ﭘﺷت ران ﺧوک 
hot chocolate ﺷﮑﻼت داغ  
ice cream ﺑﺳﺗﻧﯽ 
ice-cream parlour ﺳﺎﻟن ﺑﺳﺗﻧﯽ  
jam ﻣرﺑﺎ 
juice آب ﻣﯾوه  
kebab ﮐﺑﺎب  
knife ﭼﺎﻗو 
lemon ﻟﯾﻣو 
lemonade ﻟﯾﻣوﻧﺎد/ ﺷرﺑت ﻟﯾﻣو 
lettuce, salad ﮐﺎھو 
life زﻧدﮔﯽ 
lunch ﻧﺎھﺎر، ﻏذای ﻧﯾﻣروز 
marmalade ﻣﺎرﻣﺎﻻد 
meal اﻏذﯾﮫ،  ﺧوراﮐﯽھﺎ /  وﻋده  ھﺎ ی ﻏذاﯾﯽ  
meat ﮔوﺷت 
menu ﻣﻧو، ﻓﮭرﺳت ﻏذا 
milk  ﺷﯾر 
milkshake ﻣﯾﻠﮏ ﺷﯾﮏ/  ﺷﯾر طﻌمدار  
mineral water آب ﻣﻌدﻧﯽ  
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
112 
Foundation tier (continued) 
minced-meat kebab ﭼﻠوﮐﺑﺎب ﮐوﺑﯾده 
money ﭘول 
mushroom ﻗﺎرچ  
nut ﮔردو/ ﻓﻧدُ ق / ﭘﺳﺗﮫ/ ﺑﺎدام/ آﺟﯾل  
oil روﻏن 
omelette اُﻣﻠت  
onion ﭘﯾﺎز  
orange ﭘرﺗﻘﺎل 
packet ﺑﺳﺗﮫ 
pancakes ﭘﻧﮑﯾﮏ/ ﮐﯾﮏ ﺗﺎﺑﮫای  
party ﻣﮭﻣﺎﻧﯽ/ ﭘﺎرﺗﯽ/ ﺟﺷن  
pasta ﻣﺎﮐﺎروﻧﯽ 
peach ھﻠو/ ﺷﻔﺗﺎﻟو  
pear ﮔﻼﺑﯽ 
peas ﻧﺧود 
pepper ﻓﻠﻔل 
pizza ﭘﯾﺗزا  
pizzeria, pizza restaurant رﺳﺗوران ﭘﯾﺗزاﯾﯽ/ ﭘﯾﺗزاﯾﯽ  
plate ﺑﺷﻘﺎب  
pork ﮔوﺷت ﺧوک 
porridge ﻓرﻧﯽ  /ﭘوره 
portion  ﺑﺧش/  ﻗﺳﻣت  
potato ﺳﯾب زﻣﯾﻧﯽ 
price (pound) ﻗﯾﻣت )ﭘوﻧد(  
restaurant رﺳﺗوران/ ﻏذاﺧوری 
rice ﺑرﻧﺞ 
salad ﺳﺎﻻد 
salt ﻧﻣﮏ  
sandwich ﺳﺎﻧدوﯾﭻ 
sauce  ﺳُس  
service ﺳروﯾس / ﺧدﻣت  
smell ﺑو/ ﻋطر 
snack ﻏذای ﺳﺑﮏ و ﺳرﭘﺎﯾﯽ/ ﺗﻧﻘﻼت 
snack bar ﻣﯾز ﻏذای ﺳﺑﮏ ﯾﺎ ﺳﺎﻧدوﯾﭻ 
soup ﺳوپ / آش  
sour ﺗرش  
special offer ﺗﺧﻔﯾف وﯾژه 
spinach اﺳﻔﻧﺎج 
spoon ﻗﺎﺷﻖ 
spring-chicken kebabs ﺟوﺟﮫ ﮐﺑﺎب 
starter ﭘﯾش ﻏذا 
steak اﺳﺗﯾﮏ / ﮔوﺷت ران ﺑرﯾﺎن ﺷده 
still water آب ﻣﻌﻣوﻟﯽ/  آب راﮐد  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
113 
Foundation tier (continued) 
strawberry ﺗوت ﻓرﻧﮕﯽ 
sugar ﺷﮑر 
supermarket ﻓروﺷﮕﺎه ﻣواد ﻏذاﯾﯽ 
supper ﺷﺎم 
sweet ﺷﯾرﯾﻧﯽ 
sweet (tasting) ﺷﯾرﯾن 
sweet course, dessert دﺳر 
table ﻣﯾز 
tasty ﺧوش ﻣزه 
tea (pot) )ﻗوری( ﭼﺎی  
to have breakfast, lunch, dinner ﺻﺑﺣﺎﻧﮫ/ ﻧﺎھﺎر/ ﺷﺎم ﺧوردن  
tomato ﮔوﺟﮫ ﻓرﻧﮕﯽ 
vegetables ﺳﺑزﯾﺟﺎت  
vinegar ﺳرﮐﮫ 
vitamins وﯾﺗﺎﻣﯾن  
waiter/waitress ﭘﯾﺷﺧدﻣت  
water (tap) آب ﺷﯾر  
watermelon ھﻧدواﻧﮫ 
wine ﺷراب 
yoghurt ﻣﺎﺳت   
Higher tier 
appetite اﺷﺗﮭﺎ 
choice اﻧﺗﺧﺎب 
cooked ﭘﺧﺗﮫ   
cream ﺧﺎﻣﮫ، ﺳر ﺷﯾر 
duck ﻣرﻏﺎﺑﯽ 
fried egg ﺗﺧم ﻣرغ ﻧﯾﻣرو 
garlic ﺳﯾر  
homemade ﺧﺎﻧﮕﯽ  
honey ﻋﺳل 
jar ﺧﻣره ﺷﯾﺷﮫای/ ﺷﯾﺷﮫ دھن ﮔﺷﺎد  
lamb ﺑره 
main course ﻏذای اﺻﻠﯽ  
mayonnaise ﺳس ﻣﺎ ﯾوﻧز  
medium ﻣﺗوﺳط 
mince ﻗﯾﻣﮫ/ ﭼرخ ﺷده 
mixed ﻣﺧﺗﻠط 
mustard ﺧردل  
natural, organic food ﻏذای ارﮔﺎﻧﯾﮏ  
noodles رﺷﺗﮫ ﻓرﻧﮕﯽ  
nuts آﺟﯾل  
pineapple آﻧﺎﻧﺎس 
pork ﮔوﺷت ﺧوک 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
114 
Higher tier (continued)  
raspberry ﺗﻣﺷﮏ، ﺗوت ﻗرﻣز 
roll (bread) ﻧﺎن ﺳﺎﻧدوﯾﭼﯽ 
salmon ﻣﺎھﯽ ﺳﺎﻟﻣون  
saucer ﻧﻌﻠﺑﮑﯽ  
sea food ﻏذای درﯾﺎ ﯾﯽ  
self-service ﺳﻠف ﺳروﯾس  
sideboard, dresser ﻣﯾز دم دﺳﺗﯽ/  ﻣﯾز ﮐﻧﺎری /ﻣ ﯾز ﭘﺎ  دﯾواری  
table cloth روﻣﯾزی ﺳﻔره  
tip (money) اﻧﻌﺎم 
towel ﺣوﻟﮫ  
turkey ﺑوﻗﻠﻣون 
vegetarian ﮔﯾﺎه ﺧوار 
 
Identity and culture: what my friends and family are like 
Words relating to dress and style 
Foundation tier 
belt ﮐﻣرﺑﻧد 
blouse ﺑﻠوز، ﭘوﺷش ﻧﺎزک ﻧﯾم ﺗﻧﮫ 
boots ﭼﮑﻣﮫ/ ﭘوﺗﯾن  
bracelet دﺳﺗﺑﻧد 
cap ﮐﻼه  ﻟﺑﮫدار  
clothes ﻟﺑﺎس  
clothes shop ﻟﺑﺎس ﻓروﺷﯽ 
coat/overcoat ﭘﺎﻟﺗو/ﺑﺎراﻧﯽ/  ژاﮐت  
dress ﻟﺑﺎس زﻧﺎﻧﮫ 
fashion ﻣُد /روش/ﺳﻠ ﯾﻘﮫ  
fashionable ﻣُد روز 
flower ﮔل 
footwear ﮐﻔش/  ﭘﺎﭘوش  
glove دﺳﺗﮑش 
handbag ﮐﯾف دﺳﺗﯽ 
hat ﮐﻼه 
hairdresser's آراﯾﺷﮕر ﻣو، ﺳﻠﻣﺎﻧﯽ 
jacket ژاﮐت / ﮐﺎﭘﺷن  
jeans ﺷﻠوار ﺟﯾن  
jumper ﺑﺎﻻ ﭘوش 
make ﻣﺎرک/ ﺳﺎﺧت  
makeup آراﯾش/  ﮔرﯾم  
pants, briefs ﺷﻠوار/  زﯾر ﺷﻠواری/  ﺳﺎق  ﭘوش  
pyjamas ﭘﺎیﺟﺎﻣﮫ / ﭘﯾژاﻣﮫ/ ﻟﺑﺎس راﺣت  
ring ﺣﻠﻘﮫ/ اﻧﮕﺷﺗر  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
115 
Foundation tier (continued)  
rucksack ﮐوﻟﮫﭘﺷﺗﯽ  
scarf روﺳری 
shirt ﭘﯾراھن 
shoe (a pair of shoes) ﮐﻔش )ﯾﮏ ﺟﻔت ﮐﻔش(  
shorts ﺷﻠوارﮐوﺗﺎه / ﺷورت  
size اﻧدازه 
skirt داﻣن 
small ﮐوﭼﮏ، ﺗﻧﮓ 
smart ﺧوشﺗﯾپ / زﯾﺑﺎ  
socks ﺟوراب 
sportsman ورزﺷﮑﺎر 
sportswoman زن ورزﺷﮑﺎر  
style ﺳﺑﮏ/  اﺳﺗﯾل/  روش  
suit )ﯾﮏ دﺳت( ﮐت و ﺷﻠوار،)ﯾﮏ دﺳت( ﮐت و داﻣن  
sweater ژاﮐت/  ﭘﻠوور  
swimming costume ﻟﺑﺎس ﺷﻧﺎ/ ﻣﺎﯾو  
t-shirt ﺗﯽ ﺷرت 
tie ﮐراوات 
tights ﺟوراب ﺗﻣﺎم ﻗد زﻧﺎﻧﮫ/ ﺟوراب ﺷﻠواری 
trainers ﮐﻔشھﺎی ورزﺷﯽ  
trousers ﺷﻠوار 
umbrella ﭼﺗر 
uniform ﻟﺑﺎس ﻓرم/  روﭘوش  /ﯾوﻧﯾﻔورم 
veil ﭼﺎدر  
vest ﺟﻠﯾﻘﮫ  
watch ﺳﺎﻋت ﻣﭼﯽ 
Higher tier 
brand, label ﻧﺎم ﺗﺟﺎری/ ﻣﺎرک  
cardigan ﭘﺎرﭼﮫ ژاﮐت  
cotton (made of cotton) ﭘﺎرﭼﮫ ﮐﺗﺎﻧﯽ  
heel ﭘﺎﺷﻧﮫ   
leather ﭼرم/ ﭼرﻣﯽ   
lipstick روژ ﻟب، ﻣﺎﺗﯾﮏ 
loose (i.e. too big) ﮔﺷﺎد 
neat ﺷﺳﺗﮫ و رﻓﺗﮫ /ﻣرﺗب/  ﺗﻣﯾز  
perfume ﻋطر/ ادﮐﺎن 
raincoat ﭘﺎﻟﺗو/ ﮐت ﺑﺎراﻧﯽ  
slippers دم ﭘﺎﯾﯽ 
tattoo  ﺧﺎل ﮐوﺑﯽ/   ﺧﺎل ﺳوزﻧﯽ  
  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
116 
Words on relations, relationships, personal and physical 
characteristics 
Foundation tier 
adult, grown-up ﺑﺎﻟﻎ  
age ﺳن 
alcohol اﻟﮑل 
arm, hand ﺑﺎزو 
armchair ﺻﻧدﻟﯽ راﺣﺗ ﯽ  
at home درﺧﺎﻧﮫ 
at my/our house در ﺧﺎﻧﮫی ﻣن /ﻣﺎ  
aunt ﻋﻣﮫ / ﺧﺎﻟﮫ  
back ﻋﻘب / ﭘﺷت  
bald ﮐَل/ ﮐﭼل 
bashful ﮐم رو 
bath وان 
bathroom ﺣﻣﺎم  
beard رﯾش  
bearded ﺑﺎ رﯾش/ رﯾشدار  
beautiful زﯾﺑﺎ 
bed ﺑﺳﺗر، ﺗﺧت 
bed(linen) ﻣﻼﻓﮫ  
bedroom اﺗﺎقﺧواب  
bedside cabinet ﮐﻣد ﮐﻧﺎرﺗﺧت 
bird ﭘرﻧده 
birthday روز ﺗوﻟد 
birthplace ﺟﺎیﺗوﻟد/ ﻣﺣل ﺗوﻟد  
block (of flats) ﺑﻠوک )آﭘﺎرﺗﻣﺎن(  
blond/e ﻣوی ﺑﻠوﻧد  
body ﺑدن/ ﺗﻧﮫ/ ﺟﺛﮫ / ﺟﺳد/ ھﯾﮑل 
boy ﭘﺳر 
brother ﺑرادر 
brothers and sisters, siblings ﺑرادران و ﺧواھران 
brunette دارای ﻣوی ﻣﺷﮑﯽ ﯾﺎ  ﺧرﻣﺎﯾﯽ  
cat ﮔرﺑﮫ 
cat (tom) ﮔرﺑﮫ )ﺗﺎم(  
chair ﺻﻧدﻟﯽ  
character, personality ﺷﺧﺻﯾت  
charming, nice ﺟذاب/ ﻓرﯾﺑﺎ  
child ﺑﭼﮫ/  طﻔل/  ﮐودک  
children ﮐودﮐﺎن/ اطﻔﺎل  
clothes ﻟﺑﺎس  
comfortable (house, furniture) راﺣت و ﮔرم وﻧرم/ راﺣت  
cousin ﭘﺳرﯾﺎ دﺧﺗرﻋﻣﮫ/ﻋﻣو/ﺧﺎﻟﮫ  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
117 
Foundation tier (continued)  
curly ﻣﺟﻌد/ ﻓرﻓری  
curtains ﭘرده 
cottage ﮐﻠﺑﮫ/ ﺧﺎﻧﮫ روﺳﺗﺎ ﯾﯽ  
daily routine روزﻣره، روزاﻧﮫ 
dad ﭘدر، ﺑﺎﺑﺎ 
date of birth ﺗﺎرﯾﺦ ﺗوﻟد 
daughter دﺧﺗر 
diet ﺧوراک 
dog ﺳﮓ 
door  در 
ear/s ﮔوش)ھﺎ 
energetic ﻓﻌﺎل/ ﺟدی/ دارای اﻧرژی  
enthusiasm ﺟدﯾت/ اﺷﺗﯾﺎق / ﺷور و ذوق  
eye ﭼﺷم 
face ﺻورت 
family ﺧﺎﻧواده 
father ﭘدر 
fiance ﻧﺎﻣزد 
first name اﺳم ﮐوﭼﮏ، ﻧﺎم اول 
flat, apartment آﭘﺎرﺗﻣﺎن 
friend (m/f) دوﺳت 
friendly دوﺳﺗﺎﻧﮫ، رﻓﺎﻗتآﻣﯾز  
furniture اﺛﺎﺛﯾﮫ/ اﺳﺑﺎب ﺧﺎﻧﮫ  
garage  ﮔﺎراژ/ ﭘﺎرﮐﯾﻧﮓ  
garden ﺑﺎغ 
girl (older) دوﺷﯾزه/ زن   ﺟوان  
girl (young) دﺧﺗر دﺧﺗرﺑﭼﮫ  
glasses ﻋﯾﻧﮏ 
goldfish ﻣﺎھﯽ ﻗرﻣز 
granddaughter (f) ﻧوه دﺧﺗری  
grandson (m) ﻧوه ﭘﺳری  
grandchild (f/m) ﻧوه، ﻧواده  
grandfather, grandad ﺑﺎﺑﺎ ﺑزرگ/ ﭘدر ﺑزرگ  
grandmother, grandma,  ﻣﺎﻣﺎن ﺑزرگ/ ﻣﺎدرﺑزرگ 
grandparents ﭘدر و ﻣﺎدرﺑزرگ 
granny ﻣﺎﻣﺎن ﺑزرگ 
guest ﻣﮭﻣﺎن 
guinea pig ﺧوﮐﭼﮫ ھﻧدی /ﻣوش آزﻣﺎﯾﺷﮕﺎھﯽ  
hair ﻣو 
handsome ﺧوش ﺗﯾپ 
head ﺳر 
health ﺑﮭداﺷت و درﻣﺎن/ ﺳﻼﻣت 
horse اﺳب  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
118 
Foundation tier (continued)  
house ﺧﺎﻧﮫ  
ideal اﯾده آل/ دﻟﺧواه/ ھدف زﻧدﮔ ﯽ  
identity ھوﯾت 
intelligent ﺑﺎھوش 
kind ﻣﮭرﺑﺎن 
kitchen آﺷﭘزﺧﺎﻧﮫ 
lamp, light ﭼراغ 
leg, foot ﺳﺎق ﭘﺎ 
life زﻧدﮔﯽ 
living room, front room اﺗﺎقﻧﺷﯾﻣن  
man ﻣرد/ آﻗﺎ  
mother ﻣﺎدر 
mouse ﻣوش 
moustache ﺳﺑﯾل  
mouth دھﺎن 
mum ﻣﺎﻣﺎن 
neck ﮔردن 
neighbour ھﻣﺳﺎﯾﮫ 
nice, pleasant ﻗﺷﻧﮓ/ ﺧوب 
normal ﻧرﻣﺎل/ طﺑﯾﻌﯽ 
nose ﺑﯾﻧﯽ 
old ﮐﮭﻧﮫ/ ﻗدﯾﻣﯽ  
oldest (brother/sister) ﺑزرگﺗرﯾن/ ﭘﯾرﺗرﯾن  
only child  ﺗﻧﮭﺎ ﺑﭼﮫ / ﺗﮏ ﻓرزﻧد  
parents واﻟدﯾن 
party ﺟﺷن/ ﻣﮭﻣﺎﻧﯽ/ ﭘﺎرﺗﯽ  
pen friend (f/m) دوﺳت ﻣﮑﺎﺗﺑﮫای  
people ﻣردم 
person آدم، ﻧﻔر 
pet ﺣﯾوان ﺧﺎﻧﮕﯽ 
picture ﺗﺻوﯾر/ ﻧﻘﺎﺷﯽ  
plant ﮔﯾﺎه 
present, gift ھدﯾﮫ 
public holiday ﺗﻌطﯾلﻋﻣوﻣﯽ  
rabbit ﺧرﮔوش 
refrigerator ﯾﺧﭼﺎل 
relationship راﺑطﮫ  
religion ﻣذھب 
sauna ﺣﻣﺎم ﺑﺧﺎر/ ﺳوﻧﺎ  
serious ﺟدی 
sister ﺧواھر 
slim ﻧﺣﯾف/ ﻻﻏر  
snake ﻣﺎر  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
119 
Foundation tier (continued)  
sofa, settee ﻧﯾﻣﮑت/ ﮐﺎﻧﺎﭘﮫ  
son ﭘﺳر/ ﻓرزﻧدﭘﺳر  
stomach ﺷﮑم / ﻣﻌده  
straight (hair) )ﻣو( ﺻﺎف 
study (room) اﺗﺎق ﻣطﺎﻟﻌﮫ 
surname اﺳم ﻓﺎﻣﯾل ﻧﺎمِ ﺧﺎﻧوادﮔﯽ  
table ﻣﯾز 
talented ﻣﺳﺗﻌد/ ﺧوش ﻗرﯾﺣﮫ/ ﺑﺎ اﺳﺗﻌداد  
teenager, youth ﻧوﺟواﻧﺎن 
terrace ﺗراس/ اﯾوان   
throat ﮔﻠو 
to be healthy, fit ﺳﺎﻟم ﺑودن/ ﺗﻧدرﺳت/ ﺧوش ﺑﻧﯾﮫ  
to look (e.g. angry/happy etc) ﻋﺻﺑﺎﻧﯽ/ ﺧوﺷﺣﺎل ﺑﮫ ﻧظر  رﺳﯾدن   
tooth دﻧدان 
tropical fish ﻣﺎھﯽ اﺳﺗواﯾﯽ  
ugly زﺷت ﮐرﯾﮫ/ ﺑﯽ ﻗواره  
uncle ﻋﻣو/ ﺧﺎﻟو/ داﯾﯽ  
visit ﺑﺎزدﯾد دﯾدار  
wife ھﻣﺳر )زن 
woman/lady زن/  ﺑﺎﻧو  
younger ﺟوانﺗر  
youth ﻧوﺟواﻧﺎن 
Higher tier 
acquaintance آﺷﻧﺎ 
alone ﺗﻧﮭﺎ 
argument  ﺑﺣث / ﻣﺷﺎﺟرهﺑﮕو ﻣﮕو  
belief اﻋﺗﻘﺎد/ ﺑﺎور  
brave, adventurous دﻻور/ دﻟﯾر/  ﭘرﻣﺎﺟرا/ ﻣﺎﺟراﺟو  
career ﻣﻘﺎم / ﺷﻐل/ ﺣرﻓﮫ  
carpet ﻓرش / ﻗﺎﻟﯽ  
celebrity ﺷﺧص ﻧﺎﻣدار / ﺳﺗﺎره ﯾﺎ  ﺷﺧﺻﯾت ﺑرﺟﺳﺗﮫ  
character (in film, etc) ﻧﻘش )در ﻓﯾﻠم ﯾﺎ ﺗﺄﺗر 
character, nature ﺷﺧﺻﯾت/  طﺑﯾﻌت ﺷﺧص  
discrimination/differentiation ﺗﺑﻌﯾض/ ﻓرق ﮔذاری  
elbow آرﻧﺞ 
elderly ﻣﺳن  
example ﻣﺛﺎل  
faith (religious) اﯾﻣﺎن)دﯾﻧﯽ(  
famous ﻣﺷﮭور/ ﻣﻌروف  
feeling اﺣﺳﺎﺳﺎت ﺣس  
furnished ﻣﺑﻠﮫ  
gender, sex ﺟﻧس/ ﺟﻧﺳﯾت 
guy, dude, bloke ﻣرد / ﻓرد/ ﺷﺧص 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
120 
Higher tier (continued)  
habit/temperament ﻋﺎدت/ ﺧو  
hall (in house) ﺳﺎﻟن/ ﺗﺎﻻر  
honest ﺻﺎدق/ راﺳﺗﮕو  
husband ﺷوھر 
invitation دﻋوت 
knee زاﻧو 
lazy ﺗﻧﺑل 
lively ﺳرزﻧده/  ﺑﺎ   روح  
loft ﺳﻘف/ ا طﺎق   زﯾر ﺷﯾرواﻧﯽ  
loyal, faithful ﺑﺎ  وﻓﺎ /  وﻓﺎدار/  وظ ﯾﻔﮫ ﺷﻧﺎس/ ﺛﺎﺑت  
married ﻣﺗﺄ ھل/ ﻋروﺳﯽ ﮐرده  
meeting ﻣﻼﻗﺎت  
member of the family ﻋﺿوﺧﺎﻧواده 
mirror آﯾﻧﮫ 
mood ﺣﺎﻟت/ ﻣزاج/  ﺧﺎطر  
old age ﮐﮭﻧﺳﺎل/ ﭘﯾر  
old people’s home ﺧﺎﻧﮫ ﺳﺎﻟﻣﻧدان  
old fashioned ﺳﺑﮏ ﻗدﯾﻣﯽ/ ﻗدﯾﻣﯽ از ﻣد اﻓﺗﺎده  
optimistic ﺧوش ﺑﯾن  
pensioner ﻣﺳﺗﻣری ﺑﮕﯾ ر/ ﺑﺎزﻧﺷﺳﺗﮫ  
pessimistic ﺑد ﺑﯾن  
place of residence ﻣﺣل اﻗﺎﻣت/ ﻣﺣل ﺳﮑوﻧت 
racist ﻧژاد ﭘرﺳت  
reasonable ﻣﻌﻘول/ ﻣﻧﺎﺳب/ ﻣﺳﺗدل  
relationship ﺗﻌﻠﻖ ارﺗﺑﺎط /  ﺧوﯾﺷﺎوﻧدی/ واﺑﺳﺗﮕﯽ  
relative, relation ﻓﺎﻣﯾل/ ﻧﺳﺑت  ﻓﺎﻣﯾﻠﯽ  
reliable ﻣﻌﺗﺑر/ ﻗﺎﺑل اﻋﺗﻣﺎد  
self (myself, yourself etc) ﺧود/ﺧودش ﺧوﯾش  
selfish ﺧودﺧواه 
sense of humour ﺣس ﺷوخ  طﺑﻌﯽ/ ﺣس ﻣزاح  
sensitive ﺣﺳﺎس  
similar ﯾﮑﺳﺎن 
study, office اﺗﺎق ﻣطﺎﻟﻌﮫ / دﻓﺗر ﮐﺎر 
survey  ﻧظرﺳﻧﺟﯽ/ ﺑررﺳﯽ  
thin/slender ﻧﺣﯾف/ ﻻﻏر  
to babysit ﺑﭼﮫ داری ﮐردن  
to do the washing up ﺷﺳﺗﺷو ﮐردن 
to get on (well) with ﺑﮫ ﺧوﺑﯽ ﮐﻧﺎر  آﻣدن ﺑﺎ  
to move house ﻣﻧزل ﻋوض ﮐردن/ اﺳﺑﺎب ﮐﺷﯽ ﮐردن 
to support ﭘﺷﺗﯾﺑﺎﻧﯽ ﮐردن/ ﺣﻣﺎ ﯾت ﮐردن  
understanding ﺗواﻓﻖ/ ادراک / ﻓﮭم  
unemployed ﺑﯽﮐﺎر  
wages ﻣزد/ دﺳﺗﻣزد/ ﺣﻘوق 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
121 
Higher tier (continued)  
wanted ﺗﺣت ﺗﻌﻘﯾب/  ﺧواﺳﺗﮫ  
way of life, lifestyle روش  زﻧدﮔﯽ 
  
Identity and culture: cultural life 
Foundation tier 
adventure film ﻓﯾﻠم ﻣﺎﺟراﺟو ﯾﯽ  
aerobics اﯾروﺑﯾﮏ  
art gallery ﮔﺎﻟری ھﻧر/ ﻧﮕﺎرﺧﺎﻧﮫ ھﻧر ی  
athletics ورزش ﻗﮭرﻣﺎﻧﯽ  
badminton ﺑدﻣﯾﻧﺗون  
ball ﺗوپ ﺑﺎزی 
ballet رﻗص ﺑﺎﻟﮫ  
band/group ارﮐﺳﺗر/ دﺳﺗﮫ ﻧوازﻧدﮔﺎن  
basketball ﺑﺳﮑﺗﺑﺎل 
book ﮐﺗﺎب  
boxing ﺑوﮐس 
camera دورﺑﯾن 
camping اردو رﻓﺗن 
caravan ﮐﺎروان 
cards (playing) ورق ھﺎیﺑﺎزی  
cartoon ﮐﺎرﺗون/ ﮐﺎرﯾﮑﺎﺗور/ ﻓﯾﻠمھﺎی ﻧﻘﺎﺷﯽ ﺷده  
cat ﮔرﺑﮫ 
CD (compact disc) ﺳﯽ دی 
celebration ﺟﺷن 
chess ﺷطرﻧﺞ 
choir ﮔروه ﮐر 
Christmas ﮐرﯾﺳﻣس/ ﻣﯾﻼدﺣﺿرت ﻣﺳﯾﺢ  
cinema (medium) ﺳﯾﻧﻣﺎ 
clarinet ﮐﻼرﯾﻧت/ ﻗره ﻧﯽ  
classical, classic ﮐﻼﺳﯾﮑﯽ 
club ﮐﻠوب، ﺑﺎﺷﮕﺎه، اﻧﺟﻣن 
collect ﻣﺗراﮐم ﮐردن/  ﺟﻣﻊ ﮐردن  
collection ﺟﻣﻊ آوری/  ﻣﺟﻣوﻋﮫ  /  ﮐﻠﮑﺳﯾون  
comedy ﮐﻣدی / ﺧﻧده دار  
computer game ﺑﺎزی راﯾﺎﻧﮫا ی  
concert ﮐﻧﺳرت / ﻧﻣﺎﯾش آوازوﻣوﺳﯾﻘﯽ  
cultural ﻓرھﻧﮕﯽ   
culture ﻓرھﻧﮓ 
cycling دوﭼرﺧﮫ ﺳواری  
dance رﻗص  
detective/police (story) ﮐﺎرآﮔﺎه/ ﭘﻠﯾس  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
122 
Foundation tier (continued)  
disco (place) دﯾﺳﮑو  
documentary ﻣﺳﺗﻧد 
drum طﺑل/  دھل  
Easter ﻋﯾد ﭘﺎک / وﻓﺎت ﻣﺳﯾﺢ  
event  روﯾداد/  ﻣوﻗﻌ ﯾت  
festival ﺟﺷﻧواره/ﻋ ﯾد  
film ﻓﯾﻠم 
flute ﻧﯽ، ﻓﻠوت 
football ﻓوﺗﺑﺎل 
free time وﻗت آزاد 
game ﻣﺳﺎﺑﻘﮫ  
guitar ﮔﯾﺗﺎر 
gymnastics ژﯾﻣﻧﺎﺳﺗﯾﮏ  
happy anniversary! ﺳﺎﻟﮕرد ازدواج ﻣﺑﺎرک!  
happy birthday!  ﺗوﻟدت ﻣﺑﺎرک!  
happy new year! ﺳﺎلﻧوﻣﺑﺎرک!  
hobby, leisure activity ﺳرﮔرﻣﯽ 
hockey ھﺎﮐﯽ/  ﭼوﮔﺎن  ﺑﺎزی ﺑﺎ  اﺻول ﻓوﺗﺑﺎل  
horror film ﻓﯾﻠم ﺗرﺳﻧﺎک  
ice skating اﺳﮑﯾت رویﯾﺦ / ﭘﺎﺗﯾﻧﺎژ  
idea اﯾده/  اﻧدﯾﺷﮫ/   ﻓﮑر  
instrument وﺳﯾﻠﮫ/ اﺑزار ﻣوﺳﯾﻘﯽ 
interest ﻋﻼﻗﮫ/  دﻟﺑﺳﺗﮕﯽ  
life زﻧدﮔﯽ 
lottery ﻗرﻋﮫ/  ﺑﺧت آزﻣﺎ ﯾﯽ/  ﻗرﻋﮫ  ﮐﺷﯽ  
magazine ﻣﺟﻠﮫ 
method روش/  اﺳﻠوب/  طرﯾﻖ  
mobile phone ﺗﻠﻔن ھﻣراه 
MP3 player دﺳﺗﮕﺎه ﭘﺧش ام ﭘﯽ3  
music ﻣوﺳﯾﻘﯽ / ﻣوزﯾﮏ 
musical (show) ﻧﻣﺎﯾش ﺑﮫ ھﻣراه ﻣوﺳﯾﻘﯽ و آواز/ ﻧﻣﺎﯾش آھﻧﮕﯾن 
New Year ﺳﺎل ﻧو 
New Year’s day (Iranian 1st Farvardin) ﻧوروز 
news ﺧﺑر 
nightclub ﮐﻠوپ ﺷﺑﺎﻧﮫ  
occasion ﻣﻧﺎﺳﺑت 
opera اﭘرا 
orchestra ارﮐﺳﺗر/  دﺳﺗﮫ ﻧوازﻧدﮔﺎن  
party ﻣﯾﮭﻣﺎﻧﯽ 
photo(graph) ﻋﮑس 
piano ﭘﯾﺎﻧو 
ping pong ﭘﯾﻧﮓ ﭘوﻧﮓ  
player ﺑﺎزﯾﮑن 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
123 
Foundation tier (continued)  
pocket money ﭘول ﺗوﺟﯾﺑﯽ 
pop music ﻣوﺳﯾﻘﯽ ﭘﺎپ 
programme, broadcast ﺑرﻧﺎﻣﮫ 
rap رپ 
rock music ﻣوﺳﯾﻘﯽ راک  
role ﻧﻘش  
role model اﻟﮕو/ ﺳرﻣﺷﻖ  
romantic ﻋﺎﺷﻘﺎﻧﮫ 
rugby راﮔﺑﯽ  
saxophone ﺳﺎﮐﺳوﻓون 
science-fiction film ﻓﯾﻠم ﻋﻠﻣﯽ ﺗﺧﯾ ﻠﯽ  
sculpture ﻣﺟﺳﻣﮫ 
series ﺳ﷼  
show (theatre etc) ﻧﻣﺎ ﯾش/ ﺗﺄﺗر  
show, performance اﺟرا/ ﺑرﻧﺎﻣﮫ 
skate boarding اﺳﮑﯾت ﺑورد 
skiing اﺳﮑﯽ 
socialising رﻓت وآﻣد ﮐردن/ ﺑﺎ دوﺳﺗﺎن و آﺷﻧﺎﯾﺎن وﻗت
ﮔذراﻧدن/ ﻣﻌﺎﺷرت 
sport ورزش 
sports centre/ground ورزﺷﮕﺎه / زﻣﯾن ورزش 
sporty ورزﺷﯽ 
spy film ﻓﯾﻠم ﺟﺎﺳوﺳﯽ  
squash اﺳﮑواش 
surfing ﻣوج ﺳواری 
swimming ﺷﻧﺎ ﮐردن 
team ﺗﯾم/ ﮔروه 
television (medium) ﺗﻠوﯾزﯾوﻧﯽ 
tennis ﺗﯾﻧس 
theme ﻣوﺿوع/ ﺗم  
theme park ﭘﺎرک ﺗﻔرﯾﺣﺎت 
thriller ھﯾﺟﺎن اﻧﮕﯾز  
to adore ﻋﺷﻖ  ورزﯾدن/  ﭘرﺳﺗش ﮐردن  
to celebrate ﺟﺷن ﮔرﻓﺗن/ ﻋﯾدﮔرﻓﺗن  
to dance رﻗﺻﯾدن رﻗص ﮐردن  
to do sport ﺑﺎزی ﮐردن/  ورزش ﮐردن  
to get married ﻋروﺳﯽ ازدواج ﮐردن  
to take part (in) ﺷرﮐت ﮐردن/  ﺳﮭﯾم ﺷدن  
toy اﺳﺑﺎب ﺑﺎزی 
TV) channel ﮐﺎﻧﺎل ﺗﻠوﯾزﯾون  
video camera دورﺑﯾن ﻓﯾﻠﻣﺑرداری  
video/computer game ﺑﺎزی راﯾﺎﻧﮫا ی  
violin وﯾوﻟن 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
124 
Foundation tier (continued)  
volleyball واﻟﯾﺑﺎل  
windsurfing ﻣوج ﺳواری  
youth club  ﺑﺎﺷﮕﺎه ﺟواﻧﺎن/  ﮐﻠوپ ﺟواﻧﺎن  
Higher tier 
accordion آﮐوردﺋون 
amusement ﺗﻔرﯾﺣﺎت 
audience ﺣﺎﺿرﯾن / ﻣﺧﺎطب 
author ﻧوﯾﺳﻧده/ ﮔردآورﻧده 
boat ﻗﺎﯾﻖ 
bowling (tenpin) ﺑﺎزی ﺑوﻟﯾﻧﮓ 
ceremony ﻣراﺳم/  ﺟﺷن/ رﺳم 
championship ﻗﮭرﻣﺎﻧﯽ/  ﻣﺳﺎﺑﻘﮫ ﻗﮭرﻣﺎﻧ ﯽ  
Christmas tree درﺧت ﮐرﯾﺳﻣس  
competition ﻣﺳﺎﺑﻘﮫ  
drama (TV etc) ﻧﻣﺎﯾش، درام 
entertainment ﺗﻔرﯾﺢ 
fencing ﺷﺷﻣﺷﯾر ﺑﺎزی  
figure skating رﻗص روی ﯾﺦ  
friendly دوﺳﺗﺎﻧﮫ / رﻓﺎﻗتآﻣﯾز  
genre ژاﻧر/  ﺟور/  ﻧوع  
goal ھدف/  ﻣﻘﺻود  
knowledge داﻧش/   آﮔﺎھﯽ /  ﻣﻌرﻓت  
league ﻟﯾﮓ/  اﺗﺣﺎدﯾﮫ/  اﻧﺟﻣن  
leisure ﻓراﻏت /  ﻓرﺻت/  آﺳودﮔﯽ  
melody ﻧﻐﻣﮫ/  ﺻدای ﻣوﺳﯾﻘﯽ ﻧوا  
mountain bike دوﭼرﺧﮫ ﮐوھﺳﺗﺎﻧﯽ  
mountaineering ﮐوھﻧوردی  
play (theatre)  ﻧﻣﺎﯾش/ ﺗﺄﺗر 
pleasure ﻟذت/ ﺧوش وﻗﺗﯽ/ اﻧﺑﺳﺎط  ﺧﺎطر  
prize ﺟﺎﯾزه 
referee داور 
review ﻣرور/ ﻣرور  ﮐردن/ اﻧﺗﻘﺎد ﮐردن  
riding ﺳواری 
roller skate اﺳﮑﯾت ﭼرخ دار 
sailing ﻗﺎﯾﻖ ﺑﺎدﺑﺎﻧﯽ ﺳواری 
singer آواز ﺧوان/ ﺧواﻧﻧده 
skiing اﺳﮑﯽ 
skis اﺳﮑﯽ ﭼوب 
soap (opera) ﺳ﷼ھﺎی ﮐوﺗﺎه ﺗﻠوﯾزﯾوﻧﯽ  
song ﺳرود 
stadium ورزﺷﮕﺎه 
stage وھﻠﮫ/ ﺳطﺢ/  ﺻﺣﻧﮫ ﻧﻣﺎ ﯾ ش  
subtitles زﯾرﻧوﯾس  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
125 
Higher tier (continued)  
table tennis ﺗﻧﯾس روی ﻣﯾز 
to create ﺧﻠﻖ  ﻛردن/ اﯾﺟﺎد ﮐردن  
to do gymnastics  ژﯾﻣﻧﺎﺳﺗﯾﮏ ﮐردن/ اﻧﺟﺎم ورزش ژﯾﻣﻧﺎﺳﺗﯾﮏ  
to fish/go fishing ﻣﺎھﯾﮕﯾری ﮐردن 
to hike, ramble ﭘﯾﺎده روی  
to occupy oneself, do  ﻣﺷﻐول ﺷدن/ اﻧﺟﺎم دادن  
to participate ﺷرﮐت ﮐردن/  ﻣﺷﺎرﮐت ﮐردن  
to roller-skate اﺳﮑﯾت ﮐردن 
to sail ﮐﺷﺗﯽ ﺑﺎدﺑﺎﻧﯽ راﻧدن 
to score a goal اﻣﺗﯾﺎز ﮔرﻓﺗن/ ﻧﻣره ﮔرﻓﺗن/ ﮔل زدن  
to skateboard اﺳﮑﯾت ﮐردن 
to train ﺗرﺑﯾت ﮐردن/  ﺗﻌﻠﯾم دادن  
tournament ﻣﺳﺎﺑﻘﮫ  
training ﺗرﺑﯾت / ﺗﻌﻠﯾم  
trumpet ﺷﯾﭘور/  ﺑوق  
unforgettable ﻓراﻣوش ﻧﺷدﻧﯽ  
viewer ﺑﯾﻧﻧده/  ﺗﻣﺎﺷﺎﮔر/  ﺗﻣﺎﺷﺎﭼﯽ  
writer  ﻧوﯾﺳﻧده 
Xbox اﯾﮑس ﺑﺎﮐس/  ﮐﻧﺳول ﺑﺎزی ﮐﺎﻣﭘﯾوﺗری  
  
Identity and culture: using social media 
Foundation tier 
advantage ﻓﺎﯾده/ ﺑرﺗری 
blog وﺑﻼگ 
chatroom ﭼت روم  
computer ﮐﺎﻣﭘﯾوﺗر، راﯾﺎﻧﮫ 
computer game ﺑﺎزی راﯾﺎﻧﮫا ی  
disadvantage ﺿرر/ ﻋﯾب/  اﺷﮑﺎل  
disk ﺳﯽ دی/ ﻟوح ﻓﺷرده 
email اﯾﻣﯾل/ ﻧﺎﻣﮫ اﻟﮑﺗروﻧﯾﮑﯽ 
internet اﯾﻧﺗرﻧت 
laptop ﻟپ ﺗﺎپ  
new technology ﺗﮑﻧوﻟوژی ﺟدﯾد 
page ﺻﻔﺣﮫ  
password رﻣزﻋﺑور 
programme ﺑرﻧﺎﻣﮫ 
risk ﺧطر/  رﯾﺳﮏ /  اﺣﺗﻣﺎل زﯾ ﺎن و ﺿرر  
screen ﺻﻔﺣﮫ ﺗﻠوﯾزﯾ ون/ ﺻﻔﺣﮫی راﯾﺎﻧﮫ/ ﭘرده ﺳﯾﻧﻣﺎ  
social/mass media رﺳﺎﻧﮫھﺎی اﺟﺗﻣﺎﻋﯽ/ ﮔروھﯽ  
technology ﺗﮑﻧوﻟوژی 
to chat online ﮔﻔﺗﮕو ﺑﮫ ﺻورت آﻧﻼﯾن 
to download داﻧﻠود ﮐردن 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
126 
Foundation tier (continued)  
to erase, delete ﺣذف ﮐردن   
to load ﺑﺎرﮔذاری ﮐردن 
to save/store اﻧﺑﺎر ﮐردن/ ذﺧﯾره ﮐردن  
to surf (the net)  ﺟﺳﺗﺟو ﮐردن  
to type ﺗﺎﯾپ  
to upload آﭘﻠود 
to use اﺳﺗﻔﺎده ﮐردن  
use of technology اﺳﺗﻔﺎده از ﻓن  آوری  
virtual ﻣﺟﺎزی  
virus وﯾروس  
web وب 
web page ﺻﻔﺣﮫ وب  
webcam وﺑﮑم/ دورﺑﯾن راﯾﺎﻧﮫ  
website وب ﺳﺎﯾت / ﺗﺎرﻧﻣﺎ 
Higher tier 
connection اﺗﺻﺎل  
features/specifications ﺧﺻوﺻﯾ ﺎت  /وﯾژﮔﯽھﺎ  
homepage ﺻﻔﺣﮫ اﺻﻠﯽ 
social network ﺷﺑﮑﮫھﺎی اﺟﺗﻣﺎﻋﯽ  
  
Local area, holiday and travel 
Foundation tier 
accommodation ﻣﺣل اﻗﺎﻣت 
adult ﺑﺎﻟﻎ/ ﺑزرگ 
air ھوا/ ﺑﺎد 
airport ﻓرودﮔﺎه 
aquarium آﮐوارﯾوم  
area (in town) ﻣﻧطﻘﮫ  
art gallery ﮔﺎﻟری ھﻧر / ﻧﻘﺎﺷﯽ 
atlas ﮐﺗﺎب ﻧﻘﺷﮫ ﺟﮭﺎن 
balcony ﺑﺎﻟﮑن/ اﯾوان 
baker’s shop ﻧﺎﻧواﯾﯽ 
bank ﺑﺎﻧﮏ  
bar ﺑﺎر، ﻣﯾﻠﮫ 
barbecue ﮐﺑﺎب ﮐردن 
bath ﺣﻣﺎم / وان 
bathroom ﺣﻣﺎم  
beach ﺳﺎﺣل/ ﮐﻧﺎر درﯾﺎ 
bed ﺑﺳﺗر/ ﺗﺧتﺧواب  
bicycle/bike دو ﭼرﺧﮫ 
boat ﻗﺎﯾﻖ 
bridge ﭘُل 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
127 
Foundation tier (continued)  
brochure ﮐﺗﺎﺑﭼﮫاطﻼﻋﯽ / ﺑروﺷور  
building ﻋﻣﺎرت/ ﺳﺎﺧﺗﻣﺎن 
bus (by bus) اﺗوﺑوس 
bus stop اﯾﺳﺗﮕﺎه اﺗوﺑوس  
bus/coach station اﯾﺳﺗﮕﺎه اﺗوﺑوس 
business ﺗﺟﺎرت/ﺣرﻓﮫ  
café ﮐﺎﻓﮫ، ﻗﮭوه ﺧﺎﻧﮫ 
camp اردو 
campsite اردوﮔﺎه/ ﻣﺣل اردو 
capital city ﭘﺎﯾﺗﺧت  
car ﻣﺎﺷﯾن 
car, automobile اﺗوﻣﺑﯾل 
cathedral ﮐﻠﯾﺳﺎ ی ﺟﺎﻣﻊ  
centre ﻣرﮐز 
chemist داروﺧﺎﻧﮫ 
cheque book دﺳﺗﮫ ﭼﮏ ﺑﺎﻧﮑﯽ 
church ﮐﻠﯾﺳﺎ 
cinema (building) ﺳﯾﻧﻣﺎ 
circus ﺳﯾرک  
closed ﺑﺳﺗﮫ ﺷده 
club ﺑﺎﺷﮕﺎه 
coach ﻣرﺑﯽ 
coast ﺳﺎﺣل  
concert ﮐﻧﺳرت 
country (i.e. nation) ﻣﻠﮏ/ ﮐﺷور 
countryside دھﺎت، ﺑﯾرون ﺷﮭر 
credit card ﮐﺎرت اﻋﺗﺑﺎر ی  
department (in a shop) ﺑﺧش/ ﺷﻌﺑﮫ / ﻗﺳﻣت  
department store ﻓروﺷﮕﺎهِ ﺑزرگ 
destination ﻣﻘﺻد/ ھدف  
direct ﻣﺳﺗﻘﯾم/ راﺳت  
direction ﺟﮭت، ﺳﻣت 
disco دﯾﺳﮑو  
door در/ درب  
entrance ورودی 
exit ﺧروج، ﺧروﺟﯽ )از ﺑزرﮔراه 
experience ﺗﺟرﺑﮫ 
factory ﮐﺎرﺧﺎﻧﮫ 
farm ﻣزرﻋﮫ، ﮐﺷﺗزار 
festival ﺟﺷﻧواره 
flight ﭘرواز 
flight tickets ﺑﻠﯾت ﭘرواز 
floor (1st, 2nd) طﺑﻘﮫ )اول، دوم 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
128 
Foundation tier (continued)  
form ﻓرم، ﺷﮑل 
ground floor طﺑﻘﮫھﻣﮑف  
guest ﻣﮭﻣﺎن 
guided tour ﺗور ﺑﺎ  راھﻧﻣﺎ/ راھﻧﻣﺎی ﺗور ﮔردﺷﮕری  
help ﮐﻣﮏ 
historic ﺗﺎرﯾﺧﯽ  
historical relics آﺛﺎرِ ﺑﺎﺳﺗﺎﻧﯽ 
holiday cottage ﮐﻠﺑﮫی ﺗﻌط ﯾﻼت  
holidays ﺗﻌطﯾﻼت  
hospital ﺑﯾﻣﺎرﺳﺗﺎن 
hotel ھﺗل 
ice rink ﻣﺣوطﮫ ﭘﺎﺗﯾﻧﺎژ/ زﻣﯾن اﺳﮑﯽ روی ﯾﺦ  
identification ﺑرگ ﺷﻧﺎﺳﺎﯾﯽ 
information office دﻓﺗر اطﻼﻋﺎت 
incident اﺗﻔﺎق/ﺣﺎدﺛﮫ/ روﯾداد 
journey (short) ﺳﻔر ﮐوﺗﺎه 
journey ﻣﺳﺎﻓرت 
key ﮐﻠﯾد 
lake درﯾﺎﭼﮫ 
leaflet دﻓﺗرﭼﮫ 
library ﮐﺗﺎﺑﺧﺎﻧﮫ 
lift ﺑﺎﻻ ﺑر/ آﺳﺎﻧﺳور 
local area ﻣﻧطﻘﮫﻣﺣﻠﯽ  
lost-property office ادارهی اﻣوال ﮔﻣﺷده  
luggage ﺑﺎروﺑﻧﮫی ﺳﻔر/ ﺟﺎﻣﮫ دان  
map ﻧﻘﺷﮫ  
market ﺑﺎزار  
means of transport وﺳﺎﯾل ﻧﻘل و ﺣﻣل 
microwave ﻣﺎﯾﮑرو وﯾو 
monument ﺑﻧﺎ ی ﯾﺎدﮔﺎری/ ﻟوﺣﮫ ﺗﺎرﯾ ﺧ ﯽ  
mosque ﻣﺳﺟد 
motorbike ﻣوﺗورﺳﯾﮑﻠت  
mountain ﮐوه 
museum ﻣوزه 
newspaper stall دﮐﮫروزﻧﺎﻣﮫ  ﻓروﺷﯽ  
night club ﺑﺎﺷﮕﺎه ﺷﺑﺎﻧﮫ 
occupied/taken اﺷﻐﺎل / ﮔرﻓﺗﮫ ﺷده 
office دﻓﺗر 
on foot ﭘﺎیﭘﯾﺎده  
on the left در ﺳﻣتﭼپ  
on the right در ﺳﻣتراﺳت  
open ﺑﺎز  
palace ﮐﺎخ  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
129 
Foundation tier (continued)  
paper ﮐﺎﻏذ 
park ﭘﺎرک  
passenger ﻣﺳﺎﻓر 
passport  ﮔذرﻧﺎﻣﮫ  
passport control ﮐﻧﺗرل ﭘﺎﺳﭘورت 
petrol ﺑﻧزﯾن / ﻧﻔت 
place ﺟﺎ / ﻣﺣل 
plane ھواﭘﯾﻣﺎ 
platform ﺳﮑو 
police officer اﻓﺳرﭘﻠﯾس ﻣرد زن  
port ﻟﻧﮕرﮔﺎه/ ﺑﻧدر  
post office اداره ﭘﺳت/ ﭘﺳﺗﺧﺎﻧﮫ  
postcard ﮐﺎرت ﭘﺳﺗﺎل 
poster ﭘوﺳﺗر/ ﻋﮑسِ دﯾواری  
priority اوﻟوﯾت / ﺗرﺟﯾﺢ 
problem ﻣﺷﮑل 
public ﻋﻣوﻣﯽ/ ﻋﻣوم/ ﻋوام  
public transport وﺳﺎﯾلاﯾﺎب وذھﺎبِ ﻋﻣوﻣﯽ/ وﺳﺎﯾلﻧﻘﻠﯾﮫھﻣﮕﺎﻧﯽ  
radio رادﯾو 
railway ﺧط راه آھن 
region, area ﻣﻧطﻘﮫ/ ﻧﺎﺣﯾ ﮫ  
region, district ﻣﺣﻠﮫ 
return ticket ﺑﻠﯾت دوﺳره/ ﺑﻠﯾت دوطرﻓﮫ 
river رود / رودﺧﺎﻧﮫ  
road ﺟﺎده  
room اﺗﺎق 
room (in hotel) ﺟﺎ  / ﻣﮑﺎن  
rucksack ﮐوﻟﮫ ﭘﺷﺗﯽ 
sea درﯾﺎ 
season ﻓﺻل  
shop ﻣﻐﺎزه دﮐﺎن  
shopping ﺧرﯾد ﮐردن 
shopping centre ﺑﺎزار/ﻣرﮐزِﺧرﯾد، ﻣﺟﺗﻣﻊ ﻓروش  
show ﻧﻣﺎ ﯾش/ اراﺋﮫ/  ﺟﻠوه  
shower دوش،  رﮔﺑﺎرِﺑﺎران 
sight, tourist attraction, place to see ﻣﻧﺎظردﯾدﻧﯽ/ ﺟﺎذﺑﮫھﺎی ﮔردﺷﮕری  
single ticket ﺑﻠﯾت ﯾﮏ ﺳره/ ﺑﻠﯾت ﯾﮏ طرﻓﮫ 
snack bar ﺑﯾﺳﮑوﯾت ﯾﺎ ﮐﯾﮏ ﮐوﭼﮏ 
buffet/café (on a train) ﺑوﻓﮫ/ ﮐﺎﻓﮫ  
souvenir ﺳوﻏﺎت 
sports centre ورزﺷﮕﺎه 
square (in town) ﻣﯾدان، ﻣﯾداﻧﮕﺎه 
stadium ورزﺷﮕﺎه 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
130 
Foundation tier (continued)  
station (mainline railway) اﯾﺳﺗﮕﺎه 
station (metro) اﯾﺳﺗﮕﺎه )ﻣﺗرو(  
street ﺧﯾﺎﺑﺎن 
suburb, outskirts of town ﺑﯾرونِ ﺷﮭر 
suitcase ﭼﻣدان 
summer camp اردوﮔﺎه ﺗﺎﺑﺳﺗﺎﻧﯽ 
surname ﻧﺎمِ ﺧﺎﻧِوادﮔﯽ 
swimming pool اﺳﺗﺧرﺷﻧﺎ 
synagogue ﮐﻧﯾﺳﮫ 
taxi ﺗﺎﮐﺳﯽ  
teenager ﺟواﻧﺎن 
television set  دﺳﺗﮕﺎه ﺗﻠوﯾزﯾون 
tennis court  زﻣﯾن ﺑﺎزی ﺗﻧﯾس 
tent ﺧﯾﻣﮫ/ ﭼﺎدر 
theatre ﺗﺋﺎﺗر/ ﻧﻣﺎﯾش 
amusement park ﭘﺎرک ﺗﻔرﯾﺣﺎت 
ticket tram, bus or metro  ﺑﻠﯾت 
ticket office دﻓﺗر ﻓروشِ ﺑﻠﯾت  
till, cash desk  ﺻﻧدوق ﭘول/ ﻣﯾز ﭘرداﺧت 
to photograph ﻋﮑﺳﺑرداری  ﮐردن/ ﻋﮑس  ﮔرﻓﺗن  
toilets ﻣﺳﺗراح/ ﺗواﻟت 
tour ﮔﺷت، ﺗور 
tourism ﺟﮭﺎﻧﮕردی/ ﮔردﺷﮕری 
tourist ﺟﮭﺎﻧﮕرد/ ﮔردﺷﮕر 
tourist attractions ﺟﺎذﺑﮫھﺎی ﺗورﯾﺳﺗﯽ/ ﮔردﺷﮕری  
tourist information office  دﻓﺗرﺟﮭﺎﻧﮕردی  
town ﺷﮭر)ﮐوﭼﮏ( ﺷﮭرک 
town centre ﻣرﮐزِ ﺷﮭر  
train ﻗطﺎر 
traffic ازدﺣﺎم وﺳﺎﯾل ﻧﻘﻠﯾﮫ/ ﺗراﻓﯾﮏ 
tram ﺗراﻣوا/ ﻗطﺎر ﺧﯾﺎﺑﺎﻧﯽ 
travel agent آژاﻧسﻣﺳﺎﻓرﺗﯽ  
traveller ﻣﺳﺎﻓر 
trip, outing ﺳﻔر/ ﮔردش 
underground railway ﻗطﺎر زﯾِرِزﻣﯾﻧﯽ  
underground station اﯾﺳﺗﮕﺎه ﻗطﺎر زﯾرِزﻣﯾﻧﯽ  
vacations/holidays ﺗﻌطﯾﻼت  
valley دره 
village دھﮑده 
way out/exit ﺧروج 
welcome ﺧوش آﻣدﯾد 
window ﭘﻧﺟره 
winter holidays ﺗﻌطﯾﻼت زﻣﺳﺗﺎن 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
131 
Foundation tier (continued)  
yard, courtyard ﺣﯾﺎط 
youth hostel ﻣﮭﻣﺎﻧﺳرایِ ﺟواﻧﺎن 
zoo ﺑﺎغ وﺣش 
Higher tier 
accident ﺣﺎدﺛﮫ، ﺗﺻﺎدف 
abroad  ﺧﺎرج ازﮐﺷور  
accommodation ﻣﺳﮑن/ ﺟﺎ  
adolescent ﻧوﺟوان 
agricultural ﮐﺷﺎورزی/  زراﻋﺗﯽ  
air conditioning ﺗﮭوﯾﮫ ﻣطﺑوع  
air hostess ﻣﮭﻣﺎﻧدار)زن( ھواﭘﯾﻣﺎ 
arrival ورود 
ATM دﺳﺗﮕﺎهِ ﺧود ﺑردار/ ﻋﺎﺑر ﺑﺎﻧﮏ  
bank card ﮐﺎرتِ ﺑﺎﻧﮏ 
basement زﯾرزﻣﯾن ﺧﺎﻧﮫ 
border ﺳرﺣد/ ﻣرز  
brand/make ﺳﺎﺧت/ﻣﺎرک 
calm/peaceful ﺻﻠﺢ آﻣﯾز/   آرام  
canal آﺑراهﮐﺎﻧﺎل  
car park ﭘﺎرﮐﯾﻧﮓ 
castle ﻗﻠﻌﮫ  
change ﺗﻐﯾﯾر دادن /ﻋوض  ﮐردن  
comfortable راﺣت 
commercial ﺗﺟﺎری  
compartment (train) ﻣﺣﻔظﮫ )ﻗطﺎر(/ ﮐوﭘﮫ ﻗطﺎر 
cooker ﮔﺎز  ﺟﺎق ا 
corner ﮔوﺷﮫ 
crossroads ﭼﮭﺎرراه 
departure ﺧروج 
diesel (fuel) دﯾزل / ﮔﺎزوﺋﯾل 
double room اﺗﺎقِ دو ﻧﻔره 
driver راﻧﻧده 
driving licence ﮔواھﯽﻧﺎﻣﮫِ راﻧﻧدﮔﯽ  
entertainment ﺳرﮔرﻣﯽ 
event روﯾداد /  واﻗﻌﮫ  
exhibition ﻧﻣﺎﯾش ﮔﺎه 
ferry ﮐﺷﺗﯽ 
fireworks آﺗش ﺑﺎزی 
flight ﭘرواز 
forbidden to ﻣﻣﻧوع 
foreigner ﺧﺎرﺟﯽ / اﺟﻧﺑﯽ  
fortress ﻗﻠﻌﮫ  
fountain ﻓواره 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
132 
Higher tier (continued)  
free (available, vacant) ﺧﺎﻟﯽ / در دﺳﺗرس 
full (hotel etc.) پ◌ر  /  ﭘُ ر ﺷده/  اﻧﺑﺎﺷﺗﮫ  
games room اﺗﺎق ﺑﺎزی  
garage, service station, petrol station ﮔﺎراژ، اﯾﺳﺗﮕﺎهھﺎی ﺧدﻣﺎت، ﭘﻣپ ﺑﻧزﯾن  
heating ﮔرﻣﺎﯾش 
helicopter ھﻠﯽ ﮐوﭘﺗر  
hill ﺗﭘﮫ 
hire of/hiring ﺑرایاﺳﺗﺧدام  
holiday (public) ﺗﻌطﯾﻼتِ ﻋﻣوﻣﯽ 
hospitality ﻣﮭﻣﺎن ﻧوازی 
in advance ﭘﯾﺷﺎﭘﯾش 
included ﺷﺎﻣل 
industrial ﺻﻧﻌﺗﯽ 
industry ﺻﻧﻌت 
inhabitant ﺳﺎﮐن 
inside داﺧل  
landscape ﭼﺷم اﻧداز 
launderette رﺧت ﺷوﯾﯽ  
line (underground) ﺧط ﻗطﺎر 
list ﻓﮭرﺳت 
litter زﺑﺎﻟﮫ، آﺷﻐﺎل 
lively ﺑﺎ  ﺳرور وﺷﻌف/  ﺳرزﻧده  
local ﻣﺣﻠﯽ  
lorry ﺗرﯾﻠﯽﮐﺎﻣﯾون  
lost-property office اداره اﺷﯾﺎ ی ﮔم ﺷده  
luxurious ﻟوﮐس،ﻣﺟﻠل  
nature طﺑﯾﻌت 
no parking ﺗوﻗف ﻣﻣﻧوع، ﭘﺎرﮐﯾﻧﮓ ﻣﻣﻧوع 
noise ﺳروﺻدایِ ﺑﻠﻧد 
open air روﺑﺎز، در ھوایِآزاد  
outside ﺑﯾروﻧﯽ 
package tour ﭘﮑﯾﺞ ﻣﺳﺎﻓرﺗﯽ- ﺑﺳﺗﮫ ﻣﺳﺎﻓرت  
park ﭘﺎرک، ﻣﺣل ﮔﺷت و ﮔذار 
pavement ﭘﯾﺎده رو 
pedestrian ﻋﺎﺑرﭘﯾﺎده  
pedestrian area ﻣﻧطﻘﮫ ﻋﺎﺑر ﭘ ﯾﺎده  
pedestrian crossing ﻣﺣل ﻋﺑور ﻋﺎﺑر ﭘﯾﺎده  
picturesque زﯾﺑﺎ /  ﺧوش ﻣﻧظره  
pillow ﺑﺎﻟش/  ﻣﺗﮑﺎ  
playground ﻣﯾدان ﺑﺎزی/ زﻣﯾن ﺑﺎزی  
police station ﭘﺎﺳﮕﺎه/ اداره  ﭘﻠﯾس  
police officer ﻣﺄﻣورﭘﻠﯾس   
procession ﺣرﮐت دﺳﺗﮫ  ﺟﻣﻌﯽ/ راھﭘﯾﻣﺎﯾﯽ/ ﺗظﺎھرات  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
133 
Higher tier (continued)  
public holiday ﺗﻌطﯾلِ ﻋﻣوﻣﯽ 
receipt رﺳﯾد 
reception ﭘذﯾرش 
receptionist ﻣﻧﺷﯽ 
reduction ﮐﺎھش  
registration/booking in اﺳم ﻧوﯾﺳﯽ/  ﻧﺎم ﻧوﯾﺳﯽ  
resort ﻣﺣل اﺳﺗراﺣت/ ﻣﺣل ﺗﻔرﯾﺢ/  ﻣﺄ ﻣن  
route ﻣﺳﯾر/ راه  
rush hour ﺳﺎﻋت ﺷﻠوﻏﯽ/وﻗت ﺷﻠوﻏﯽﺗراﻓﯾﮏ  
seat belt ﮐﻣرﺑﻧداﯾﻣﻧﯽ  
ship ﮐﺷﺗﯽ 
sign ﻋﻼﻣت / ﻧﺷﺎﻧﮫ  
single room اطﺎق ﯾﮏ ﻧﻔره 
situated واﻗﻊ در  
ski resort  ﻣﺣلاﺳﮑﯽ  
skiing اﺳﮑﯽ ﮐردن  
sleeping bag ﮐﯾﺳﮫِ  ﺧواب  
sleeping car (in a train) واﮔنِ ﺧواب  
soap ﺻﺎﺑون 
speed ﺳرﻋت 
speed limit ﺳرﻋتﻣﺟﺎز  
star ﺳﺗﺎره/ ﺳﺗﺎرهِ ﺳﯾﻧﻣﺎ 
summer camp  ﮐﻣپﺗﺎﺑﺳﺗﺎﻧ ﯽ/ اردوی ﺗﺎﺑﺳﺗﺎﻧﯽ  
ticket inspector ﻣﺎﻣورﮐﻧﺗرل ﺑﻠﯾت 
timetable  ﺑرﻧﺎﻣﮫ زﻣﺎن ﺑﻧدی 
to overtake ﺳﺑﻘت ﮔرﻓﺗن/  ﺟﻠو زدن  
to pack (cases) ﺑﺳﺗﮫ ﺑﻧدی ﮐردن  
to send (set off) ﻓرﺳﺗﺎدن 
to spend the night ﮔذراﻧدن )ﺷب 
to unpack (cases)  ﺑﺎز ﮐردن ﺑﺳﺗﮫ  
to validate a ticket (e.g. train, tram) ﻗﺎﻧوﻧﯽ ﮐردن/  ﺗﻧﻔﯾذ ﮐردن/   ﻣﻌﺗﺑر ﺳﺎﺧﺗن  
toilet paper ﮐﺎﻏذ ﺗواﻟت، دﺳﺗﻣﺎل ﺗواﻟت 
toothbrush ﻣﺳواک 
toothpaste ﺧﻣﯾرِدﻧدان  
tower ﺑرج 
trade ﺗﺟﺎرت  
traffic ﺗراﻓﯾﮏ راه  ﺑﻧدان  
traffic jam ازدﺣﺎم وﺳﺎﯾل ﻧﻘﻠﯾﮫ/  راه ﺑﻧدان  
traffic lights ﭼراغ راھﻧﻣﺎ 
travel ﺳﻔر / ﻣﺳﺎﻓرت 
traveller ﻣﺳﺎﻓر 
twin-bedded room اطﺎقِ دو ﻧﻔره 
waiting room اﺗﺎق / ﺳﺎﻟنِ اﻧﺗظﺎر 
wash room اﺗﺎقِ ﺷﺳﺗﺷو 
winter holiday ﺗﻌط ﯾﻼت زﻣﺳﺗﺎﻧﯽ  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
134 
Phrases associated with weather 
Foundation tier 
bad ﺑد / ﻧﺎﺧوش آﯾﻧد 
climate آب وھوا،ﺟَ و  
cloud اﺑر 
cloudy )آﺳﻣﺎن( اﺑری 
cold ﺳرد 
degree (temperature) درﺟﮫ ﺣرارت 
fog/foggy ﻣﮫ/ ﻏﺑﺎر ﻣﮫ آﻟود  
frost ﯾﺧﺑﻧدان 
heat ﮔرﻣﺎ 
hot داغ/ داغ ﮐردن 
humid ﻣرطوب ﻧﻣﻧﺎک / ﺷرﺟﯽ  
ice ﯾﺦ 
in the east در ﺷرق  
in the north در ﺷﻣﺎل  
in the south در ﺟﻧوب  
in the west در ﻏرب  
it is chilly ﺳرد اﺳت  
it is freezing در ﺣﺎل اﻧﺟﻣﺎد اﺳت/ ﯾﺦ ﻣﯽ زﻧد  
it is raining ﺑﺎران ﻣﯽ آﯾد 
it is snowing ﺑرف ﻣﯽ ﺑﺎرﯾد 
it is windy ﺑﺎد ﻣﯽ وزد  
lowest temperature ﭘﺎ ﯾﯾن ﺗرﯾن درﺟﮫ   
mist ﻏﺑﺎر/  ﻣﮫ  
moderate ﻣدارا/ ﻣﻌﺗدل 
overcast اﺑری/ ﭘوﺷﯾده از اﺑر/  ﮔرﻓﺗﮫ  
rain/rainy ﺑﺎران / ﺑﺎراﻧﯽ  
season ﻣوﺳم/ ﻓﺻل 
shower رﮔﺑﺎرِ ﺑﺎران 
snow ﺑرف 
storm  ﺗوﻓﺎن  
sky آﺳﻣﺎن 
sun آﻓﺗﺎب 
sunny آﻓﺗﺎﺑﯽ  
the sun is shining ﺧورﺷﯾد در ﺣﺎل درﺧﺷﯾدن اﺳت 
varied ﮔوﻧﺎﮔون  
warm ﮔرم 
weather آب وھوا 
weather forecast ﭘﯾش ﺑﯾﻧﯽ آب وھوا 
wind ﺑﺎد 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
135 
Higher tier 
average temperature درﺟﮫ ﺣرارت ﻣﺗوﺳط 
bright آﻓﺗﺎﺑﯽ/ روﺷن / درﺧﺷﺎن 
changeable ﺗﻐﯾﯾرﭘذﯾر/  ﻣﺗﻐﯾر  
downpours ﺑﺎرﻧدﮔﯽ زﯾﺎد  
dry ﺧﺷﮏ  
hail ﺗﮕرگ  
heat ﮔرﻣﺎ 
high temperature درﺟﮫ ﺣرارت ﺑﺎﻻ  
it is frosty ﯾﺧﺑﻧدان اﺳت  
it is lightning رﻋد و ﺑرق  ﻣﯽزﻧد  
lightning رﻋد وﺑرق/ ﺗﻧدر 
low temperature دﻣﺎ ی ﭘﺎ ﯾﯾن  
misty  ﻣﮫ دار  
thunder ﺗﻧدر/ رﻋد و ﺑرق 
to be expected اﻧﺗظﺎر داﺷﺗن/  ﺗوﻗﻊ داﺷﺗن  
Asking for directions 
are you going in a car?  آﯾﺎ ﺑﺎ ﻣﺎﺷﯾن ﻣﯽروﯾد؟  
are you going on foot?  ﭘﯾﺎده ﻣﯽروﯾد؟  
at (place) در )ﻣﺣل 
at the back درﻋﻘب/ ﭘﺷتِ ﭼﯾزی / ﺟﺎی  
at the bottom  ﺗﮫ  
at the front در ﺟﻠو/ ﭘﯾﺷﺎﭘﯾش  
at the house of   در ﺧﺎﻧﮫی   
at the top در ﺑﺎﻻی / در ﻓوق  
as far as ﺗﺎ  آﻧﺟﺎ ﯾﯽ ﮐﮫ  
continue  اداﻣﮫ دادن/  دﻧﺑﺎل ﮐردن  
cross (over) ﻋﺑور 
far  دور 
go straight on  ﻣﺳﺗﻘﯾم ﺑرو  
high street/main street ﺧﯾﺎﺑﺎن اﺻﻠﯽ  
how do I get to? ﭼﮕوﻧﮫ ﺑرﺳم؟ 
it is 100 metres away ﻣﺗرﻓﺎﺻﻠﮫ دارد/ آن طرفﺗر اﺳت  ﺻد 
it is very close ﻧزدﯾﮏ اﺳت 
not far دور ﻧﯾﺳت 
on the left در ﺳﻣتِ ﭼپ 
on the right در ﺳﻣتِ راﺳت 
straight on ﻣﺳﺗﻘﯾﻣﺎ  ﺑر روی  
take the first road on the left ﺟﺎده اول در ﺳﻣت ﭼپ    
turn left ﺑﭘﯾﭼﯾد دﺳت ﭼپ 
turn right ﺑﭘﯾﭼﯾد دﺳت راﺳت 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
136 
Dealing with problems 
Foundation tier 
address آدرس/ ﻧﺷﺎﻧﯽ  
bill ﻗﺑض/ ﺻورت ﺣﺳﺎب 
colour رﻧﮓ  
customer ﻣﺷﺗری / ﺧرﯾدار 
customer service ﺧدﻣﺎت ﻣﺷﺗری 
email address آدرس اﯾﻣﯾل/ آدرس ﻧﺎﻣﮫ اﻟﮑﺗروﻧﯾﮑﯽ 
form ﻓرم/ ﺷﮑل  
guarantee ﮔﺎراﻧﺗﯽ/ ﺿﻣﺎﻧت 
part ﻗﺳﻣت/ ﺑﺧش 
purse ﮐﯾف ﭘول 
size اﻧدازه 
telephone number ﺷﻣﺎره ﺗﻠﻔن 
to work, function ﮐﺎر ﮐردن )وﺳﺎﯾل 
wrong اﺷﺗﺑﺎه 
Higher tier 
broken ﺷﮑﺳﺗﮫ 
complaint ﺷﮑﺎﯾت  
crime ﺟرم/ﺟﻧﺎﯾت 
criminality ﺟﻧﺎﯾﺗﮑﺎری 
fault ﺧطﺎاﺷﺗﺑﺎه  
fine  ﺟرﯾﻣﮫ 
improvement ﺑﮭﺑود 
instructions  دﺳﺗور اﺳﺗﻔﺎده 
insurance ﺑﯾﻣﮫ 
mistake ﻏﻠط/ اﺷﺗﺑﺎه 
progress ﭘﯾﺷرﻓت 
quality ﮐﯾﻔﯾت 
quantity ﻣﻘدار 
reduction ﮐﺎھش  
repair ﺗﻌﻣﯾر 
theft دزدی/ ﺳرﻗت 
thief ﺳﺎرق / دزد 
to bring back ﺑرﮔرداﻧدن 
to exchange ﻋوض ﮐردن 
to guarantee ﺿﻣﺎﻧت ﮐردن 
to insure ﺑﯾﻣﮫ ﮐردن 
wallet ﮐﯾف ﺑﻐﻠﯽ/ ﮐﯾف ﭘول  
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
137 
School 
Foundation tier 
answer ﺟواب ، ﭘﺎﺳﺦ 
art, drawing ھﻧر ، ﻧﻘﺎﺷﯽ 
biology ﺑﯾوﻟوژی زﯾﺳت ﺷﻧﺎﺳﯽ ،   
board (blackboard, whiteboard etc) ﺗﺧﺗﮫ)ﺳﯾﺎه/ﺳﻔﯾد(  
book ﮐﺗﺎب  
break وﻗﻔﮫ/ ﻓرﺻت/ زﻧﮓ ﺗﻔرﯾﺢ  
business studies ﻣطﺎﻟﻌﺎت ﺗﺟﺎری 
calculator ﻣﺎﺷﯾنِ ﺣﺳﺎب 
calendar ﺗﻘوﯾم 
canteen ﮐﺎﻧﺗﯾن، / ﻧﮭﺎرﺧوری 
chemistry ﺷﯾﻣﯽ 
choir ﮔروه ﮐُر 
circle, club اﻧﺟﻣن، ﺑﺎﺷﮕﺎه 
class ﮐﻼس ﻣدرﺳﮫ 
class test  اﻣﺗﺣﺎن ﮐﻼﺳﯽ  
classroom اﺗﺎق ﮐﻼس درس 
college ﮐﺎﻟﺞ/  داﻧﺷﮑده  
copy ﮐﭘﯽ/ ﻧﺳﺧﮫ 
corridor راھرو 
cupboard ﮔﻧﺟﮫ 
desk ﻣﯾزِﺗﺣرﯾر 
dining room اﺗﺎقِ ﻏذا ﺧوری 
drama (school subject) درام/ ﻧﻣﺎﯾش 
DT (design technology) دی ﺗﯽ/ ﺗﮑﻧوﻟوژی طراﺣﯽ 
English اﻧﮕﻠﯾﺳﯽ  
event (at school) روﯾداد 
examination اﻣﺗﺣﺎن 
exchange ﺗﺑﺎدل 
exercise ﺗﻣرﯾن 
exercise book ﮐﺗﺎﺑﭼﮫ ﺗﻣرﯾن 
experiment آزﻣﺎﯾش 
foreign languages زﺑﺎنھﺎیِ ﺧﺎرﺟﯽ  
French(language) ﻓراﻧﺳﮫ 
future plan طرح آﯾﻧده/ﺑرﻧﺎﻣﮫ ﺑرای آﯾﻧده 
geography ﺟﻐراﻓﯾﺎ 
German (language) آﻟﻣﺎﻧﯽ  
gym ﺑﺎﺷﮕﺎه ورزﺷﯽ / ﺑدﻧﺳﺎزی 
head teacher ﻣدﯾر ﻣدرﺳﮫ 
history ﺗﺎرﯾﺦ 
holidays (school)  ﺗﻌطﯾﻼت  
homework ﺗﮑﻠﯾف / ﻣﺷﻖ ﺷب 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
138 
Foundation tier (continued)  
ICT ﻓنآوری راﯾﺎﻧﮫای/ اﻧﻔورﻣﺎﺗﯾﮏ  
Italian (language) اﯾﺗﺎﻟﯾﺎﯾﯽ 
laboratory آزﻣﺎﯾﺷﮕﺎه 
journalist روزﻧﺎﻣﮫ ﻧﮕﺎر 
languages زﺑﺎنھﺎ  
Latin (language)  ﻻﺗﯾن 
lesson درس 
librarian ﮐﺗﺎﺑدار 
library ﮐﺗﺎﺑﺧﺎﻧﮫ 
literature ادﺑﯾﺎت 
lunch  ﻧﺎھﺎر 
lunch break وﻗتِ ﻧﺎھﺎر 
mark ﻧﻣره 
maths رﯾﺎﺿﯾﺎت 
music ﻣوﺳﯾﻘﯽ 
occupation ﺷُﻐل 
P.E. درس ورزش 
pen ﻗﻠم  
pen (ball point)  ﺧودﮐﺎر 
pencil ﻣداد 
pencil case ﺟﻌﺑﮫی ﻣداد/ﺟﺎ ﻣدادی  
Persian (language) ﻓﺎرﺳﯽ  
physics ﻓﯾزﯾﮏ 
pilot ﺧﻠﺑﺎن  
plan  طرح  
practical ﻋﻣﻠﯽ 
pressure ﻓﺷﺎر  
prize ﺟﺎﯾزه 
professional ﺣِرﻓﮫ ای  
progress ﭘﯾﺷرﻓت 
projector ﭘروژﮐﺗور 
question ﺳوال 
religion, religious studies ﺗﻌﻠﯾﻣﺎت دﯾﻧﯽ 
result ﻧﺗﯾﺟﮫ 
rubber ﻣداد ﭘﺎک ﮐن 
rule ﻗﺎﻧون/ﺿﺎﺑطﮫ  
ruler ﺧط ﮐش  
Russian (language) زﺑﺎن روﺳﯽ 
school ﻣدرﺳﮫ 
school activities ﻓﻌﺎﻟﯾتھﺎی ﻣدرﺳﮫ  
school bag ﮐﯾف ﻣدرﺳﮫ 
school exchange ﺗﺑﺎدل ﺷﺎﮔرد ﻣﯾﺎن ﻣدارس 
school hall ﺳﺎﻟن اﺻﻠﯽ ﻣدرﺳﮫ 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
139 
Foundation tier (continued)  
school playground زﻣﯾن ﺑﺎزی ﻣدرﺳﮫ 
school trip ﺳﻔر ﻣدرﺳﮫ 
schoolchild (f/m) داﻧش آﻣوز/ ﺑﭼﮫ ﻣدرﺳﮫای  
science ﻋﻠم / ﻋﻠوم 
secondary school ﻣدرﺳﮫ ﻣﺗوﺳطﮫ 
section ﭘﺧش 
sociology ﺟﺎﻣﻌﮫ ﺷﻧﺎﺳﯽ 
Spanish اﺳﭘﺎﻧﯾﺎﯾﯽ 
spellings اِﻣﻼء/ دﯾﮑﺗﮫ 
sports hall, gym ﺳﺎﻟن ورزش، ﺑﺎﺷﮕﺎه 
staffroom اﺗﺎق ﮐﺎرﮐﻧﺎن 
stress اﺳﺗرس/ ﻧﮕراﻧﯽ/  ﻓﺷﺎرﻋﺻﺑﯽ  
Student/pupil داﻧﺷﺟو/  ﺷﺎﮔرد/  داﻧشآﻣوز  
studious درسﺧوان  
study ﻣطﺎﻟﻌﮫ/  ﺗﺣﺻﯾل  
subject ﻣوﺿوع/رﺷﺗﮫ 
success ﻣوﻓﻘﯾت 
summer holidays ﺗﻌطﯾﻼتِ ﺗﺎﺑﺳﺗﺎن 
team ﺗﯾم/دﺳﺗﮫ/ ﮔروه 
technology ﺗﮑﻧوﻟوژی 
term ﺗرم/ دوره ﺳﮫﻣﺎھﮫ ﺳﺎل ﺗﺣﺻﯾﻠﯽ  
test ﺗﺳت/آزﻣون/ اﻣﺗﺣﺎن 
text ﻣﺗن 
textbook ﮐﺗﺎبِ درﺳﯽ 
the future آﯾﻧده 
the past ﮔذﺷﺗﮫ 
tie ﮐراوات 
timetable (school) ﺑرﻧﺎﻣﮫ ﮐﻼس 
type ﻧوع 
university داﻧﺷﮕﺎه 
uniform اوﻧﯾﻔورم/ روﭘوش 
year ﺳﺎل  
Higher tier 
able زرﻧﮓ/ ﻗﺎدر/ ﻻﯾﻖ / ﺑﺎ اﺳﺗﻌداد/ﺗواﻧﺎ 
art ھﻧر 
assessment ارزﯾﺎﺑﯽ 
attention ﺗوﺟﮫ 
ballpoint pen ﻗﻠم ﺧودﮐﺎر 
boarding school ﻣدرﺳﮫ ﺷﺑﺎﻧﮫ روزی 
briefcase ﮐﯾف دﺳﺗﯽ 
clever زرﻧﮓ/ ﺑﺎھوش 
circle, club داﯾره/ ﺑﺎﺷﮕﺎه/ ﮐﻼب 
compulsory subject درس اﺟﺑﺎری 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
140 
Higher tier (continued)  
core subjects ﻣوﺿوﻋﺎت اﺻﻠﯽ  
degree (university qualification) ﻣدرک داﻧﺷﮕﺎھﯽ 
dictionary ﻓرھﻧﮓ ﻟﻐت / واژه ﻧﺎﻣﮫ 
discipline اﻧﺿﺑﺎط ﻧظم  
discussion ﺑﺣث ﻣﻧﺎظره  /ﻣذاﮐره/ ﻣﺑﺎﺣﺛﮫ  
do badly, fail an exam رد ﺷدن 
drama group, acting group ﮔروه ﺗﺋﺎﺗر 
economics اﻗﺗﺻﺎد 
education آﻣوزش و ﭘرورش 
essay ﻣﻘﺎﻟﮫ  
fountain pen ﺧود ﻧوﯾس 
glue ﭼﺳب  
hardworking ﺳﺧت ﮐوش 
kindergarten ﻣﮭد ﮐودک/  ﮐودﮐﺳﺗﺎن  
locker ﻗﻔﺳﮫ ﻗﻔل دار/ ﮐﻣد ﻗﻔلدار  
mark, grade ﻧﻣره 
meeting ﺟﻠﺳﮫ 
mixed ﻣﺧﺗﻠط 
nursery school ﮐودﮐﺳﺗﺎن 
optional (subject) اﺧﺗﯾﺎری  
oral زﺑﺎﻧﯽ  
pad of paper دﺳﺗﮫی ﮐﺎﻏذ   
page ورق / ﺻﻔﺣﮫ  
parents’ evening ﻣﻼﻗﺎت ﭘدر وﻣﺎدر ﺑﺎ آﻣوزﮔﺎر  
permission اﺟﺎزه 
pressure ﻓﺷﺎر/ زور  
primary school ﻣدرﺳﮫ اﺑﺗداﯾﯽ / دﺑﺳﺗﺎن 
private school ﻣدرﺳﮫ ﺧﺻوﺻﯽ 
project ﭘروژه 
pronunciation ﺗﻠﻔظ 
punctual وﻗت ﺷﻧﺎس 
punishment ﻣﺟﺎزات ﺗﻧﺑﯾﮫ/ ﭘﺎداش  
qualification  ﻣدرک  
R.E. ﺗﻌﻠﯾﻣﺎت دﯾﻧﯽ 
report ﮔزارش/   ﺧﺑر  
school leaving certificate ﻣدرک ﻓﺎرغاﻟﺗﺣﺻﯾﻠﯽ  
school report ﮔزارش ﻣدرﺳﮫ 
school textbook ﮐﺗﺎب درﺳﯽ  ﻣدرﺳﮫ  
scissors ﻗﯾﭼﯽ  
secondary school ﻣدرﺳﮫ ﻣﺗوﺳطﮫ/ دﺑﯾرﺳﺗﺎن 
sharpener ﻣداد ﺗراش 
shelf ﺗﺎﻗﭼﮫ/ ﻗﻔﺳﮫ 
sociology ﺟﺎﻣﻌﮫ ﺷﻧﺎﺳﯽ 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
141 
Higher tier (continued)  
sports ground ﻣﯾدانِ ﺑﺎزی 
staff room اﺗﺎقِ ﮐﺎرﮐﻧﺎن 
state  اﺳﺗﺎن/  ﮐﺷوردوﻟﺗﯽ  
strict ﺳﺧت ﮔﯾر 
strong, good at (subject) ﻣﺣﮑم /ﻗوی 
studies ﺗﺣﺻﯾل  
success ﻣوﻓﻘﯾت 
successful ﻣوﻓﻖ 
survey ﻧظر ﺳﻧﺟﯽ 
to calculate ﺷﻣردن/ ﻣﺣﺎﺳﺑﮫﮐردن  
to correct ﺗﺻﺣﯾﺢ ﮐردن/  اﺻﻼح ﮐردن  
to pass (exam) ﻗﺑول ﺷدن 
to pay attention ﺗوﺟﮫ ﮐردن 
to practise ﺗﻣرﯾن ﮐردن/  ﻣﻣﺎرﺳت ﮐردن  
to pronounce ﺗﻠﻔظ ﮐردن/  ادا ﮐردن  
to revise  دوره ﮐردن/  ﺗﺟدﯾد ﻧظر ﮐردن  
to sit an exam اﻣﺗﺣﺎن دادن 
to skive/to skip/bunk lessons ﺗرک ﺗﺣﺻﯾل/ﻋدول ﮐردن 
to work hard ﺳﺧت ﮐﺎر ﮐردن 
translation ﺗرﺟﻣﮫ 
unfair ﻏﯾر ﻣﻧﺻﻔﺎﻧﮫ/ ﻧﺎﻋﺎدﻻﻧﮫ/  ﺑﯽ اﻧﺻﺎف  
vocational school; technical college داﻧﺷﮑده ﻓﻧﯽ/  ھﻧرﺳﺗﺎن ﻓﻧﯽ ﺣرﻓﮫ ای  
waste of time اﺗﻼف وﻗت 
weak, bad at (subject) ﺿﻌﯾف 
 
Future aspirations, study and work 
Foundation tier 
actor  ھﻧر ﭘﯾﺷﮫ 
actress ھﻧرﭘﯾﺷﮫ زن  
advertisement ﺗﺑﻠﯾﻎ / آﮔﮭﯽ 
air hostess ﻣﮭﻣﺎﻧدار ھواﭘﯾﻣﺎ  
ambition ھدف/ آرزو 
architect ﻣﻌﻣﺎر طراح  
aspiration آرﻣﺎن و آرزو 
assistant دﺳﺗﯾﺎر 
banker ﺑﺎﻧﮑدار 
beyond (the classroom)  ﺧﺎرج از ﮐﻼس 
builder ﮐﺎرﮔر ﺳﺎﺧﺗﻣﺎﻧﯽ/ ﺑﻧّ ﺎ/ ﺧﺎﻧﮫﺳﺎز  
business ﮐﺳب و ﮐﺎر/ﺑﺎزرﮔﺎﻧﯽ 
career ﺣرﻓﮫ 
cashier ﺻﻧدوﻗدار/ ﺗﺣوﯾل دار  
coffee break زﻣﺎن اﺳﺗراﺣت ﺑرای ﻧوﺷﯾدن ﻗﮭوه  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
142 
Foundation tier (continued)  
colleague ھﻣﮑﺎر  
company ﺷرﮐت 
computer  ﮐﺎﻣﭘﯾوﺗر/ راﯾﺎﻧﮫ 
computer operator اﭘراﺗور ﮐﺎﻣﭘﯾ وﺗر  
computer science ﻋﻠم ﮐﺎﻣﭘﯾوﺗر 
cook آﺷﭘز 
degree دﯾﭘﻠم ﯾﺎ  درﺟﮫ  ﺗﺣﺻﯾل  
dentist دﻧدان ﭘزﺷﮏ 
designer طراح 
doctor دﮐﺗر 
driver راﻧﻧده 
electrician ﻣﮭﻧدسِ ﺑرق  
employment اﺳﺗﺧدام 
engineer ﻣﮭﻧدس 
farmer ﮐﺷﺎورز دھﻘﺎن  
farm worker ﮐﺎرﮔر ﻣزرﻋﮫ 
fashion ﻣد 
file ﭘروﻧده 
fireman آﺗشﻧﺷﺎن / ﻣﺄﻣور آﺗشﻧﺷﺎﻧﯽ  
folder ﭘوﺷﮫ 
form ﻓرم 
future آﯾﻧده 
interview ﻣﺻﺎﺣﺑﮫ 
job ﮐﺎر  
journalist روزﻧﺎﻣﮫ ﻧﮕﺎر 
language زﺑﺎن 
lawyer وﮐﯾل 
lecturer ﻣﻌﻠم 
male nurse ﭘرﺳﺗﺎر)ﻣرد 
manager ﻣدﯾر 
marketing ﺑﺎزارﯾﺎﺑﯽ 
mechanic ﻣﮑﺎﻧﯾﮏ  
member ﻋﺿو 
musical ﻣوﺳﯾﻘﯽ/ﻣوزﯾﮏ 
musician ﻧوازﻧده 
nurse ﭘرﺳﺗﺎر 
organisation ﺳﺎزﻣﺎن 
per hour در ﺳﺎﻋت  
plan طرح  
poet ﺷﺎﻋر 
printer ﭼﺎﭘﮕر  
profession ﺣرﻓﮫ/ ﺷﻐل 
programmer ﺑرﻧﺎﻣﮫ ﻧوﯾس 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
143 
Foundation tier (continued)  
project ﭘروژه 
reporter ﺧﺑر ﻧﮕﺎر 
sales assistant ﻓروﺷﻧده 
shop ﻓروﺷﮕﺎه/ﻣﻐﺎزه 
soldier ﺳرﺑﺎز 
student داﻧش آﻣوز/ ﺷﺎﮔرد 
teacher ﻣﻌﻠم 
technician ﺗﮑﻧﺳﯾن 
telephone ﺗﻠﻔن 
to apply for a job درﺧواﺳت ﺑرای  ﮐﺎر/ ﺗﻘﺎﺿﺎی ﮐﺎر  
to organise ﺳﺎزﻣﺎن دادن/ ﺗﺷﮑﯾل دادن/  ﺗرﺗﯾب دادن   
training (sport)  ﺗرﺑﯾت ﺑدﻧﯽ  
travel agency آژاﻧسِ ﻣﺳﺎﻓرﺗﯽ  
university داﻧﺷﮕﺎه 
vet داﻣﭘزﺷﮏ 
volunteer داوطﻠب 
waiter/waitress ﭘﯾﺷﺧدﻣت 
work  ﮐﺎر  
work experience ﺗﺟرﺑﮫﮐﺎری  
Higher tier 
aim, goal ھدف ﻣﻘﺻد/ ﻣﻘﺻود  
ambition ﺟﺎه  طﻠﺑﯽ/ آرزوھﺎی ﺑزرگ داﺷﺗن  
artist ھﻧرﻣﻧد 
badly paid دﺳﺗﻣزد ﺧﯾﻠﯽ ﮐم  
civil servant ﻣﺳﺗﺧدم دوﻟﺗﯽ/ﮐﺎرﻣﻧد  
conference ﮐﻧﻔراﻧس 
database ﭘﺎﯾﮕﺎه داده 
dream روﯾﺎ 
driver راﻧﻧده 
educational آﻣوزﺷﯽ 
employer ﮐﺎرﻓرﻣﺎ 
enclosed ﺑﮫ ﭘﯾوﺳت ﻓرﺳﺗﺎدن  
experienced ﺑﺎ  ﺗﺟرﺑﮫ  
hard disk ھﺎرد دﯾﺳﮏ 
higher education آﻣوزش ﻋﺎﻟﯽ 
impression ﺗﺎﺛﯾر/  ﻧﻔوذ  
in aid of در ﮐﻣﮏ ﺑﮫ/ ﺑرای ﮐﻣﮏ ﺑﮫ  
internship ﮐﺎر آﻣوزی 
job advert ﺗﺑﻠﯾﻎ ﮐﺎر/ آﮔﮭﯽ ﮐﺎر 
keyboard ﺻﻔﺣﮫ ﮐﻠﯾد 
law (study of the subject) ﻗﺎﻧون 
link ﻟﯾﻧﮏ 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
144 
Higher tier (continued)  
medicine (study of the subject)  ﭘزﺷﮑﯽ  
model ﻣدل/ ﻧﻣوﻧﮫ 
mouse ﻣﺎوس ﮐﺎﻣﭘﯾوﺗر 
part time ﭘﺎره وﻗت/ ﻧﯾﻣﮫ وﻗت  
plumber ﻟوﻟﮫ ﮐش 
profession ﺣرﻓﮫ  
programmer ﺑرﻧﺎﻣﮫ ﻧوﯾس 
prospects ﭼﺷم اﻧداز 
qualification ﻣدرک ﺗﺣﺻﯾﻠﯽ 
qualified واﺟد ﺷراﯾط 
salary, wages دﺳﺗﻣزد 
signature اﻣﺿﺎ 
skill ﻣﮭﺎرت/  ﮐﺎرداﻧﯽ/  ﭼﯾره دﺳﺗﯽ  
society ﺟﺎﻣﻌﮫ  
surgeon ﺟراح 
terms of employment ﺷراﯾط  اﺳﺗﺧدام  
to attach ﭘﯾوﺳت ﮐردن /  اﻟﺣﺎق  ﮐردن /ﭘ ﯾوﺳﺗن  
to fill in a form ﻓرم ﭘر ﮐردن 
to introduce oneself ﮐﺳﯽ راﻣﻌرﻓﯽ ﮐردن  
to print out ﭼﺎپ ﮐردن  
to telephone  ﺗﻠﻔن زدن/  ﺗﻠﻔن ﮐردن  
trainee ﮐﺎر آﻣوز 
to volunteer داوطﻠب ﺷدن  
unemployment ﺑﯽ ﮐﺎری 
vacancy ﭘﺳت ﺧﺎﻟﯽ  
voluntarily  داوطﻠﺑﺎﻧﮫ 
voluntary work ﮐﺎرداوطﻠﺑﺎﻧﮫ  
webmail اﯾﻣﯾل/ ﭘﺳت اﻟﮑﺗروﻧﯾﮑﯽ   
well-paid job ﺷﻐل ﭘردرآﻣد  
without pay ﺑدون ﭘرداﺧت 
 
International and global dimension: bringing the world together, 
environmental issues 
Foundation tier 
access to دﺳﺗرﺳﯽ ﺑﮫ 
against در ﻣﻘﺎﺑل / درﺑراﺑر  
animal ﺣﯾوان 
campaign ﮐﻣﭘﯾن 
championship ﻗﮭرﻣﺎﻧﯽ 
charity ﻣوﺳﺳﮫِ ﺧﯾرﯾﮫ 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
145 
Foundation tier (continued)  
country ﮐﺷور/ﺳرزﻣﯾن 
earth زﻣﯾن 
ecological زﯾﺳت ﻣﺣﯾطﯽ  
ecology ﻣﺣﯾطِ زﯾﺳت ﺷﻧﺎﺳﯽ/ ﺑوم ﺷﻧﺎﺳﯽ  
effect اﺛر/  ﻧﺗﯾﺟﮫ  
electricity ﺑرق / اﻟﮑﺗرﯾﺳﯾﺗﮫ  
energy اﻧرژی 
environment ﻣﺣﯾط زﯾﺳت 
environmental issues ﻣﺳﺎﺋل زﯾﺳت  ﻣﺣﯾط ﯽ  
festival ﺟﺷﻧواره 
for ﺑرای 
forest ﺟﻧﮕل 
gas ﮔﺎز  
good cause ﮐﺎر ﺧوب/ اﺛرﻣﻔﯾد 
global ﺟﮭﺎﻧﯽ  
green ﺳﺑز 
hunger ﮔرﺳﻧﮕﯽ 
hurricane  ﺗوﻓﺎن  
illegal ﻏﯾر ﻗﺎﻧوﻧﯽ 
international ﺑﯾناﻟﻣﻠﻠﯽ  
international dimension اﺑﻌﺎد ﺑﯾناﻟﻣﻠﻠﯽ  
legal ﻗﺎﻧوﻧﯽ 
music festival ﺟﺷﻧواره ﻣوﺳﯾﻘﯽ 
musical event روﯾدادھﺎی ﻣوﺳﯾﻘﯽ/ ﺑرﻧﺎﻣﮫھﺎی ﻣوﺳﯾﻘﯽ  
natural resources ﻣﻧﺎﺑﻊ طﺑﯾﻌﯽ 
ocean اﻗﯾﺎﻧوس  
oil ﻧﻔت 
Olympic Games ﺑﺎزیھﺎی اﻟﻣﭘﯾﮏ  
organisation ﺳﺎزﻣﺎن 
people ﻣردم 
planet ﺳﯾﺎره 
political ﺳﯾﺎﺳﯽ 
politician ﺳﯾﺎﺳﺗﻣدار 
politics, policy ﺳﯾﺎﺳت  
refugee ﭘﻧﺎھﻧده 
sporting event روﯾداد ورزﺷﯽ 
tiger ﺑﺑر 
to recycle ﺳطل  
world ﺟﮭﺎن  
World Cup (football)  ﺟﺎم ﺟﮭﺎﻧﯽ)ﻓوﺗﺑﺎل(  
the) United Nations ﺳﺎزﻣﺎن ﻣﻠل 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
146 
Higher tier 
advantages ﻣزاﯾﺎ/ﻓواﯾد 
alcohol اﻟﮑل 
atomic اﺗُﻣﯽ / ھﺳﺗﮫای  
climate (adjective) آب و ھوا 
coal زﻏﺎل ﺳﻧﮓ 
developed countries ﮐﺷورﺗوﺳﻌﮫ ﯾﺎﻓﺗﮫ 
disadvantages ﻣﻌﺎﯾب  
disaster ﻓﺎﺟﻌﮫ 
drinking water آب آﺷﺎﻣﯾدﻧﯽ 
drought ﺧﺷﮏ ﺳﺎﻟﯽ 
drugs ﻣواد ﻣﺧدر 
earthquake زﻣﯾن ﻟرزه/زﻟزﻟﮫ 
elephant ﻓﯾل  
environment ﻣﺣﯾط زﯾﺳت 
enmity دﺷﻣﻧﯽ 
fair trade ﺗﺟﺎرت ﻋﺎدﻻﻧﮫ 
famine ﻗﺣطﯽ/ ﮐﻣﺑود 
field زﻣﯾﻧﮫ 
flood, flooding ﺳﯾل 
global warming ﮔرم ﺷدن ﮐرهزﻣﯾن  
hunger, famine ﮔرﺳﻧﮕﯽ،ﻗﺣط ﯽ  
indirect ﻏﯾر ﻣﺳﺗﻘﯾم 
instrument دﺳﺗﮕﺎه/ اﺑزار ﻣوﺳﯾﻘﯽ 
island ﺟزﯾره 
lack (of) ﻋدم / ﻧﺑود 
natural resources ﻣﻧﺎﺑﻊ طﺑﯾﻌﯽ 
nature طﺑﯾﻌت 
office (department) اِداره 
pesticide ﺣﺷره ﮐش 
peace ﺻﻠﺢ 
planting trees درﺧت ﮐﺎری   
plastic ﭘﻼﺳﺗﯾﮏ 
pollution آﻟودﮔﯽ 
poverty ﻓﻘر  
protection ﺣﻔﺎظت 
recycling ﺑﺎزﯾﺎﻓت 
reliance اﺗﮑﺎء/ اﻋﺗﻣﺎد 
rights of man; human rights ﺣﻘوق ﺑﺷر 
rubbish آﺷﻐﺎل/ ﭘﺳﻣﺎﻧده /زﺑﺎﻟﮫ 
security اﻣﻧﯾت 
solar power اﻧرژی ﺧورﺷﯾدی 
society اﺟﺗﻣﺎع 
species ﮔوﻧﮫ 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
147 
Higher tier (continued)  
sports event روﯾداد ورزﺷﯽ 
spying ﺟﺎﺳوﺳﯽ 
starving ﮔرﺳﻧﮫ 
threat ﺗﮭدﯾد 
to contaminate آﻟوده ﮐردن/ ﭘﺧش ﮐردن آﻟودﮔﯽ 
to pollute آﻟوده ﮐردن  
to preserve/to protect ﺣﻔظ ﮐردن/ ﻣراﻗﺑت ﮐردن/ ﻧﮕﮫداری ﮐردن  
to recycle ﺑﺎزﯾﺎﻓت ﮐردن  
to save, economise ﺻرﻓﮫ  ﺟوﯾﯽ  ﮐردن/ ﮐم ﻣﺻرف ﮐردن  
to save, rescue ﻧﺟﺎت دادن 
to sort/separate (e.g. rubbish) ﺟدا ﮐردن/ ﺗﻔﮑﯾﮏ ﮐردن 
to stay in contact در ﺗﻣﺎس ﻣﺎﻧدن  
to survive زﻧده ﻣﺎﻧدن 
to threaten ﺗﮭدﯾد ﮐردن 
undeveloped ﻋﻘب ﻣﺎﻧده 
violence  ﺧﺷوﻧت 
volcano آﺗش ﻓﺷﺎن 
war ﺟﻧﮓ  
waste products ﺿﺎﯾﻌﺎت 
world(-wide) / ﺑﮫ ﺻورت ﺟﮭﺎﻧﯽ  درﺳراﺳر ﺟﮭﺎن  
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
148 
Appendix 4: The context for the 
development of this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] and our 
ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
● reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with those 
taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
● consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including subject 
associations, academics and advisors, teachers and students to ensure this qualification is 
suitable for a UK context 
● reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in their 
documents GCSE (9 to 1) Subject Level Guidance and GCSE Subject Level Conditions and 
Requirements for Modern Foreign Languages, published in April 2016. 
 
  
 
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification Principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
● demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning and 
measuring higher-order skills 
● rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and valid 
assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in end users of the knowledge, skills 
and competencies of certified students 
● inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students develop at 
different rates and have different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
● empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills, see Appendix 5.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
149 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
May 2014 
“The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important change to the 
education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications will assist them in 
helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an ‘Expert 
Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or because of 
our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the world as diverse as 
Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification development 
process that has included: 
● extensive international comparability of subject content against the highest-performing 
jurisdictions in the world 
● benchmarking assessments against UK and overseas providers to ensure that they are at 
the right level of demand 
● establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-specific 
expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
● subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future oriented. The 
design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, meaning learner outcomes 
have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a learner’s 
success in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident that we have 
supported the development of qualifications that are outstanding for their coherence, 
thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as representing world-class best 
practice.
”    
  
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Lee Sing Kong  
Director, National Institute of Education, 
Singapore 
  Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
  Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
 
All titles correct as at May 2014 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
150 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently flagged the 
need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable them to respond with 
confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines skills, or 
competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that can be learned and 
that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform an activity or task and can be 
built upon and extended through learning.’
[1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected and 
evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this process, we 
identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the most evidence-based and 
robust skills framework. We adapted the framework slightly to include the Program for 
International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT Literacy and Collaborative Problem Solving 
(CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves:[2] 
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve general 
cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and communicate. [3]  
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, oral communication, written communication, assertive 
communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, service 
orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared understanding, 
taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team organisation. 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work stress, 
adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, and physical 
adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual teams, 
work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and able to acquire 
new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher education, 
as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the teaching and learning of 
this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning materials, developed with 
stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
 
[1]  OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012) 
[2]  Koenig J A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop  
(National Academies Press, 2011) 
[3]  PISA – The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy (2011) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Persian 
Specification – Issue 4 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
151 
Appendix 6: Codes 
 
Type of code Use of code Code 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for 
performance tables is assigned a 
discount code that indicates the subject 
area to which it belongs. 
Discount codes are published by the DfE. 
Please see the GOV.UK 
website* 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an 
Ofqual Regulated Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) code. 
The RQF code is known as a Qualification 
Number (QN). This is the code that 
features in the DfE Section 96 and on 
the LARA as being eligible for 16–18 and 
19+ funding, and is to be used for all 
qualification funding purposes. The QN 
will appear on students’ final certification 
documentation. 
The QN for this 
qualification is: 
603/2670/0 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to 
enter students for a qualification. 
Centres will need to use the entry codes 
only when claiming students’ 
qualifications. 
GCSE – 1PN0 
Paper codes These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be 
entered for individual papers. 
Paper 1: 1PN0/01 
Paper 2: 1PN0/02 
Paper 3: 1PN0/03 
Paper 4: 1PN0/04 
 
*www.gov.uk/government/publications/2018-performance-tables-discount-code 
 
 
 
 
Db290922 9781446953020_GCSE2017_L12_PERSIAN ISS4.DOCX.1–156/0 

 
 
About Pearson 
We are the world’s leading learning company operating in countries all around the world. We 
provide content, assessment and digital services to schools, colleges and universities, as well 
as professional and vocational education to learners to help increase their skills and lifelong 
employability prospects. We believe that wherever learning flourishes so do people.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This specification is Issue 4. We will inform centres of any changes to this issue. The latest 
issue can be found on the Pearson website: qualifications.pearson.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References to third party materials made in this specification are made in good faith. Pearson 
does not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may 
be subject to change, or any opinions expressed therein. (Materials may include textbooks, 
journals, magazines and other publications and websites.) 
 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
 
ISBN 978 1 446 95302 0 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2022 
 
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office:  80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121