This draft qualification has not yet been accredited by Ofqual. It is published to enable teachers to have early sight of our 
proposed approach to Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9 - 1) in Music (1MU0). Further chang
es may be required 
and no assurance can be given at this time that the proposed qualification will be made available in its current form, or 
that it will be accredited in time for first teaching in September 2016 and first award in 2018.
Specification
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9 - 1) in Urdu (1UR0)
First teaching from September 2017
First certification from June 2019
GCSE (9-1)
Urdu
Issue 5

 
 
Summary of Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2  
GCSE (9-1) in Urdu Specification  
Issue 5 changes  
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this current 
issue  
Page 
number  
Removal of Subject Advisor name: 
‘Our subject advisor service and online community…’ 
3 
Update to Foundation tier paper timing: 
‘Foundation tier: 1 hour 20 minutes…’ 
6 and 39 
Clarification of question titles appearing in English added: 
‘The instructions to students are in Urdu. The question titles appear in English.’ 
38 
Update to Foundation tier Assessment Information for Paper 4, bullet point 5: 
‘Question 2 has two options from which students have to select one. This 
question assesses students on their ability to note down key points and convey 
information. Students must use the formal register.’ 
39 
Reference to ‘GCE AS’ removed in the following sentence: 
This qualification offers a suitable progression route to GCE A level in Urdu.  
68 
 
If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, contact us via our 
website at: qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/contact-us.html. 
 
 
Contents 
1 Introduction 2 
Why choose Edexcel GCSE Urdu? 2 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this qualification 3 
Qualification at a glance 4 
2 Subject content 7 
Themes and topics 8 
Paper 1: Listening and understanding in Urdu 10 
Paper 2: Speaking in Urdu 12 
Paper 3: Reading and understanding in Urdu 36 
Paper 4: Writing in Urdu 38 
Assessment Objectives 63 
3 Administration and general information 64 
Entries 64 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special consideration and 
malpractice 64 
Student recruitment and progression 67 
Appendix 1: Candidate speaking examination record form 
(CS2) 71 
Appendix 2: Grammar list 72 
Appendix 3: Vocabulary list 79 
Appendix 4: The context for the development of this 
qualification 200 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 202 
Appendix 6: Codes 203 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
2 
1 Introduction 
Why choose Edexcel GCSE Urdu? 
We believe languages should be accessible for all students. Our new Pearson Edexcel  
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu has been developed to help students of all abilities 
progress and develop a passion for languages, through culturally engaging content. 
We’ve listened to feedback from the languages community and have developed an engaging 
and inspirational course of study that will enable your students to manipulate and use the 
target language effectively, independently and creatively, so that they have a solid basis 
from which to progress to A Level or employment. 
Engaging and popular topics 
Our specification includes both familiar and new topics that you have told us you like and 
that motivate your students. 
Manageable content 
Our content has been structured across five themes. This flexible programme of study allows 
time for a focused revision period at the end of the course. 
Content and assessments that provide an engaging real-world focus 
The authentic situations and stimuli enable students to see language in context and learn 
about the culture of the target language country. Our assessments allow for spontaneity and 
test grammar as well as providing plenty of opportunities for students to apply their 
knowledge independently, creatively and in authentic situations. 
Straightforward assessments that are accessible to all students 
Special care has been taken to ensure that all our papers are designed to be clear and 
concise and, where appropriate, questions feature scaffolding to help all students progress 
through the assessments confidently. Reading and listening papers are structured so that 
questions set in the target language are in a separate section from those questions requiring 
responses in English. Both papers are also structured so that they are progressive in their 
level of demand with the most demanding question being the final question in the paper. 
Translation tasks are progressive in their level of difficulty and are of appropriate demand at 
each tier. 
Carefully selected texts 
We have worked closely with teachers and expert practitioners to ensure we include 
interesting and relevant texts at the right level for students at each tier and that will 
encourage the use of a wide range of texts in the classroom. 
Clear and precise assessment criteria 
Our mark schemes have been trialled with sample student answers to ensure they reward 
students appropriately and that it is clear what is expected of students at each band. 
Continuous progression 
Our content builds on the understanding developed at prior language learning experience at  
Key Stage 3 while also ensuring that students new to the subject are appropriately 
supported, and provides a firm foundation for students to make a smooth transition to 
A Level. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
3 
Supporting you in planning and implementing 
this qualification 
Planning 
● To support you in delivering this specification, our Getting Started Guide, available on 
our website, gives you an overview of the new GCSE qualification to help you to get to 
grips with the changes to content and assessment and to help you understand what these 
changes mean for you and your students. 
● We will give you an editable course planner and scheme of work that you can adapt to 
suit your department. 
● Our mapping documents highlight key differences between the new and 2009 
qualification. 
Teaching and learning 
There are lots of free teaching and learning support to help you deliver the new qualification, 
including: 
● a guide to questions in the target language 
● student guide 
● online and face-to-face training events. 
Preparing for exams 
We also provide a range of resources to help you prepare your students for the assessments, 
including: 
● marked exemplars of student work with examiner commentaries 
ResultsPlus 
ResultsPlus provides the most detailed analysis available of your students’ exam 
performance. It can help you identify the topics and skills where further learning would 
benefit your students. 
Get help and support 
Our subject advisor service and online community will ensure you receive help and guidance 
from us and that you can share ideas and information with other teachers. You can sign up 
to receive e-newsletters to keep up to date with qualification updates and product and 
service news. 
Learn more at qualifications.pearson.com 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
4 
Qualification at a glance 
Content and assessment overview 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu consists of four externally 
examined papers based on the following skills: listening, speaking, reading and writing. 
Students must complete their speaking assessment in April/May and all other assessments in 
May/June in any single year. 
Each paper is available at Foundation tier or Higher tier. Students must be entered for a 
single tier across all papers. 
The use of dictionaries is not permitted. For Paper 2 this includes during the 
preparation time. 
 
Paper 1: Listening and understanding in Urdu (*Paper code: 1UR0/1F and 1H) 
Written examination 
Foundation tier: 35 minutes, including 5 minutes’ reading time; 50 marks 
Higher tier: 45 minutes, including 5 minutes’ reading time; 50 marks 
25% of the total qualification 
Content overview 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes and topics. 
Assessment overview 
Students are assessed on their understanding of standard spoken Urdu by one or more 
speakers in a range of public and social settings. Students will respond to multiple-response 
and short-answer open-response questions based on a recording featuring male and female 
Urdu speakers. 
Students must answer all questions in both sections. 
There is no requirement for students to produce written responses in Urdu. 
Foundation tier 
● Section A is set in English. The instructions to students are in English. 
● Section B is set in Urdu. The instructions to students are in Urdu. 
Higher tier 
● Section A is set in Urdu. The instructions to students are in Urdu. 
● Section B is set in English. The instructions to students are in English. 
The listening audio files are available on our website. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
5 
 
Paper 2: Speaking in Urdu (*Paper code: 1UR0/2F and 2H) 
Internally conducted and externally assessed 
Foundation tier: 7–9 minutes plus 12 minutes’ preparation time; 70 marks 
Higher tier: 10–12 minutes plus 12 minutes’ preparation time; 70 marks 
25% of the total qualification 
Content overview 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes and topics. 
Assessment overview 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate and interact effectively through 
speaking in Urdu for different purposes and in different settings. 
There are three tasks which must be conducted in the following order: 
Task 1 – a role play based on one topic that is allocated by Pearson 
Task 2 – questions based on a picture stimulus based on one topic that is allocated by Pearson 
Task 3 – conversation based on two themes. The first theme is based on the topic chosen by 
the student in advance of the assessment. The second theme is allocated by Pearson. 
The assessments are conducted by teachers in one session within a prescribed assessment 
window, the recordings are then submitted to Pearson for external marking. 
 
Paper 3: Reading and understanding in Urdu (*Paper code: 1UR0/3F and 3H) 
Written examination 
Foundation tier: 50 minutes; 50 marks. Higher tier: 1 hour 5 minutes; 50 marks 
25% of the total qualification 
Content overview 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes and topics. 
Assessment overview 
Students are assessed on their understanding of written Urdu across a range of different types 
of texts, including advertisements, emails, letters, articles and literary texts. Students are 
required to respond to multiple-response and short-answer questions based on these texts. 
Students must answer all questions in each of the three sections: 
Section A is set in English. The instructions to students are in English. 
Section B is set in Urdu. The instructions to students are in Urdu. 
Section C includes a translation passage from Urdu into English with instructions in English. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
6 
 
Paper 4: Writing in Urdu (*Paper code: 1UR0/4F and 4H) 
Written examination 
Foundation tier: 1 hour 20 minutes; 60 marks 
Higher tier: 1 hour 25 minutes; 60 marks 
25% of the total qualification 
Content overview 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes and topics. 
Assessment overview 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate effectively through writing in Urdu for 
different purposes and audiences. Students are required to produce responses of varying 
lengths and types to express ideas and opinions in Urdu. The instructions to students are in 
Urdu. Word counts are specified for each question. Students must answer all questions. 
Foundation tier – three open-response questions and one translation into Urdu. 
Higher tier – two open-response questions and one translation into Urdu. 
 
*See Appendix 6: Codes for a description of this code and all codes related to this 
qualification 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
7 
2 Subject content 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu allows students to develop their 
ability to communicate with Urdu native speakers in both speech and writing. Students will 
study across a variety of contexts relevant to their age and interests and will also develop a 
greater awareness of the culture of Urdu-speaking communities and countries. These 
contexts are listed under Themes and topics. 
Students will need to develop and use their knowledge and understanding of Urdu grammar 
progressively through their course of study. Grammar requirements are given in the 
grammar list (see Appendix 2: Grammar list). 
To help students build on their range of vocabulary, a list is provided of words that students 
are expected to use and understand (see Appendix 3: Vocabulary list). These lists are not 
exhaustive but are intended as a guide; students at both tiers will be required to understand 
and respond to familiar words (appropriate to the tier) that are not on the lists. 
Qualification aims and objectives 
The aims and objectives of this qualification are to enable students to: 
● develop their ability to communicate confidently and coherently with native speakers in 
speech and writing, conveying what they want to say with increasing accuracy 
● express and develop thoughts and ideas spontaneously and fluently 
● listen to and understand clearly articulated, standard speech at near normal speed 
● deepen their knowledge about how language works and enrich their vocabulary in order 
for them to increase their independent use and understanding of extended language in a 
wide range of contexts 
● acquire new knowledge, skills and ways of thinking through the ability to understand and 
respond to a rich range of authentic spoken and written material, adapted and abridged, 
as appropriate, including literary texts 
● develop awareness and understanding of the culture and identity of the countries and 
communities where the language is spoken 
● be encouraged to make appropriate links to other areas of the curriculum to enable 
bilingual and deeper learning, where the language may become a medium for constructing 
and applying knowledge 
● develop language-learning skills both for immediate use and to prepare them for further 
language study and use in school, higher education or employment 
● develop language strategies, including repair strategies. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
8 
Themes and topics 
Questions across all four language skills are set in common contexts, addressing a range of 
relevant contemporary and cultural themes. They are organised into five themes, each 
broken down into topics and sub-topics. 
The five themes are: 
1. Identity and culture 
2. Local area, holiday, travel 
3. School 
4. Future aspirations, study and work 
5. International and global dimension. 
All themes and topics must be studied in the context of both the students’ home 
country and that of countries and communities where Urdu is spoken. 
For listening and reading assessments, the majority of contexts are based on the culture and 
countries where the assessed language is spoken. Students may also refer to the culture of 
the assessed language country/countries or communities in the speaking and writing papers. 
It is, therefore, important that students are exposed to materials relating to Urdu-speaking 
countries throughout the course. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
9 
Each topic has been highlighted in bold. 
All topics must be studied in the context of both the students’ home country and 
that of countries and communities where Urdu is spoken. 
 
Theme 1: Identity and culture 
● Who am I?: relationships; when I was younger; what my friends and family are like; 
what makes a good friend; interests; socialising with friends and family; role models 
● Daily life: customs and everyday life; food and drink; shopping; social media and 
technology (use of, advantages and disadvantages) 
● Cultural life: celebrations and festivals; reading; music; sport; film and television 
 
Theme 2: Local area, holiday and travel 
● Holidays: preferences; experiences; destinations 
● Travel and tourist transactions: travel and accommodation; asking for help and 
dealing with problems; directions; eating out; shopping 
● Town, region and country: weather; places to see; things to do 
 
Theme 3: School 
● What school is like: school types; school day; subjects; rules and pressures; celebrating 
success 
● School activities: school trips; events and exchanges 
 
Theme 4: Future aspirations, study and work 
● Using languages beyond the classroom: forming relationships; travel; employment 
● Ambitions: further study; volunteering; training 
● Work: jobs; careers and professions 
 
Theme 5: International and global dimension 
● Bringing the world together: sports events; music events; campaigns and good causes 
● Environmental issues: being ‘green’; access to natural resources 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
10 
Paper 1: Listening and understanding in Urdu 
Content 
Students are assessed on their understanding of standard spoken Urdu in a variety of 
scenarios. 
Students will need to:  
● identify the overall message, key points, details and opinions 
● deduce meaning from a variety of spoken texts 
● recognise the relationship between past, present and future events 
● recognise and respond to key information, important themes and ideas in spoken text, 
including authentic sources, adapted and abridged, as appropriate 
● be able to answer questions, extract information, evaluate and draw conclusions. 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes 
(see Themes and topics). 
Students are presented with recorded scenarios involving one or more speakers in public and 
social settings. Recordings include authentic sources and are based on the themes. Recorded 
material features both male and female voices and represents different age groups.  
Students should be given the opportunity to become accustomed to hearing the Urdu 
language spoken in a range of styles and registers. 
Recordings for individual questions within the assessment vary in length, including both short 
and longer spoken passages, using both familiar language and, where appropriate, more 
complex language and abstract material, as appropriate to the tier. 
To prepare students adequately for this assessment, teachers should present and exploit a 
range of vocabulary relevant to each theme listed and build on the Key Stage 3 Programme 
of Study, where appropriate. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
11 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2019. 
● The assessment is out of 50 marks. 
● Students must be allocated five minutes in which to read through the paper before the 
first extract of the recording starts. This gives students an opportunity to familiarise 
themselves with the length and the layout of the paper and to read the questions before 
hearing the first extract. 
● Students will listen to the recording featuring Urdu-language speakers who will speak at a 
rate appropriate to the expected level of student understanding. 
● Each passage is recorded twice, with pauses following the second hearing to allow each 
student sufficient time to write or note their response to each question (or part of a 
question) and to read the next question before the related extract is played. 
● Recordings will be issued as digital sound files accessed via a secure download. 
● Each question is set in a context drawn from the topics. The assessment tasks will feature 
general content that is familiar and accessible to all students. 
● Students must answer all questions in both sections.  
● Foundation tier 
o 35 minutes is given for the assessment, including 5 minutes’ reading time. 
o Section A contains 12 questions set in English. Question types comprise both multiple-
response and short-answer open-response questions. The instructions to students are 
in English. 
o Section B contains two questions set in Urdu. The question type is multiple-response. 
The instructions to students are in Urdu. 
• Higher tier 
o 45 minutes is given for the assessment, including 5 minutes’ reading time. 
o Section A contains two questions set in Urdu. The question type is multiple-response. 
The instructions to students are in Urdu. 
o Section B contains eight questions set in English. Question types comprise both 
multiple-response and short-answer open-response questions. The instructions to 
students are in English. 
● Four of the questions will be common to both tiers. 
● For both tiers, there is no requirement for students to produce written responses in Urdu. 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and mark scheme for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
12 
Paper 2: Speaking in Urdu 
Content 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate and interact effectively through 
speaking in Urdu for different purposes. 
Students will need to: 
● convey information and narrate events coherently and confidently, using and adapting 
language for different purposes 
● speak spontaneously, responding to unpredictable questions, points of view or situations, 
sustaining communication by using rephrasing or repair strategies, as appropriate 
● use a range of vocabulary and grammatical structures accurately, including some more 
complex forms, with reference to past, present and future events 
● make creative and more complex use of the language, as appropriate, to express and 
justify their own thoughts and points of view 
● use accurate pronunciation and intonation in order to be understood by a native speaker, 
however they will be able to access the highest marks available for each task without a 
‘perfect’ command of Urdu. 
These are assessed through a series of three consecutive tasks. 
Task 1 – Role play 
The role play is an interaction requiring the student to ask and answer questions, to 
exchange information and to use different registers (see definition of registers beneath the 
Role play mark grid within the marking guidance section of the specification). The role play 
relates to either formal or informal scenarios, in turn inviting the student to use either formal 
or informal language relevant to the scenario. The task is set in the register that the student 
is required to use, so students should use that register in their responses. All role plays are 
marked for communication only. 
The role plays are set and provided by Pearson at the time of assessment together with a 
sequencing grid and instructions. For an example, please see the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document – 
Paper 2: Speaking in Urdu, General instructions to the teacher section. 
Scenarios require an exchange of information. Some scenarios are transactional in nature. 
The scenarios are based on any of the topics from themes 1 to 4 (listed on page 9), i.e. not 
on the theme International and global dimension as this theme lends itself better to the 
picture-based task and the conversation. 
Task 2 – Picture-based task 
The assessment scenario is based on any of the topics (listed on page 9). The topic is 
allocated by Pearson at the time of assessment together with a sequencing grid and 
instructions. For an example, please see the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in 
Urdu Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document – Paper 2: Speaking in Urdu, General 
instructions to the teacher section.  
This assessment allows students to: 
● describe and narrate events 
● give information 
● express, justify and exchange opinions. 
Students are required to refer to past, present and future events in this assessment at both 
Foundation and Higher tiers, using different timeframes. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
13 
Task 3 – Conversation 
The conversation allows students to cover all of the requirements outlined in the Content 
section on page 12, including conveying information, giving points of view, developing and 
initiating conversation and discussion and producing extended sequences of speech. 
The conversation is based on any two themes (see Themes and topics) and is in two parts. 
For the first part of the conversation, the student selects one topic from one theme in 
advance of the assessment. The choice of topic must be agreed between the student and the 
teacher and must be selected no later than two weeks before the assessment takes place. 
This part of the conversation task starts with this first topic and then may move on to other 
topics within the same theme. 
The second part of the conversation must be on a different theme. This will be prescribed by 
Pearson through instructions on a sequencing grid. For an example please see the Pearson 
Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document 
– Paper 2: Speaking in Urdu, General instructions to the teacher section. 
This part of the conversation may focus on one or more topics from within the selected 
theme (see page 9). 
Students are required to refer to past, present and future events in this assessment, using a 
range of tenses and timeframes. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
14 
Assessment information 
General information  
● First assessment: April/May 2019. 
● The entire assessment must be conducted in Urdu. 
● Students complete three tasks. 
o Task 1 – a role play based on one topic. This is allocated by Pearson at the time of 
assessment. 
o Task 2 – a task containing a picture and questions drawn from one topic. This is 
allocated by Pearson at the time of assessment. 
o Task 3 – conversation based on two themes. The first theme is based on the topic 
chosen by the student in advance of the assessment. The second theme is selected by 
the teacher from a choice of two themes allocated by Pearson. 
● Task 1 is set in the register that the student is required to use. 
At the time of assessment, Pearson will issue a prescribed order per student for their role 
play, picture-based task and two themes for the second part of the conversation. The 
teacher does not choose the order of the cards. Pearson will provide instructions on 
sequencing and a sequencing grid. For an example please see the Pearson Edexcel  
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document –  
Paper 2: Speaking in Urdu, General instructions to the teacher, section. 
This grid has been designed to help ensure that each student covers a broad range of 
themes from this specification. 
● Assessments are conducted by centres within a five-week assessment period in April and 
May in any single year. Dates for the assessment period will be confirmed in the  
UK Information Manual at the start of each academic year. The assessment period will not 
always be continuous or be the same period each year, for example it will need to 
accommodate the Easter break which changes each year. 
● The assessment materials provided by Pearson for all tasks may be accessed by the 
teacher no more than three working days before the prescribed five week assessment 
period. This is to enable the teacher to prepare for the assessment. The assessment 
materials in this pack must not be removed from the centre premises.   
● Assessments are conducted by teachers in one session within a prescribed assessment 
window and then submitted to Pearson for external marking. 
● Students are presented with instructions in English but must communicate entirely in  
Urdu for the duration of the assessment. 
● Complete, unedited recordings of all assessments must be submitted to Pearson via the 
online Learner Work Transfer (LWT) portal.
 
● Each question is set in a context drawn from the topics. The assessment tasks will feature 
general content that is familiar and accessible to all students. 
● Students must be permitted 12 minutes’ preparation time to consider the questions and 
stimulus cards for Tasks 1 and 2. 
● Students are assessed on the quality of responses rather than length of assessment, 
however the assessment times are different to reflect the demand of each tier. 
● All assessments are marked against assessment criteria, please see Marking Guidance for 
Paper 2. 
● Centres must have procedures in place to verify the identity of all students at the time  
of the assessment and confirm this on the Candidate speaking examination record 
form (CS2) (see Appendix 1). Centres are required to submit to Pearson one completed  
CS2 form for all students for each tier. 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted during the preparation time or during the 
assessment. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
15 
Foundation tier assessment time and marks 
● The total assessment for the three tasks is 7 to 9 minutes plus 12 minutes’ preparation 
time. 
● The assessment is worth 70 marks. 
● The assessment consists of the following three tasks, which must be conducted in the 
following order: 
o Task 1 – one role play recommended to last between one to one-and-a-half minutes for 
10 marks 
o Task 2 – one picture-based task recommended to last between two-and-a-half to three 
minutes for 24 marks 
o Task 3 – a conversation recommended to last between three-and-a-half to  
four-and-a-half minutes for 36 marks. 
Higher tier assessment time and marks 
● The total assessment for the three tasks is 10 to 12 minutes plus 12 minutes’ preparation 
time. 
● The assessment is worth 70 marks. 
● The assessment consists of the following three tasks, which must be conducted in the 
following order: 
o Task 1 – one role play recommended to last between two to two-and-a-half minutes for 
10 marks 
o Task 2 – one picture-based task recommended to last between three to  
three-and-a-half minutes for 24 marks 
o Task 3 – a conversation recommended to last between five to six minutes for 36 marks. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
16 
Preparation time 
Students are allocated 12 minutes’ preparation time, under supervised conditions, 
immediately prior to the assessment for Tasks 1 and 2. The purpose is to consider the 
questions and stimulus for the role play and picture-based scenarios allocated. 
Students are permitted to make notes (up to a maximum of one side of A4 for both Tasks 1 
and 2) during this period and they can refer to them during the role play and picture-based 
assessment, but not during the conversation task. Students must return their notes to the 
teacher before commencing Task 3 (conversation). 
The notes should be for reference only and students must not read out whole, prepared 
sentences in answer to questions. 
Any notes made during the preparation time must be kept securely by the centre until the 
end of October in the year the assessment is completed, after which time they should be 
securely destroyed. 
Students cannot have access to a dictionary, or any other resource, during the preparation 
time. 
Task 1 – Role play 
Pearson will set and provide ten different sets of role plays for each tier. Each role play 
consists of two cards – one for the teacher and one for the student. 
Teacher cards 
The teacher cards contain instructions on how to conduct the role play and the exact 
questions to ask. 
Each role play opens with an introduction from the teacher who then asks the first question. 
Candidate cards 
The candidate cards include prompts as a guide and highlight where the candidate needs to 
ask a question (indicated by the symbol ‘?’), and where an unpredictable question is posed 
to them by the teacher (indicated by the symbol ‘!’). 
Students have access to this during their preparation time to help in preparing for the 
assessment. 
Each candidate card contains instructions in English and the task is in Urdu. The context of 
the role play is provided in both sections. Candidates must read both sections fully to 
support understanding of each bullet point. 
At Foundation tier, the candidate cards contain five bullet points, eliciting five utterances. 
Students need to ask one question and respond to one unpredictable question. Students are 
required to speak only in the present tense for four of the prompts or they may use a 
familiar conditional tense where it is more natural to do so. 
At Higher tier, the candidate cards contain five bullet points, eliciting five utterances. 
Students need to ask two questions and respond to one unpredictable question. Students are 
required to speak in the present tense for four of the prompts or they may also use a 
conditional tense if it is more natural to do so and respond to one question set in a past 
tense. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
17 
Task 2 – Picture-based task 
Pearson will provide ten different sets of picture-based tasks for each tier. Each task consists 
of two cards – one for the teacher and one for the student. 
Teacher cards 
The teacher cards contain instructions on how to conduct this task and the five questions to 
ask the student. Teachers are allowed to repeat questions and use set prompts to enable 
students to give a developed response. They are not allowed to deviate from the set 
prompts. 
Each task opens with the teacher asking the first question, which is based on the picture. 
The first question is directly based on the picture; the remaining questions extend beyond 
the picture, but are based on the overall topic from which the picture is drawn, inviting an 
exchange of views or opinions. 
Candidate cards 
At Foundation tier, students are provided with a picture and five bullets in Urdu to help in 
preparing for the five questions that will be asked during the assessment. Students are 
allowed to ask for questions to be repeated. 
Students have access to this during their preparation time. 
At Higher tier, students are provided with a picture and five bullets in Urdu to help in 
preparing for the five questions that will be asked during the assessment. The final bullet is 
marked by the symbol ‘!’ to denote one unpredictable question. Students are allowed to ask 
for questions to be repeated. 
Students have access to this during their preparation time. 
Task 3 – Conversation 
The first part of the conversation opens with the topic chosen by the student. The student 
may choose to focus on any aspect(s) of the topic as each has a number of different 
features. For example, a student who has selected the topic What school is like may: 
● choose to focus on ‘school types’ and ‘rules and pressures’, or 
● choose to focus only on ‘rules and pressures’. 
To enable them to make a confident start, the teacher should allow the student to state their 
chosen aspect(s) from their nominated topic and to talk about this aspect/these aspects for 
up to one minute. 
The teacher continues the conversation on the chosen topic and then may move on to other 
topics within the same theme, if necessary, to ensure that students use the recommended 
time for this task most effectively. 
The second part of the conversation is based on a different theme allocated by Pearson and 
covers any of the topics across that single theme. 
Teachers must ensure that an equal amount of time is allocated to both parts of the 
conversation. 
Throughout the conversation, in order to facilitate a genuine and spontaneous interaction, 
the nature of questions from the teacher should enable students to: 
● answer questions freely, in turn allowing them to produce extended sequences of speech 
● develop conversations and discussions 
● give and justify own thoughts and opinions 
● refer to past, present and future events. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
18 
Administration and general information about the conduct of the 
speaking assessment 
Preparation time and notes for Tasks 1 and 2 only 
● The notes made during the preparation time should be a reference only, and students 
should not read out whole, prepared sentences. 
● The preparation time must be supervised. It can take place either in the examination 
room with the teacher or outside of the room with an invigilator. 
● Students are not permitted to write on the candidate cards. 
● Students must return their notes and candidate cards to the teacher at the end of the 
second task (picture-based task). 
● Any notes made during the preparation time must be kept securely by the centre until the 
end of October in the year the assessment is completed, after which time they should be 
securely destroyed. 
● Students cannot have access to a dictionary, or any other resource, during the preparation 
time. 
Sample assessment materials 
Sample candidate and teacher cards for the role-play and picture-based tasks and 
accompanying marking guidance and assessment criteria can be found in the Pearson 
Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Marking guidance and assessment criteria are also provided in this document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
19 
Marking guidance for Paper 2: Speaking in Urdu 
This marking guidance is for the use of Pearson-appointed external examiners. The guidance 
has been included for teacher reference to aid understanding of how the assessment criteria 
will be applied. 
General guidance on using levels-based mark schemes 
Step 1 Decide on a band 
● The examiner will first of all consider the answer as a whole and then decide which descriptors 
most closely match the answer and place it in that band. The descriptors for each band 
indicate the different features that will be seen in the student’s answer for that band. 
● When assigning a band they will look at the overall quality of the answer and not focus 
disproportionately on small and specific parts of the answer where the student has not 
performed quite as well as the rest. If the answer covers different aspects of different 
bands of the mark scheme they will use a ‘best fit’ approach for defining the band and 
then use the variability of the response to help decide the mark within the band, for 
example if the response is predominantly band 5–8 with a small amount of band 9–12 
material, it would be placed in band 5–8 but be awarded a mark near the top of the band 
because of the band 9–12 content. 
Step 2 Decide on a mark 
● Once they have decided on a band they will then need to decide on a mark within the 
band. 
● They will decide on the mark to award based on the quality of the answer; they will award 
a mark towards the top or bottom of that band depending on how the student has 
evidenced each of the descriptor bullet points. 
● They will modify the mark based on how securely the trait descriptors are met at that band. 
● They will need to go back through the answer as they apply the mark scheme to clarify 
points and assure themselves that the band and the mark are appropriate. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
20 
Assessment criteria for the Foundation tier – Part 1 
Role play – Foundation tier (10 marks) 
For this task, students’ work is marked by Pearson using the following assessment criteria. 
The mark grid is applied once to each individual response to the prompts. There is a 
maximum of 2 marks for each of the five prompts on the role-play cards. 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable communication; highly ambiguous OR pronunciation prevents 
communication 
1 Partially clear/ambiguous OR partially appropriate within the context of the 
role play; pronunciation may affect clarity of communication 
2 Clearly communicated; appropriate within the context of the role play; 
unambiguous; pronunciation supports clear communication 
 
Exemplification of how to apply the role-play mark grid can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Additional guidance 
Appropriate: relevant response related to the prompt, uses appropriate register for the 
scenario. 
Informal register includes language that students would use with friends and people of a 
similar age such as endearments and informal greetings and forms of address where 
appropriate. Informal register also requires the use of the informal structures when using, for 
example, verbs and possessive adjectives. 
Formal register includes language that students would use with adults in a formal context, 
for example teachers, employers, customers, officials. Formal register includes avoidance of 
slang, over-familiar language, exaggeration and endearments. It also includes formal 
greetings and forms of address where appropriate. Formal register requires formal structures 
when using, for example, verbs, personal pronouns and possessive adjectives 
Partially clear/pronunciation may affect clarity of communication: makes speech 
difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is eventually understood)/forces the 
listener to strain to understand what is meant. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
21 
Assessment criteria for the Foundation tier – Part 2 
Picture-based task – Foundation tier (24 marks) 
There are two mark grids to be applied to this task: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
Picture-based task: communication and content – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–4 ● Limited response to set questions, likely to consist of single-word answers 
● Minimal success in adapting language to describe, narrate, inform using 
individual words/phrases; sometimes unable to respond 
● A straightforward opinion may be expressed but without justification 
● Pronunciation and intonation are inconsistently intelligible with inaccuracies that 
lead to frequent impairment in communication 
5–8 ● Responds briefly to set questions, there is much hesitation and continuous 
prompting needed 
● Some limited success in adapting language, to describe, narrate and inform in 
response to the set questions; may occasionally be unable to respond 
● Straightforward, brief opinions are given but without justification 
● Pronunciation and intonation are mostly intelligible but inaccuracies lead to 
some impairment in communication 
9–12 ● Responds to set questions with some development, some hesitation and some 
prompting necessary 
● Some effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform in 
response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions with occasional, brief justification 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, occasionally inaccuracies affect 
clarity of communication 
13–16 ● Responds to set questions with frequently developed responses, occasional 
hesitation, occasional prompting necessary 
● Frequently effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform in 
response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions and gives justification with some development 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, inaccuracies are minimal and have 
no impact on clarity of communication 
Additional guidance 
Adaptation of/adapting language to describe, narrate and inform: adapts language to 
achieve different purposes in the language; students may adapt language more effectively 
for one purpose than another, for example they may use language effectively to inform but 
less effectively to narrate. 
Straightforward opinions and justification are those that form part of a minimum/standard/ 
predictable response. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
22 
Picture-based task: linguistic knowledge and accuracy – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Limited accuracy when responding to set questions; minimal success when 
referring to past, present and future events 
● Individual words and phrases are coherent when responding to set 
questions; high frequency of errors prevent meaning throughout most of the 
conversation 
3–4 ● Occasionally accurate grammatical structures when responding to set 
questions; occasional success when referring to present events, limited 
success when referring to future or past events, much ambiguity 
● Some coherent phrases and sentences within responses to set questions; 
regular errors prevent coherent overall speech and frequently prevent 
meaning 
5–6 ● Some accurate grammatical structures, including some successful references 
to past, present and future events in response to the set questions, some 
ambiguity 
● Responses are partially coherent, errors occur that sometimes hinder clarity 
of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
7–8 ● Generally accurate grammatical structures, generally successful references to 
past, present and future events in response to the set questions, occasional 
ambiguity 
● Responses are generally coherent although errors occur that occasionally 
hinder clarity of communication 
Additional guidance 
Errors: the mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on 
clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the listener from the content of what is being said. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make speech difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force listeners to strain to understand what is meant, 
for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the possessive 
adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the listener from the content of what is 
being said. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, i.e. using the incorrect person of the 
verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
23 
Assessment criteria for the Foundation tier – Part 3 
Conversation – Foundation tier (36 marks) 
There are three mark grids to be applied to this task: 
● communication and content 
● interaction and spontaneity 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
Conversation: communication and content – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Communicates limited information relevant to the topics and questions 
● Uses language to express limited, straightforward ideas and thoughts; 
occasional straightforward opinion expressed without justification 
● Uses limited, familiar vocabulary and expression with much repetition; 
communication is disjointed and frequently breaks down because of restricted 
range of vocabulary 
● Pronunciation and intonation are inconsistently intelligible with inaccuracies 
that lead to frequent impairment in communication 
4–6 ● Communicates brief information relevant to the topics and questions 
● Uses language to produce straightforward ideas and thoughts; expresses 
straightforward opinions with limited justification 
● Uses repetitive, familiar vocabulary and expression; communication is often 
constrained and occasionally breaks down because of restricted range of 
vocabulary 
● Pronunciation and intonation are mostly intelligible but inaccuracies lead to 
some impairment in communication 
7–9 ● Communicates information relevant to the topics and questions, with 
occasionally extended sequences of speech 
● Uses language to produce straightforward ideas, thoughts and opinions with 
occasional justification 
● Uses a limited variety of mainly straightforward vocabulary, communication for 
some purposes is constrained because of restricted range of vocabulary 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, occasionally inaccuracies affect 
clarity of communication 
10–12 ● Communicates information relevant to the topics and questions, with some 
extended sequences of speech 
● Occasionally uses language creatively to express some individual thoughts, 
ideas and opinions, some of which are justified 
● Occasional variety in use of vocabulary, including some examples of 
uncommon language with some variation of expression, fulfils most purposes 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, inaccuracies are minimal and 
have no impact on clarity of communication 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
24 
Additional guidance 
Uses language creatively – examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● manipulating language, including familiar, high-frequency and simple language, to 
respond to unfamiliar/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to maintain 
interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, to 
convince. 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view which go 
beyond the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
Straightforward ideas, thoughts and opinions are those that give the minimum/standard/ 
predictable response. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
25 
Conversation: interaction and spontaneity – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Basic exchange where only some questions are responded to; answers rely 
on rehearsed language that is frequently irrelevant to the question 
● Short, undeveloped responses, many incomplete 
● Isolated examples of ability to sustain communication, pace is slow and 
hesitant throughout 
4–6 ● Responds with limited spontaneity; answers rely on rehearsed language that 
is occasionally irrelevant to the question 
● Short responses, any development depends on teacher prompting 
● Limited ability to sustain communication, pace is mostly slow and hesitant 
7–9 ● Occasionally able to respond spontaneously with some examples of natural 
interaction although often stilted 
● Occasionally able to initiate and develop responses independently but regular 
prompting needed 
● Occasionally able to sustain communication, using rephrasing/repair 
strategies if necessary to continue the flow; frequent hesitation 
10–12 ● Responds spontaneously to some questions, interacting naturally for parts of 
the conversation 
● Sometimes able to initiate and develop the conversation independently, 
some prompting needed 
● Sometimes able to sustain communication, using rephrasing/repair strategies 
if necessary to continue the flow; some hesitation 
 
Additional guidance 
Rephrasing/repair strategies: strategies that aid communication and allow the 
conversation to be sustained, for example rephrasing, circumlocution, adjusting the 
message, asking for clarification/repetition, repair strategies such as self-correction; these 
strategies enable students to deliver the message when exact vocabulary or expressions are 
not known. 
Responds/responding spontaneously: gives a relevant, impromptu response based on 
what they have heard. 
Rehearsed language: language learned by heart, which may not give a relevant, 
impromptu response based on what has been heard (not spontaneous). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
26 
Conversation: linguistic knowledge and accuracy – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Uses straightforward, individual words/phrases; limited evidence of language 
manipulation 
● Limited accuracy, minimal success when referring to past, present and future 
events 
● Individual words and phrases are coherent; high frequency of errors prevent 
meaning throughout much of the conversation 
4–6 ● Uses straightforward, repetitive, grammatical structures 
● Occasionally accurate grammatical structures, occasional success when 
referring to present events, limited success when referring to future or past 
events, much ambiguity 
● Some coherent phrases and sentences; regular errors prevent coherent 
overall speech and frequently prevent meaning 
7–9 ● Manipulates a limited variety of mainly straightforward grammatical 
structures, minimal use of complex structures 
● Some accurate grammatical structures, some successful references to past, 
present and future events, some ambiguity 
● Sequences of coherent speech although errors occur that often hinder clarity 
of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
10–12 ● Manipulates grammatical structures with occasional variation, complex 
structures used but repetitive 
● Generally accurate grammatical structures, generally successful references to 
past, present and future events 
● Generally coherent speech although errors occur that sometimes hinder 
clarity of communication 
 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be:  
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language. 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: the mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on 
clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the listener from the content of what is being said. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
27 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make speech difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force listeners to strain to understand what is meant, 
for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the possessive 
adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the listener from the content of what is 
being said. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, i.e. using the incorrect person of the 
verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
28 
Assessment criteria for the Higher tier – Part 1 
Role play – Higher tier (10 marks) 
For this task, students’ work is marked by Pearson using the following assessment criteria. 
The mark grid is applied once to each individual response to the prompts. There is a 
maximum of 2 marks for each of the five prompts on the role-play cards. 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable communication; highly ambiguous OR pronunciation prevents 
communication 
1 Partially clear/ambiguous OR partially appropriate within the context of the role 
play; pronunciation may affect clarity of communication 
2 Clearly communicated; appropriate within the context of the role play; 
unambiguous; pronunciation supports clear communication 
 
Exemplification of how to apply the role-play mark grid can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Additional guidance 
Appropriate: relevant response related to the prompt, uses appropriate register for the 
scenario. 
Informal register includes language that students would use with friends and people of a 
similar age such as endearments and informal greetings and forms of address where 
appropriate. Informal register also requires the use of the informal structures when using, for 
example, verbs and possessive adjectives. 
Formal register includes language that students would use with adults in a formal context, 
for example teachers, employers, customers, officials. Formal register includes avoidance of 
slang, over-familiar language, exaggeration and endearments. It also includes formal 
greetings and forms of address where appropriate. Formal register requires formal structures 
when using, for example, verbs, personal pronouns and possessive adjectives. 
Partially clear/pronunciation may affect clarity of communication: makes speech 
difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is eventually understood)/forces the 
listener to strain to understand what is meant. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
29 
Assessment criteria for the Higher tier – Part 2 
Picture-based task – Higher tier (24 marks) 
There are two mark grids to be applied to this task: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
Picture-based task: communication and content – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–4 ● Responds to set questions with some development, some hesitation and 
some prompting necessary 
● Some effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform in 
response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions with occasional, brief justification 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, occasionally inaccuracies affect 
clarity of communication 
5–8 ● Responds to set questions with frequently developed responses, occasional 
hesitation, occasional prompting necessary 
● Frequently effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform 
in response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions and gives justification with some development 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, inaccuracies are minimal and 
have no impact on clarity of communication 
9–12 ● Responds to set questions with mostly developed and fluent responses, 
minimal hesitation and minimal prompting necessary 
● Predominantly effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and 
inform, in response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions effectively and gives justification which is mostly 
developed  
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible and predominantly accurate  
13–16 ● Responds to the set questions with consistently fluent and developed 
responses 
● Consistently effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and 
inform, in response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions with ease and gives fully-developed justification 
● Pronunciation and intonation are consistently accurate and intelligible 
Additional guidance 
Adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform: adapts language to achieve 
different purposes in the language; students may adapt language more effectively for one 
purpose than another, for example they may use language effectively to inform but less 
effectively to narrate. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
30 
Picture-based task: linguistic knowledge and accuracy – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Some accurate grammatical structures, including some successful 
references to past, present and future events in response to the set 
questions, some ambiguity 
● Responses are partially coherent, errors occur that sometimes hinder clarity 
of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Generally accurate grammatical structures, generally successful references 
to past, present and future events in response to the set questions, 
occasional ambiguity 
● Responses are generally coherent although errors occur that occasionally 
hinder clarity of communication 
5–6 ● Predominantly accurate grammatical structures, mostly successful 
references to past, present and future events in response to the set 
questions 
● Responses are predominantly coherent, errors occur but they rarely hinder 
clarity of communication 
7–8 ● Consistently accurate grammatical structures, successful references to 
past, present and future events in response to the set questions 
● Responses are coherent, any errors do not hinder the clarity of the 
communication 
Additional guidance 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free speech in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the listener from the content of what is being said. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make speech difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force listeners to strain to understand what is meant, 
for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the possessive 
adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they distract the listener from the content of what is 
being said. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message  
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, i.e. using the incorrect person of the 
verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
31 
Assessment criteria for the Higher tier – Part 3 
Conversation – Higher tier (36 marks) 
There are three mark grids to be applied to this task: 
● communication and content 
● interaction and spontaneity 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
Conversation: communication and content – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Communicates information relevant to the topics and questions, with 
occasionally extended sequences of speech 
● Uses language to produce straightforward ideas, thoughts and opinions with 
occasional justification 
● Uses a limited variety of mainly straightforward vocabulary, communication for 
some purposes is constrained because of restricted range of vocabulary 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, occasionally inaccuracies affect 
clarity of communication 
4–6 ● Communicates information relevant to the topics and questions, with some 
extended sequences of speech 
● Occasionally uses language creatively to express some individual thoughts, ideas 
and opinions, some of which are justified 
● Occasional variety in use of vocabulary, including some examples of uncommon 
language with some variation of expression, fulfils most purposes 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, inaccuracies are minimal and have 
no impact on clarity of communication 
7–9 ● Communicates detailed information relevant to the topics and questions, usually 
with extended sequences of speech 
● Frequently uses language creatively to express and justify a variety of individual 
thoughts, ideas and opinions 
● Uses a variety of vocabulary, including frequent use of uncommon language, to 
regularly vary expression for different purposes 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible and predominantly accurate  
10–12 ● Communicates detailed information relevant to the topics and questions, 
consistently extended sequences of speech 
● Consistently uses language creatively to express and justify a wide variety of 
individual thoughts, ideas and opinions 
● Consistently uses a wide variety of vocabulary, including uncommon language, to 
consistently vary expression for different purposes 
● Pronunciation and intonation are consistently accurate and intelligible 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
32 
Additional guidance 
Uses language creatively: examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● manipulating language, including familiar, high-frequency and simple language, to 
respond to unfamiliar/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to 
maintain interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, to 
convince. 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view that go beyond 
the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
Straightforward ideas, thoughts and opinions are those that give the minimum/standard/ 
predictable response. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
33 
Conversation: interaction and spontaneity – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Occasionally able to respond spontaneously with some examples of natural 
interaction although often stilted 
● Occasionally able to initiate and develop responses independently but regular 
prompting needed 
● Occasionally able to sustain communication, using rephrasing/repair strategies if 
necessary to continue the flow; frequent hesitation 
4–6 ● Responds spontaneously to some questions, interacting naturally for parts of the 
conversation 
● Sometimes able to initiate and develop the conversation independently, some 
prompting needed 
● Sometimes able to sustain communication, using rephrasing/repair strategies if 
necessary to continue the flow; some hesitation 
7–9 ● Responds to most questions spontaneously, resulting in mostly natural 
interaction 
● Mostly able to initiate and develop the conversation independently 
● Able to sustain communication throughout most of the conversation, using 
rephrasing/repair strategies if necessary to continue the flow, occasional 
hesitation 
10–12 ● Responds spontaneously and with ease to questions, resulting in natural 
interaction 
● Consistently able to initiate and develop the conversation independently 
● Able to sustain communication throughout, using rephrasing/repair strategies if 
necessary to continue the flow 
Additional guidance 
Respond(s) spontaneously: gives a relevant, impromptu response based on what they 
have heard. 
Rephrasing/repair strategies are strategies that aid communication and allow the 
conversation to be sustained, for example rephrasing, circumlocution, adjusting the 
message, asking for clarification/repetition, repair strategies such as self-correction; these 
strategies enable students to deliver the message when exact vocabulary or expressions are 
not known. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
34 
Conversation: linguistic knowledge and accuracy – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Manipulates a limited variety of mainly straightforward grammatical 
structures, minimal use of complex structures 
● Some accurate grammatical structures, some successful references to past, 
present and future events, some ambiguity 
● Sequences of coherent speech although errors occur that often hinder clarity 
of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
4–6 ● Manipulates grammatical structures with occasional variation, complex 
structures used but repetitive 
● Generally accurate grammatical structures, generally successful references to 
past, present and future events 
● Generally coherent speech although errors occur that sometimes hinder 
clarity of communication 
7–9 ● Manipulates a variety of grammatical structures, some variety of complex 
structures 
● Predominantly accurate grammatical structures, mostly successful references 
to past, present and future events 
● Predominantly coherent speech; errors occur but they rarely hinder clarity of 
communication 
10–12 ● Manipulates a wide variety of grammatical structures, frequent use of 
complex structures 
● Consistently accurate grammatical structures, consistently successful 
references to past, present and future events 
● Fully coherent speech; any errors do not hinder the clarity of the 
communication 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● all grammar and structures included in the grammar list that are specific to Higher tier 
GCSE 
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free speech in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the listener from the content of what is being said. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
35 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make speech difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force listeners to strain to understand what is meant, 
for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the possessive 
adjective. 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the listener from the content of what is 
being said. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message  
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, i.e. using the incorrect person or the 
verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
36 
Paper 3: Reading and understanding in Urdu 
Content 
Students are assessed on their understanding of written Urdu across a range of different 
types of texts. 
Students need to: 
● identify the overall message, key points, details and opinions in texts 
● deduce meaning from a variety of written texts 
● recognise the relationship between past, present and future events 
● understand texts, organise and present relevant details, and, where appropriate, draw 
inferences in context and recognise implicit meaning 
● recognise and respond to key information, important themes and ideas in more extended 
written text, including authentic sources, adapted and abridged as appropriate, by being 
able to extract information and answer questions. 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes (see Themes and 
topics). 
Texts for individual questions within the assessment use high-frequency language and vary 
in length, including both short- and longer written passages. Texts include authentic sources 
that introduce more complex language and unfamiliar materials.  
The range of text types include: 
● advertisements, emails, letters, articles and literary texts 
● a short passage to be translated from Urdu into English. 
Literary texts consist of short extracts from texts that may have been adapted and abridged 
from authentic sources to be appropriate to this level – from letters, short stories, novels or 
plays to contemporary and historical sources. Students are also expected to translate a short 
passage of written Urdu into English to demonstrate an ability to transfer meaning accurately 
into English. 
Scenarios in the texts are set either at home or, more frequently, in an Urdu-speaking 
country, allowing students to develop appropriate cultural awareness and understanding. 
To prepare students adequately for this assessment, teachers should present and exploit a 
range of vocabulary relevant to each theme listed, building on the Key Stage 3 Programme 
of Study, where appropriate. 
Students should be presented with Urdu language in a range of styles or registers and in a 
variety of different contexts, as appropriate to their age and level of understanding. Students 
should also be presented with different fonts and formats, for example short, printed 
messages, articles and email messages. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
37 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2019. 
● The assessment time is: 
o Foundation tier – 50 minutes in length 
o Higher tier – 1 hour 5 minutes in length. 
● The assessment is out of 50 marks. 
● The assessment consists of 10 questions. 
● Students must answer all questions from each of the three sections. 
● Students are required to respond to questions based on passages of text from a range of 
sources. Each question is set in a context drawn from the themes. 
● Section A has six questions set in English. Question types comprise both multiple-response 
and short-answer open response questions. The instructions to students are in English. 
● Section B contains three questions set in Urdu. The instructions to students are in Urdu: 
o for the Foundation tier there are three multiple-response questions 
o for the Higher tier, there are two multiple-response questions and one short-answer 
open-response question. 
● Section C contains one translation passage from Urdu into English. The instructions to 
students are in English. 
● Four of the questions are common to both tiers. 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and mark scheme for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
38 
Paper 4: Writing in Urdu 
Content 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate effectively through writing in Urdu. 
Students need to:  
● communicate effectively in writing for a variety of purposes across a range of specified 
contexts 
● write short texts, using simple sentences and familiar language accurately to convey 
meaning and exchange information 
● produce clear and coherent text of extended length to present facts and express ideas and 
opinions appropriately for different purposes and in different settings 
● make accurate use of a variety of vocabulary and grammatical structures, including some 
more complex forms, to describe and narrate with reference to past, present and future 
events 
● manipulate the language, using and adapting a variety of structures and vocabulary with 
increasing accuracy and fluency for new purposes, including using appropriate style and 
register 
● make independent, creative and more complex use of the language, as appropriate, to 
note down key points, express and justify individual thoughts and points of view, in order 
to interest, inform or convince 
● translate sentences and short texts from English into the assessed language to convey key 
messages accurately and to apply grammatical knowledge of language and structures in 
context. 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2019. 
● The assessment is out of 60 marks. 
● Each question is set in a context drawn from the themes and topics. The assessment tasks 
feature general content that is familiar and accessible to all students. 
● Students are required to produce responses of varying lengths and types to express facts, 
ideas and opinions in Urdu. 
● The length of each response required and complexity of language increases across the 
paper. Recommended word counts are specified for each question. Students will not be 
penalised for writing more or fewer words than recommended in the word count or for 
going beyond the mandatory bullets. 
● One question is a translation of a short passage from English into Urdu. 
● All assessments are marked against assessment criteria, please see Marking guidance for 
Paper 4: Writing in Urdu. 
● The instructions to students are in Urdu. The question titles appear in English. 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
39 
● Foundation tier 
o The assessment time is 1 hour and 20 minutes in length. 
o The paper consists of three open questions and one translation from English into Urdu. 
o Students must answer all questions. 
o Question 1 assesses students on their ability to write to describe and to express 
opinions. 
o Question 2 has two options from which students have to select one. This question 
assesses students on their ability to note down key points and convey information. 
Students must use the formal register, please see the definition in Marking guidance for 
Paper 4: Writing in Urdu. 
o Question 3 has two options from which students have to select one. This question 
assesses students on their ability to convey information, narrate, express opinions, 
interest, and convince the reader about a certain point. Students must use the informal 
register, please see the definition in Marking guidance for Paper 4: Writing in Urdu. This 
question is common to the Higher tier. 
o Question 4 is the translation question. Students are required to translate five sentences 
from English to Urdu. The sentences are ordered by increasing level of difficulty. 
● Higher tier 
o The assessment time is 1 hour and 25 minutes in length. 
o The paper consists of two questions and one translation from English into Urdu. 
o Students must answer all questions. 
o Question 1 has two options from which students have to select one. This question 
assesses students on their ability to convey information, narrate, express opinions, 
interest, and convince the reader about a certain point. Students must use the informal 
register, please see the definition in Marking guidance for Paper 4: Writing in Urdu. This 
question is common to the Foundation tier. 
o Question 2 has two options from which students have to select one. This question 
assesses students on their ability to convey information, narrate, express and justify 
ideas and opinions, and interest or convince the reader. Students must use the formal 
register, please see the definition in Marking guidance for Paper 4: Writing in Urdu.  
o Question 3 is the translation question. Students are required to translate a short 
paragraph from English into Urdu. The individual sentences are ordered by increasing 
level of difficulty. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample question paper and accompanying marking guidance and assessment criteria can 
be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu Sample Assessment 
Materials (SAMs) document. 
Marking guidance and assessment criteria are also provided in this document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
40 
Marking guidance for Paper 4: Writing in Urdu 
This marking guidance is for the use of Pearson-appointed external examiners. The guidance 
has been included for teacher reference to aid understanding of how the assessment criteria 
will be applied. 
General guidance on using levels-based mark schemes 
Step 1 Decide on a band 
● The examiner will first of all consider the answer as a whole and then decide which descriptors 
most closely match the answer and place it in that band. The descriptors for each band 
indicate the different features that will be seen in the student’s answer for that band. 
● When assigning a band they will look at the overall quality of the answer and not focus 
disproportionately on small and specific parts of the answer where the student has not 
performed quite as well as the rest. If the answer covers different aspects of different 
bands of the mark scheme they will use a ‘best fit’ approach for defining the band and 
then use the variability of the response to help decide the mark within the band, for 
example if the response is predominantly band 5–8 with a small amount of band 9–12 
material, it would be placed in band 5–8 but be awarded a mark near the top of the band 
because of the band 9–12 content. 
Step 2 Decide on a mark 
● Once they have decided on a band they will then need to decide on a mark within the 
band. 
● They will decide on the mark to award based on the quality of the answer; they will award 
a mark towards the top or bottom of that band depending on how the student has 
evidenced each of the descriptor bullet points. 
● They will modify the mark based on how securely the trait descriptors are met at that band. 
● They will need to go back through the answer as they apply the mark scheme to clarify 
points and assure themselves that the band and the mark are appropriate. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
41 
Assessment criteria for the Foundation tier 
Question 1 – Foundation tier (12 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria given in two 
mark grids: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
The student is expected to produce 20–30 words for this task. The number of words is 
approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer words than 
recommended in the word count. All work produced by the student must be marked. 
Question 1: communication and content mark grid – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Some relevant, basic information without development 
● Uses language to inform, give short descriptions and express opinions with limited 
success 
● Uses limited selection of common, familiar vocabulary and expression with frequent 
repetition 
3–4 ● Mostly relevant information, minimal extra detail 
● Uses language to give short descriptions, simple information and opinions with 
variable success 
● Uses small selection of common, familiar vocabulary and expression with some 
repetition 
5–6 ● Relevant information with occasional extra detail 
● Uses language to give short descriptions, simple information and opinions with 
some success 
● Uses small selection of common, familiar vocabulary and expression with little 
repetition 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
42 
Question 1: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Produces simple, short sentences in isolation 
● Limited accurate application of a small selection of straightforward grammatical 
structures, limited success in referring to present events; frequently errors 
prevent meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Produces simple, short sentences with little linking 
● Inconsistently accurate application of a small selection of straightforward 
grammatical structures, inconsistently successful reference to present events; 
often errors occur that hinder clarity of communication and occasionally prevent 
meaning 
5–6 ● Produces simple sentences with some linking 
● Accurate application of a small selection of straightforward grammatical 
structures, refers successfully to present events as appropriate to the task; 
occasionally errors occur that hinder clarity of communication 
Additional guidance 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: the mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on 
coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the 
possessive adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
43 
Question 2 – Foundation tier (16 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria given in two 
mark grids: 
● communication and content  
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
This question requires students to write in a formal style/register (see Additional guidance). 
The student is expected to produce 40–50 words for this task. The number of words is 
approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer words than 
recommended in the word count. All work produced by the student must be marked. 
Question 2: communication and content mark grid – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Limited information given likely to consist of single words and phrases 
● Limited ability to use language to present simple facts, inform and note down 
key points; expression is frequently constrained and communication often 
breaks down 
● Repetitive use of a limited selection of common words and phrases; heavy 
reliance on language of the stimulus material to express thoughts 
● Knowledge of register and style is rarely evident because of restricted use of 
vocabulary and expression 
3–4 ● Some brief information given, basic points made without development 
● Occasional success in using language to present simple facts, information and 
to note down key points but expression is sometimes constrained and 
communication occasionally breaks down 
● Limited use of common, familiar vocabulary and expression with frequent 
repetition; some reliance on language of the stimulus material to express 
thoughts 
● Occasional appropriate use of register and style 
5–6 ● Some relevant information given appropriate to the task, basic points made 
with little development 
● Uses language with some success, to present simple facts, information and to 
note down key points, expression is occasionally constrained 
● Uses a small range of, common, familiar vocabulary and expression, mostly 
independently selected, with some repetition; mostly goes beyond the 
language of the stimulus material 
● Mostly appropriate use of register and style, mostly sustained 
7–8 ● Relevant information given appropriate to the task, basic points made with 
some development 
● Uses language mostly with success, to present simple facts, information and to 
note down key points using simple ideas 
● Uses independently selected, common, familiar vocabulary and expression 
with little repetition; goes beyond the language of the stimulus material 
● Appropriate use of register and style sustained 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
44 
 
Additional guidance 
Independently selected vocabulary and expression: students may use key words from 
the stimulus material but to demonstrate their knowledge of vocabulary and ability to 
express themselves independently they must be able to use vocabulary and expression that 
is not in the stimulus material. 
Register and style definition: formal register and style includes, for example, avoidance 
of slang, over-familiar language, exaggeration, ‘text-speak’, inappropriate colloquialisms or 
writing in a conversational style. Formal register and style require the use of the formal 
structure when using, for example, verbs, personal pronouns and possessive adjectives. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
45 
Question 2: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Repetitive use of minimal selection of straightforward grammatical structures 
● Produces individual words/set phrases 
● Limited accuracy in grammatical structures used, limited success in referring to 
present and future events; regular errors prevent meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Use of a restricted range of straightforward grammatical structures, frequent 
repetition 
● Produces simple, short sentences, which are not linked 
● Occasional accuracy in grammatical structures used, occasional success in 
referring to present and future events; sometimes errors prevent meaning being 
conveyed 
5–6 ● Uses straightforward grammatical structures, some repetition 
● Produces simple, short sentences; minimal linking 
● Some accurate use of straightforward grammatical structures, some success in 
referring to present and future events to meet the requirements of the task; 
occasionally errors prevent meaning being conveyed 
7–8 ● Uses straightforward grammatical structures, occasional repetition 
● Produces predominantly simple sentences occasionally linked together 
● Mostly accurate use of straightforward grammatical structures, mostly successful 
references to present and future events to meet the requirements of the task; 
occasionally errors hinder clarity of communication 
Additional guidance 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: the mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on 
coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the 
possessive adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
46 
Question 3 – Foundation tier (20 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria given in two 
mark grids: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
This question contains four bullet points that form part of the task. Failure to cover all four 
bullet points will impact on the marks that can be awarded against the requirements of the 
two mark grids for this question. There is no requirement for even coverage of the bullet 
points in any band. However, in order to access marks in the top band, students must refer 
to all bullet points and meet the other assessment criteria in the top band. 
This question requires students to write in an informal style (see Additional guidance). 
The student is expected to produce 80–90 words for this task. The number of words is 
approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer words than 
recommended in the word count. All work produced by the student must be marked. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
47 
Question 3: communication and content mark grid – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Communicates brief information relevant to the task with little development 
● Limited adaptation of language to narrate, inform and interest; straightforward 
personal opinions are given with limited justification 
● Expresses straightforward thoughts and ideas; uses common, familiar language 
with repetition 
● Variable use of appropriate register and style 
4–6 ● Communicates information relevant to the task, with development of the 
occasional key point and idea 
● Some effective adaptation of language to narrate and inform; attempts are 
made to interest and give convincing personal opinions which are occasionally 
successful 
● Expresses mainly straightforward thoughts and ideas with the occasional 
individual thought/idea; some different examples of common, familiar language 
● Appropriate use of register and style is evident but with inconsistencies 
7–9 ● Communicates information relevant to the task, with development of some key 
points and ideas 
● Mostly effective adaptation of language to narrate and inform, some effective 
language to interest and give convincing personal opinions 
● Some examples of creative language use to express individual thoughts and 
ideas; a variety of mainly common, familiar language with the occasional 
example of uncommon language 
● Appropriate use of register and style is evident but with occasional 
inconsistency 
10–12 ● Communicates information relevant to the task with expansion of key points 
and ideas 
● Effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest and give convincing 
personal opinions 
● Frequent examples of creative language use to express individual thoughts and 
ideas; a variety of vocabulary and expression, some examples of uncommon 
language 
● Appropriate use of register and style throughout with minimal inconsistency 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
48 
Additional guidance 
Creative language use – examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● using language, including familiar, high-frequency and simple language, to respond to 
unfamiliar/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to maintain 
interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, to 
convince. 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view which go 
beyond the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
Register and style definition: informal register and style – examples of informal style 
include colloquial, conversational language that students would use with friends. It also 
requires use of the informal structure when using, for example, verbs, personal pronouns 
and possessive adjectives. 
Adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest and give convincing opinions: 
adapts language to achieve different purposes in the language; students may adapt language 
more effectively for one purpose than another, for example they may use language 
effectively to narrate but less effectively to interest or give a convincing opinion. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
49 
Question 3: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Uses straightforward grammatical structures, some repetition 
● Produces brief, simple sentences, limited linking of sentences 
● Variable accuracy with language and structures, variable success when referring 
to past, present and future events, regular ambiguity; often errors prevent 
meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Uses mostly straightforward grammatical structures, occasional repetition 
● Produces occasionally extended sentences linked with familiar, straightforward 
conjunctions 
● Some accurate language and structures, including some successful references to 
past, present and future events, some ambiguity; often errors occur that hinder 
clarity of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
5–6 ● Different examples of straightforward grammatical structures are evident 
● Produces some extended sentences that are linked with familiar, straightforward 
conjunctions 
● Frequently accurate language and structures, including mostly successful 
references to past, present and future events, occasional ambiguity; sometimes 
errors occur that hinder clarity of communication 
7–8 ● Some variation of grammatical structures, occasional complex structure 
● Produces frequently extended sentences, well linked together 
● Generally accurate language and structures, including successful references to 
past, present and future events; occasionally errors occur that hinder clarity of 
communication 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language. 
Straightforward grammatical structures is considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
50 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the 
possessive adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
51 
Question 4 – Foundation tier (12 marks) 
Translation mark grids and example responses 
Mark grid for sentences (a), (b) and (c), which are worth 2 marks each. The 
mark grid will be applied to each individual sentence. 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1 ● Meaning partially communicated with errors that hinder clarity or prevent meaning 
being conveyed 
2 ● Meaning fully communicated with occasional errors that do not hinder clarity 
 
Mark grid for sentences (d) and (e), which are worth 3 marks each. The mark 
grid will be applied to each individual sentence. 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1 ● Some words are communicated but the overall meaning of the sentence is not 
communicated 
2 ● The meaning of the sentence is partially communicated 
● Linguistic structures and vocabulary are mostly accurate with some errors that 
hinder clarity or prevent meaning being conveyed 
3 ● The meaning of the sentence is fully communicated 
● Linguistic structures and vocabulary are accurate with only occasional errors that 
do not hinder clarity 
 
Additional guidance 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the 
possessive adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
52 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
53 
Assessment criteria for the Higher tier 
Question 1 – Higher tier (20 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria given in two 
mark grids: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
This question contains four bullet points that form part of the task. Failure to cover all four 
bullet points will impact on the marks that can be awarded against the requirements of the 
two mark grids for this question. There is no requirement for even coverage of the bullet 
points in any band. However, in order to access marks in the top band, students must refer 
to all bullet points and meet the other assessment criteria in the top band. 
This question requires students to write in an informal style (see Additional guidance). 
The student is expected to produce 80–90 words for this task. The number of words is 
approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer words than 
recommended in the word count. All work produced by the student must be marked. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
54 
Question 1: communication and content mark grid – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Communicates brief information relevant to the task with little development 
● Limited adaptation of language to narrate, inform and interest; straightforward 
personal opinions are given with limited justification 
● Expresses straightforward thoughts and ideas; uses common, familiar language 
with repetition 
● Variable use of appropriate register and style 
4–6 ● Communicates information relevant to the task, with development of the 
occasional key point and idea 
● Some effective adaptation of language to narrate and inform; attempts are made 
to interest and give convincing personal opinions which are 
occasionally successful 
● Expresses mainly straightforward thoughts and ideas with the occasional 
individual thought/idea; some different examples of common, familiar language 
● Appropriate use of register and style is evident but with inconsistencies 
7–9 ● Communicates information relevant to the task, with development of some key 
points and ideas 
● Mostly effective adaptation of language to narrate and inform, some effective 
language to interest and give convincing personal opinions 
● Some examples of creative language use to express individual thoughts and 
ideas; a variety of mainly common, familiar language with the occasional 
example of uncommon language 
● Appropriate use of register and style is evident but with occasional inconsistency 
10–12 ● Communicates information relevant to the task with expansion of key points and 
ideas 
● Effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest and give convincing 
personal opinions 
● Frequent examples of creative language use to express individual thoughts and 
ideas; a variety of vocabulary and expression, some examples of uncommon 
language 
● Appropriate use of register and style throughout, with minimal inconsistency 
 
Additional guidance 
Creative language use: examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● using language, including familiar, high frequency and simple language, to respond to 
unfamiliar/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to maintain 
interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, to 
convince. 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view that go beyond 
the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
55 
Register and style definition: informal register and style – examples of informal style 
include colloquial, conversational language that students would use with friends. It also 
requires use of the informal structure when using, for example, verbs, personal pronouns 
and possessive adjectives. 
Adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest and give convincing opinions: 
adapts language to achieve different purposes in the language; students may adapt language 
more effectively for one purpose than another, for example they may use language 
effectively to narrate but less effectively to interest or give a convincing opinion. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
56 
Question 1: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Uses straightforward grammatical structures, some repetition 
● Produces brief, simple sentences, limited linking of sentences 
● Variable accuracy with language and structures, variable success when referring 
to past, present and future events, regular ambiguity; often errors prevent 
meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Uses mostly straightforward grammatical structures, occasional repetition 
● Produces occasionally extended sentences linked with familiar, straightforward 
conjunctions 
● Some accurate language and structures, including some successful references to 
past, present and future events, some ambiguity; often errors occur that hinder 
clarity of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
5–6 ● Different examples of straightforward grammatical structures are evident 
● Produces some extended sentences that are linked with familiar, straightforward 
conjunctions 
● Frequently accurate language and structures, including mostly successful 
references to past, present and future events, occasional ambiguity; sometimes 
errors occur that hinder clarity of communication 
7–8 ● Some variation of grammatical structures, occasional complex structure 
● Produces frequently extended sentences, well linked together 
● Generally accurate language and structures, including successful references to 
past, present and future events; occasionally errors occur that hinder clarity of 
communication 
 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● all grammar and structures included in the grammar list that are specific to Higher tier 
GCSE 
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language. 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
57 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the 
possessive adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
58 
Question 2 – Higher tier (28 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria contained in 
two mark grids: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
This question contains four bullet points that form part of the task. Failure to cover all four 
bullet points will impact on the marks that can be awarded against the requirements of the 
two mark grids for this question (see below). There is no requirement for even coverage of 
the bullet points in any band. However, in order to access marks in the top band, students 
must refer to all bullet points and meet the other assessment criteria in the top band. 
This question requires students to write in a formal register/style (see Additional guidance). 
The student is expected to produce 130–150 words for this task. The number of words is 
approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer words than 
recommended in the word count. All work produced by the student must be marked. 
Question 2: communication and content mark grid – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–4 ● Communicates occasionally detailed information relevant to the task with 
occasionally effective development of key points and ideas 
● Some effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest/convince 
● Occasional examples of creative use of language to express individual thoughts, 
ideas and points of view, occasional justification; variety of mainly common, 
familiar language, occasional examples of uncommon language 
● Appropriate use of register and style with the occasional inconsistency 
5–8 ● Communicates some detailed information relevant to the task, frequently 
effective development of key points and ideas 
● Frequently effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest/convince 
● Examples of creative use of language to express some individual thoughts, ideas 
and points of view, some justified; some variation of vocabulary and expression 
with some examples of uncommon language 
● Appropriate use of register and style with few inconsistencies 
9–12 ● Communicates detailed information relevant to the task, with mostly effective 
development of key points and ideas 
● Mostly effective adaptation of language, to narrate, inform, interest/convince 
● Creative use of language to express a range of individual thoughts, ideas and 
points of view, most of which are justified; variety of vocabulary and expression, 
frequent examples of uncommon language 
● Predominantly appropriate use of register and style 
13–16 ● Communicates detailed information relevant to the task, with consistently 
effective development of key points and ideas 
● Consistently effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, 
interest/convince 
● Creative use of language to express and fully justify a wide range of individual 
thoughts, ideas and points of view; wide variety of vocabulary and expression, 
many examples of uncommon language 
● Consistent use of appropriate register and style throughout 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
59 
 
Additional guidance 
Creative use of language: examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● using language, including familiar, high frequency and simple language, to respond to 
unfamiliar/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to maintain 
interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, to 
convince. 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view that go beyond 
the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
Adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest/convince: adapts language to 
achieve different purposes in the language; students may adapt language more effectively 
for one purpose than another, for example they may use language effectively to narrate but 
less effectively to interest/convince. 
Register and style definition: formal register and style includes, for example, avoidance 
of slang, over-familiar language, exaggeration, ‘text-speak’, inappropriate colloquialisms or 
writing in a conversational style. Formal register and style require the use of the formal 
structure when using, for example, verbs, personal pronouns and possessive adjectives. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
60 
Question 2: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Uses a variety of mainly straightforward grammatical structures, occasional 
examples of repetitive complex language 
● Occasional sequences of fluent writing, occasionally extended, well-linked 
sentences 
● Straightforward grammatical structures are largely accurate with occasional 
accurate use of complex language, some successful references to past, present 
and future events but some ambiguity; errors occur that sometimes hinder clarity 
of communication 
4–6 ● Some variation of grammatical structures, including some repetitive instances of 
complex language 
● Prolonged sequences of fluent writing, some extended, well-linked sentences 
● Generally accurate language and structures, frequently successful references to 
past, present and future events, occasional ambiguity; errors occur that 
occasionally hinder clarity of communication 
7–9 ● Uses a variety of grammatical structures including some different examples of 
complex language 
● Predominantly fluent response; frequent extended sentences, mostly well-linked 
● Mostly accurate language and structures, mostly successful references to past, 
present and future events; errors occur but they rarely hinder clarity of 
communication 
10–12 ● Uses a wide variety of grammatical structures, including complex language 
● Fluent response throughout with extended, well-linked sentences 
● Consistently accurate language and structures, consistently successful references 
to past, present and future events; any errors do not hinder the clarity of the 
communication 
 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● all grammar and structures included in the grammar list that are specific to Higher tier 
GCSE 
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language. 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
61 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the 
possessive adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
62 
Question 3 – Higher tier (12 marks) 
Translation mark grid and example response 
Translation mark grid assesses both communication and content and linguistic knowledge 
and accuracy. When awarding marks, the student’s response across the whole paragraph 
should be considered. 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Meaning of some individual words or phrases is conveyed; frequent 
omissions/incorrectly communicated words and phrases/mother-tongue 
interference 
● Some straightforward structures are accurate but regular errors prevent 
meaning of individual phrases/sentences being conveyed 
4–6 ● The meaning of the passage is partially communicated, some words and phrases 
are omitted/incorrectly communicated 
● Language and structures are accurate in some phrases and sentences but some 
errors prevent meaning being conveyed 
7–9 ● The meaning of the passage is mostly communicated, occasional words are 
omitted/incorrectly communicated 
● Mostly accurate language and structures; errors occur that occasionally hinder 
clarity and in rare instances prevent meaning being conveyed 
10–12 ● The meaning of the passage is fully communicated 
● Consistently accurate language and structures, any errors do not hinder clarity 
Additional guidance 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the 
possessive adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
63 
Assessment Objectives 
 
Students must: % in GCSE 
AO1 Listening – understand and respond to different types of spoken 
language 
25 
AO2 Speaking – communicate and interact effectively in speech 25 
AO3 Reading – understand and respond to different types of written 
language 
25 
AO4 Writing – communicate in writing 25 
Total 100% 
 
 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
 
Paper 
Assessment Objectives Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives AO1 % AO2 % AO3 % AO4 % 
Paper 1: Listening and 
understanding in Urdu 
25 0 0 0 25% 
Paper 2: Speaking in Urdu 0 25 0 0 25% 
Paper 3: Reading and 
understanding in Urdu 
0 0 25 0 25% 
Paper 4: Writing in Urdu 0 0 0 25 25% 
Total for GCSE 25% 25% 25% 25% 100% 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
64 
3 Administration and general information 
Entries 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for this qualification can be found in 
our UK Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations officers and is 
available on our website: qualifications.pearson.com 
Discount code and performance tables 
Students taking the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu must take all 
assessments in either the Foundation tier or the Higher tier only. 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more than one GCSE, or other Level 2 
qualifications with the same discount code, will have only the grade for their 'first entry' 
counted for the purpose of the school and college performance tables (please see 
Appendix 6: Codes). For further information about what constitutes 'first entry' and full 
details of how this policy is applied, please refer to the DfE website: 
www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-education 
Students should be advised that if they take two GCSEs with the same discount code, 
schools and colleges they wish to progress to are likely to take the view that this 
achievement is equivalent to only one GCSE. The same view may be taken if students take 
two GCSEs or other Level 2 qualifications that have different discount codes but have 
significant overlap of content. Students or their advisers who have any doubts about their 
subject combinations should check with the institution they wish to progress to before 
embarking on their programmes. 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, 
special consideration and malpractice 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality policy requires all students to 
have equal opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our qualifications 
to be awarded in a way that is fair to every student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the Equality Act 2010) are not, 
when they are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in comparison to 
students who do not share that characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification and that 
this achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their peers. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be available in English, with the exception of specific 
questions in the listening, reading and writing assessments. 
For speaking and writing assessments, all student work must be in Urdu. For listening and 
reading, all student work must follow the instruction provided for the individual question. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
65 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with special 
educational needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to: 
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the assessment. 
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an individual 
student with a disability, without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding bodies comply with the duty under the 
Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students will 
then know what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for assessment. 
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable adjustments 
where a person with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in undertaking an 
assessment. The awarding organisation is required to take reasonable steps to overcome 
that disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be unique to that individual and 
therefore might not be in the list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of factors, 
including: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding 
organisation, or affects timeframes or the security or integrity of the assessment. This is 
because the adjustment is not ‘reasonable’. 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student's mark or grade to 
reflect temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the 
examination/assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a material 
effect on a candidate’s ability to take an assessment or demonstrate their level of attainment 
in an assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to apply for access arrangements 
and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special 
consideration, please refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
66 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that compromises or seeks to 
compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in examinations must be reported to Pearson using a JCQ Form M1 
(available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to Investigations Team, Pearson, 190 High Holborn, 
London, WC1V 7BH. Please provide as much information and supporting documentation as 
possible. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice constitutes staff or centre malpractice. 
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and maladministration of 
our qualifications. As with candidate malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is any act that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the 
integrity of the qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported 
immediately, before any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson on a 
JCQ Form M2(a) (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form, 
supporting documentation and as much information as possible can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to Investigations Team, Pearson, 
190 High Holborn, London, WC1V 7BH. Note that the final decision regarding 
appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the document 
General and Vocational Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments Policies and Procedures, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
67 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to comply with the requirements of 
Ofqual's General Conditions of Recognition. 
The raw marks for papers 1, 3 and 4 in this qualification will be scaled by Pearson to 
represent the relative weighting of 25% for each paper. 
Foundation and Higher tier 
Paper  Weighting  Raw marks Scaling factor Scaling mark 
1 25% 50 1.400 70 
2 25% 70 1.000 70 
3 25% 50 1.400 70 
4 25% 60 1.167 70 
 
This GCSE qualification will be graded and certificated on a nine-grade scale from 9 to 1 
using the total subject mark where 9 is the highest grade. Individual papers are not graded. 
For Foundation tier, grades 1–5 are available and for Higher tier, grades 4–9 are available, 
however if the mark achieved is a smaller number of marks below the 4/3 grade boundary, 
then a grade 3 may be awarded. 
The first certification opportunity for this qualification will be 2019. 
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum judged by Pearson to be of 
sufficient standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U result. 
Student recruitment and progression 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this qualification. 
Progression 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu offers a suitable progression route 
from prior language learning experience at Key Stages 2 and 3, focusing on the development 
of all four language skills, listening, speaking, reading and writing. Grammar and the 
mastering of linguistic features are key elements of this specification as is the inclusion of 
authentic written and spoken sources. 
Students will be expected to be able to talk about themselves as well as matters that go 
beyond their immediate experience. They should be able to express and justify their own 
opinions in speech and writing, building on the fluency and spontaneity developed at 
Key Stage 3. 
The skill of translation will be developed from those skills initiated from Key Stage 3. The 
broader range of topics promotes a clear progression in grammar and vocabulary from 
Key Stage 3 and will increase linguistic and cognitive demand. The grammar and vocabulary 
lists illustrate the level required for this qualification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
68 
This qualification offers a suitable progression route to GCE A Level in Urdu. In addition, the 
study of one language at GCSE can facilitate and help promote the learning of other 
languages. The qualification may also add to an individual’s employability profile. 
Students will be able to apply their knowledge, skills and understanding to authentic, real-life 
contexts. They will develop transferable skills that support higher education study and the 
transition to employment, together with an understanding and appreciation of Urdu-speaking 
countries and their cultures. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
69 
 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Candidate speaking examination record form (CS2) 71 
Appendix 2: Grammar list 72 
Appendix 3: Vocabulary list 79 
Appendix 4: The context for the development of this qualification 200 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 202 
Appendix 6: Codes 203 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
70 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
71 
Appendix 1: Candidate speaking examination record form (CS2) 
A separate form must be submitted for Foundation tier and Higher tier candidates. Please indicate the tier below. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu 1UR0:       2F/2H*                     (*Please delete as appropriate) 
Centre name:  Centre number:  
 
Candidate name and number Declaration and permissions signature 
and date* 
Role play Picture-
based 
discussion 
Conversation 
(1)                  (2) 
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
Teacher name Declaration and permissions signature 
and date* 
        
            
 
*I declare that the above examinations have been carried out in line with Pearson and JCQ documentation for the conduct of the examinations and agree to 
this work being used to support teachers and examiners. 
Please photocopy and continue on a separate sheet as necessary. Please do not write in shaded boxes – these areas are for Pearson Examiner use 
only. A ‘Word’ version of this form is available on our website to facilitate administration in centres. 
 

 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
72 
Appendix 2: Grammar list 
The grammar requirements for GCSE are set out in two tiers: Foundation tier and Higher 
tier. 
GCSE students will be expected to have acquired knowledge and understanding of Urdu 
grammar during their course. In the exam they will be required to apply their knowledge and 
understanding, appropriate to the relevant tier of entry, drawing from the following lists. The 
examples are indicative, not exclusive. For structures marked (R), only receptive knowledge 
is required. 
Students will be expected to develop and use their knowledge and understanding of this 
grammar progressively throughout their course. 
Urdu (Foundation tier) 
Nouns 
• genderﻣرد، ﻋورت، ﻟڑﮐﺎ، ﻟڑﮐﯽ     
• singular, plural including common regulars   ﺎ، ﮐرﺳﯽ، ﮐرﺳﯾﺎں، ﺑﯾﮢﺎ،  ﺳﯾﻧﻣﻣﯽ،  آد 
ﺑﯾﮢﮯ  
and declensionآدﻣﯾوں،  ں    ، ﻟوﮔو ﻋورﺗوں  
Articles 
• definite and indefinite     ﯽ ﮐوﺋ/ﯽﮐﺳ   
• partitive   ﮐﭼﮭ اﻧڈےﺧرﯾدے / ﺗﮭوڑا ﭘﮭل ﮐﮭﺎ ﻟو        
Adjectives 
• agreement  ﻟﻣﺑﺎ ﻟڑﮐﺎ  /یﺑڑ ﺑﯾﮢﯽ     
• position of adjectives 
• comparative and superlative, including common irregulars, e.g. 
      تاﭼﮭﺎ، ﺑﮩ اﭼﮭﺎ، ﺳب ﺳﮯ اﭼﮭﺎ  
• demonstrative       ،وه، ﯾہ، ﯾﮩﺎں، وﮨﺎں، اس  اُن  
• indefinite: singular/plural usage, e.g.  ﺑﮩت، ﮐﭼﮭ، ﭼﻧد، ﮐﺋﯽ، ﮨرﮐوﺋﯽ، ﺑﻌض ﻟوگ،
ﮐوﺋﯽ ﺷﺧص  
• possessive, e.g.    اُنﻣﯾرا، ﮐﺎ، اس  ﮐﺎ، ﮨﻣﺎرا  
• interrogative, e.g.ﮐﯾوں، ﮐون ﺳﺎ، سﮐ  ﮐسﯾﮯ، ﮐﯾﺳﺎ، ﻟ  وﻗت     
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
73 
Adverbs (masculine, feminine, plural) 
• regular and common irregular (manner, time, place)   ﯾزیﺗ ﯽﺳﮯ،ﮐﺑﮭ  ﯾں، ﯾﮩﯾں  ﻧﮩ   
• comparative and superlative   ﺳﮯ ﺳﮯﺳب  آﮔﮯ،     آﮔﮯ، ﺳﮯ  ﺳب ،   ﭘﮩﻠﮯ
ﺳﮯ ﭘﮩﻠﮯ  
• interrogative     ﮐب، ﮐﮩﺎں ، ﯾﺳﮯﮐ      
• adverbs of time, place and manner 
جآ ،ﮐل  ﭘرﺳوں   ،آﮨﺳﺗہ ﺳﮯ  اب، اب ﺗﮏ، اب  ﺳﮯ، وﮨﯾں،  
• degree modifier      ﺑﮩت،   ذرا،  ذرا ﺳﺎ  
• common adverbial phrases     ﻟڑﮐﺎ ﺗﯾزی ﺳﮯ ﺑﮭﺎﮔﺎ    
Quantifiers/intensifiers 
• common expressions of quantity          ﮐس ، ﺎ، ﮐﺎﻓﯽﻗدر، ﮐﺗﻧ  
• non-count nouns   ﺑﮩت ه، ﺑﮯﮐم، زﯾﺎد ﺷﻣﺎر، ان ﮔﻧت  
Pronouns 
• personal all subject pronouns – all subject pronoun, e.g.  ﻣﯾں، وه، ﮨم  ، ﺗم، آپ  
• direct object pronouns,  e.g. ﻣﺟﮭ، اس  ،  اُن،  ﺟن،  ، ﺗُوﺗﺟﮭ  
• indirect object pronouns e.g. ں،ﮨﻣﯾں، اُﻧﮭﯾ ﻣﺟﮭﮯ، اﺳﮯ،   ﺟﮭﮯ ﺗ  
• combined forms of direct and indirect pronouns, e.g. 
اﻧﮭوں  ﻧﮯ، ﻣﺟﮭ ﻧﮯ، ﺗُماس  ﻣﺟﮭﮯ، ﺳﮯ/  ﮐو، ﺟﻧﮭوںﺳﮯ/  ﻧﮯ، ﮨم ﮨﻣﯾںﺳﮯ/     
        
• reflexive, e.g.  ، اﭘﻧﯽ      ﺧود، اﭘﻧﮯ، اﭘﻧﺎ  
• relative/correlative e.g.  ﮐﺎ، وﮨﺎں، ﺟﮩﺎں، ﮐﯾﺳﮯ، اﯾﺳﮯ، ﺟﯾﺳﮯ 
• disjunctive/emphatic,  e.g.ﯾﮩﯽ، وﮨﯽ، ﮨﯽ، ﺳﺎ، ﺑﮭﯽ  
• demonstrative ,   e.g.    ﯾہ، وه    
• indefinite, e.g.   ﮨر ﮐوﺋﯽ، ﮐﭼﮭ/ ﺑﻌض، ﮐوﺋﯽ ﭼﯾز، ﮐوﺋﯽ ﺷﺧص،ﮐوﺋﯽ   
• interrogative, e.g. ﮐون، ﮐﯾﺎ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
74 
Pronouns (cont) 
• combined forms, e.g. اس ﺟﯾﺳﺎ ﮐوﺋﯽ ﻧﮩﯾں  
• declension of pronouns  س ، اِ اُس  
• correlative   ﺳﯽ، ﺟوﺎں، ﺟﯾ ﺟب، ﺟﮩ  
 
Position and order of object pronouns (R)   ﻣﺟﮭﮯ، ﺗﺟﮭﮯ، ﮨﻣﯾں،ﺗﻣﮩﯾں، اﻧﮩﯾں 
 
Verbs 
• regular and irregular forms of verb including reflexive verbs, e.g. 
 
آﻧﺎ، ﺟﺎﻧﺎ، ﺳوﻧﺎ، ﺟﺎﮔﻧﺎ 
 
• infinitives, e.g. 
، ﭘڑھﻧﺎ،ﺎ، ﮐﮭﺎﻧﺎ، ﺟﺎﻧ ﺳوﭼﻧﺎ  ﻧﺎ، ﮐﺎم ﮐرﻧﺎ، ﺳوﻧﺎ دﯾﮑﮭﻧﺎ، دوڑﻧﺎ، ﺳﯾﮑﮭ  
 
• all persons of the verb, singular and plural 
 
ﯾﻠﺗﺎﮐﺎ ﮐﮭ ﻟڑ  ﮨﮯ ﯽ ﻟڑﮐ ۔    ﯽﭘڑھﺗ ۔ ﺑﭼﮯﮨﮯ ﮐﮭﯾﻠﺗﮯ ﮨﯾں۔     
• modes of address     آپ،  ﺗم،  ﺗو  
• negative forms, e.g.  ﻧہ، ﻧﮩﯾں،  وه ﻧہ ﮔﯾﺎ،  اﺑﮭﯽ  ﺗﮏ ﯾںﻧﮩ آﯾﺎ  
• interrogative forms    ,  e.g. ﯾوں، ﮐﮐﯾﺎ    ﮐﮩﺎں،  
• impersonal constructions, e.g.  ﺑﺎرش ﮨو  رﮨﯽ  ﮨﮯ۔    اﻧدھﯾرا ﭼﮭﺎ ﮔﯾﺎﮨﮯ۔   
• verbs followed by infinitive, with or without preposition. 
•  imperative including polite form, e.g  .   ﮐرﯾں، ﺟﺎﺋﯾﮯ،  و، اُﮢﮭو، ﺟﺎﺋﯾں، ﭼل، ﮐر 
ﮐﯾﺟﺋﯾﮯ  
•  auxiliary verbs, e.g.  (present)      ﮨﮯ،  ﮨﯾں، ﮨوں ،  past) ﺗﮭﺎ،  ﺗﮭﮯ،  ﺗﮭﯽ ، ﺗﮭﯾں   
• imperative with regular form, e.g.      ﻟﯾﺟﯾﮯ، دﯾﺟﯾﮯ، ﭼﻠﯾﮯ، ﺑﯾﮢﮭﯾﮯ  
• imperative (negation)              ﻣت ﺟﺎؤ / ﻣت ﺳُﻧو  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
75 
 
• Tenses: e.g. 
o present   ,  e.g. ﺟﺎﺗﺎ  ، آﺗﯽ، ﺳوﺗﮯ، ﮐﮭﺎﺗﮯ  
o present perfect,  e.g. ﻣﯾں  ﻧﮯ ﺑﺎﮨر اﯾﮏ  ﮐﺎر دﯾﮑﮭﯽ ﮨﮯ  
o passive (present), e.g. ﻣﺟﮭﮯ ﺑﻼﯾﺎ ﮔﯾﺎ ﮨﮯ   
o present participle, e.g. ﮐﮭﺎﺗﺎ، ﺟﺎﺗﺎ، ﺳوﺗﺎ 
o present tenses: simple,/habitual  continuous   ,  perfect, e.g. 
وه ﺟﺎﺗﺎ ﮨﮯ  /رﮨﺎﺟﺎ  ﺎ ﮭﺗ  /ﭼﮑﺎﺟﺎ  ﺎ     ﮭﺗ   
o present perfect, e.g. وه آﯾﺎ ﮨﮯ   
o imperfect, e.g.   وه اﺳﮑول ﺟﺎﺗﺎ  ﮨﮯ  
o present subjunctive/subjunctive mood, e.g.  
وه ﭼﻠﮯ  / ﯾںﻣ  ﮐﮩوں  / ﮨﮯﮨو ﺳﮑﺗﺎ   ﯾںﻣ  ںﺟﺎوٴ     
o other common verbs in the imperfect tense ( R ) 
 
o past tense: participle, continuous, perfect form, e.g.  
وه ﯾﺎ ﮔ  /ﮭﺎﮨﺎ ﺗﺟﺎ ر / ﺟﺎ  ﮑﺎ  ﭼُ   ﺗﮭﺎ       
o future tenses, participle, continuous, perfect, form, e.g. 
وه ﺟﺎﺋﮯ  ﺟﺎرﮨﺎﮔﺎ/ ﺟﺎﮨﮯ/  ﮔﺎﭼﮑﺎ ﮨو      
o immediate future ﻣﯾں ﮐل  ﭘﺎﮐﺳﺗﺎن ﺟﺎ رﮨﺎ ﮨوں      
o pluperfect (R )   ﮔرﻣﯾوں  ﻣﯾں  ﮨم اﻣرﯾﮑہ  ﮔﺋﮯ ﮯ ﺗﮭ   
o other common verbs in the imperfect tense – commenced event (R) 
o (oblique infinitive)   ﺑﺎرش ﯽ ﮨوﻧﮯ ﻟﮕ  /  وه ﺟﺎﻧﮯ  واﻻ   ﺗﮭﺎ     
o imperative forms ﻻوٴ  ،ﮐﮭﺎ وٴ   ،  ﺟﺎوٴ     
o conditional e.g.  اﮔر، ﺗو  ، ،  ورﻧہ      ب ﺗ  
o transitive/intransitive verb in past 
  ﮨم ﻧﮯ  ﺳُﻧﺎ  ﮨﮯ     ﮐہ  وه    ﺟﻧﮕل   ﯾںﻣ   ﯾﺎﮔ   اور  اُس  ﻧﮯ  ﯾﮏا  ﯾرﺷ    
   اﻣﺎر  
Negatives 
e.g.  ﻧہ، ﻧﮩﯾں، اس  ﺑﺎوﺟود، ﻧہﮐﮯ   ﺗو   / ﮨﯽ، ﮐوﺋﯽﻧہ   ﯾں،ﻧﮩ  ﯽﮐﺑﮭ  ﻧﮩﯾں، ﮐﭼﮭ  ﯽﺑﮭ   
ﻧﮩﯾں ،اﺑﮭﯽ ﻧﮩﯾں، ﻧہ ﺻرف  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
76 
 
Postpositions 
● contracted forms of preposition,  e.g. 
   ، ﺎسﮏ  ﻧﯾﭼﮯ،  ﭘ ﻣﯾں، ﺳﮯ،  ﺗ  ﺳﺎﻣﻧﮯ،  ﭘر،  ﮐﺎ،  ﮐﯽ،  ﮐﮯ   
• fixed case and dual case with accusative and /or dative with genitive (R), e.g. 
اس ﺳﮯ ﭼﻼ  ﻧﮩﯾں  ﺟﺎﺗﺎ  /ﻣﺟﮭ ﺳﮯ  ﺑوﻻ ﻧﮩﯾں ﺟﺎﺗﺎ  
• common compound postpositions, e.g. 
 ﯾبﮐﮯ ﻗر ﯾﮯ/ ﺳﮯ آﮔﮯ / ﮐﮯ ﭘﺎس / ﮐﮯ ﻟﺋ  / ﮐﮯ ﺗﺣت/ ﮐﮯ  ﺑر ﻋﮑس  
Clause Structures 
• main clause word order/subordinate clauses, including relative clauses. 
 
Conjunctions 
• coordinating and subordinating, e.g.  
ﺑﮭﯽ، اور، ﺟس  طرح، ﺟﮩﺎں ﺗﮏ، ﺑﮩر ﺣﺎل،  ﭼوﻧﮑہ،  ﮑہ  ﺟﺑ   
Connectives, e.g. 
  اس ﮐﮯ ﻋﻼوه،  ﮐہ، وهظﺎﮨر ﮨﮯ  ﻟﯾﮯ ﮐہ، ﺳﭻاس  ﯾہ ﮐہ،   ورﻧہ، اسﮨﮯ  ﯾںﻣ   
ﯽﮐوﺋ  ﯾں ﺷﮏ ﻧﮩ  
Number, quantity and time 
• ordinal and cardinal numbers , e.g.   . اﯾﮏ دو  ﺗﯾن/ ﭘﮩﻼ، دوﺳرا، ﺗﯾﺳرا  
• common coordinating conjunctions, e.g.   اس  وﺟہ  ﺳﮯ، ﮑن ، ﻟﯾ ﭘﮭر  
• common subordinating conjunctions, e.g.   ﺧواه ﮑہ، اﮔرﭼہ،  وﻧ ﮐﯾ  
• common quantities, e.g. اﮐﺎﺋﯽ، دﮨﺎﺋﯽ، ﻋدد، ﺳﯾﻧﮑڑه، ﮨزار، ﻻﮐﮭ، ﮐروڑ، ارب،
درﺟن  
• time and date,  e.g.   ﻣﻧٹ ،ﮔﮭﻧﮢہ ،دوﭘﮩر، ﺷﺎم، ﺑﺟﻧﮯ ﯾںﻣ  ،  ﮐر، ﺳﺎڑھﮯ، ﺑﺞ   
       دوﺳری، آﮢﮭوﯾں  ﻣﮩﯾﻧہ، ی، ﺻدﺳﺎل                                     
• distributive pronouns, e.g. ﮨزاروں ﻟوگ  ﺟﻣﻊ  ﮨو  ﮔﺋﮯ  
Vowel points and other marks 
e.g.   ﯾر، زﺑر، ﭘﯾش، ﺗﺷدﯾد، ﺟزم، ﺗﻧوﯾنز  ﮐﺎ  اﺳﺗﻌﻣﺎل   
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
77 
Urdu (Higher tier) 
All grammar and structures listed for Foundation tier, as well as: 
Nouns 
• less common irregulars abstract nouns, e.g.  ﺧﯾﺎﻻتﺟذﺑﺎت،   
• compound nouns , e.g. ﺑر ﺻﻐﯾر  ﭘﺎک و   ﮨﻧد، وزﯾر  اﻋظم، آب و   ﮨوا   
• complex and irregular plurals, e.g.  ﻣﻧظر ﺳﮯ  ﻣﻧﺎظر ، اﺳﺗﺎد ﺳﮯ اﺳﺎﺗذه   
Adjectives 
• comparatives and superlatives including Arabic and Persian adjectives, e.g. 
 ﻣﺗرﯾن ﺑﮩﺗرﯾن، ﮐ  
• irregular superlatives, e.g. اول ﮐﺎ، ﺑﻠﻧد درﺟﮯ  
• pronominal, e.g.      ﮐﺗﻧﺎ، ﮐﯾﺳﺎ، ﮐﯾﺳﮯ،  اب، ﺗب، ﮐون  
Adverbs 
• comparative and superlative, e.g.   زﯾﺎده آﮨﺳﺗہ ﭼﻠﺗﺎ  ﮨﮯ    
•repeated adverbs, e.g.  وه زور زور ﺳﮯ  ﺑوﻟﺗﺎ ﮨﮯ  
• Arabic adverbs, e.g.  ﺑﺎً ﺗﻘرﯾ   ،  ﻋﻣوﻣﺎً     
Pronouns 
• indefinite, e.g. (oblique)  ﮐوﺋﯽ اﯾﺳﺎ ﺷﺧص،  ﮐوﺋﯽ،   ﮐﺳﯽ  
• interrogatives, e.g. ﺟِس ﮐﺳﯽ ﻧﮯ   ﺑﮭﯽ،  وه اﯾﺳﺎ ﮐون ﮨﮯ  
• combinations of direct and indirect pronouns, e.g. 
ﯾہ ںﮐﺗﺎﺑﯾ  ناُ   ﺑﭼوں  ﮐو  دو  
• demonstratives oblique (R), e.g.  ﺟِس  زﯾ ﻣ  ﭘر ﮨﮯ، ﺟِس   ﮔﮭر  ﻣﯾں ﮨﮯ  
• possessive (R) 
• direct and indirect object after an infinitive 
• relative pronouns, e.g.  ﺟﻧﮩﯾں، ﺟﺳﮯ، ﺟو ﯽ ﮐوﺋ  
• position and order of object pronouns, e.g.  ﻣﯾں،ﻣﺟﮭﮯ، ﺗﻣﮩﯾں، ﮨ اﺳﮯ  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
78 
Verbs 
• infinitival agreement e.g.ﻣﺟﮭﮯ  ﮐﺋﯽ  ﮐﺎم ﮐرﻧﮯ  ۔ ﮨﯾں  
• participle constructions e.g.  آﺗﮯ  ﮨﯽ، ﭼﻠﺗﮯ  ﭼﻠﺗﮯ  
• obligation e.g.    ﺟﺎﻧﺎ ﭘڑے ﮔﺎ،  ﮐرﻧﺎ  ﮨو   ﮔﺎ/ﭼﺎﮨﯾﮯ     
•present subjective/subjective mood e.g. . وه ﭼﻠﮯ، ﻣﯾں  ﮐﮩوں، ﮨو  ﺳﮑﺗﺎ ﮨﮯ  ﻣﯾں  
ﺟﺎوٴں  
• compound verbs e.g.،  ﯾﺎوه ﭼﻼ ﮔ  ﯾںﻣ  ھﻧﮯ ﮐﺗﺎب ﭘڑ ﻟﯽ ﮨﮯ   
• imperative with irregular forms e.g. .  ﻟﯾﺟﯾﮯ، دﯾﺟﯾﮯ، ﺑﯾﮢﮭﯾﮯ  
Passive Forms 
• present perfect e.g. ﺑُﻼﯾﺎ ﮔﯾﺎ ﮨوں، /ﺑﮭﺟواﯾﺎ ﮔﯾﺎ ﮨوں  
•pluperfect e.g.  ﺑُﻠواﯾﺎ ﺟﺎﺗﺎ ﺗﮭﺎ /ﯾﺎﺑﮭﺟوا  ﺎﺟﺎﺗﺎ ﺗﮭ  
•future perfect e.g.   ﺑُﻼﯾﺎ ﺟﺎ ﭼﮑﺎ ﮨو   ﮔﺎ /ﯾﺎﺑﮭﺟوا  ﺟﺎ ﭼﮑﺎ ﮨو ﮔﺎ  
• conditional verb forms e.g.  ﮐﺎش ﻣﯾں وﮨﺎں ﺗﺎ و ﮨ /ﮨماﮔر   ﺟﺎﻧﺗﮯ  
•interrogative impressions e.g.  /ﯾﺎﮐ ﮨو ﺟﺎﺗﺎ  اور  ﻣﯾں ﮐﯾﺎ ﮐرﺗﺎ  
• present/past/future perfect continuous tenses e.g.  ﺟﺎﺗﺎ رﮨﺎ/ﺟﺎﺗﺎ رﮨﺎ ﺗﮭﺎ/رﮨﺎﺎ ﺟﺎﺗ ﮨو   ﮔﺎ  
Conjunctions 
• more complex forms e.g.  ﺣﺎﻻﻧﮑہ ﺑﺗہ، اﮔرﭼہ،  ﻟا  
Connectives 
• more complex forms e.g.  
 اس ﮐو ﻣد ﻧظر رﮐﮭﺗﮯ ﮨوﺋﮯ،    ظﺎﮨر  ﮨﮯ، وه  ﯾہ ﮐہ،  ﻣﺛﻼً، اِس ﻣﯾں ﮐوﺋﯽ  
ﺷﮏ ﻧﮩﯾں  
Numbers 
• cardinal numbers, 1 to 1000, plus those listed in general vocabulary 
• ordinal numbers and commonly used impressions e.g. رﮨواںﺎﺑ ﺳﺑﻖ، ﭼودھوﯾں ﮐﺎ  ﭼﺎﻧد  
Time 
• including non-limited time span اﯾﮏ  ﯾوںﻋرﺻﮯ ﺳﮯ  / ﺻد ﭘﮩﻠﮯ   
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
79 
Appendix 3: Vocabulary list 
The following vocabulary list is intended to assist teachers in planning their work. It provides 
the core generic vocabulary that all students will need to acquire. It is an essential 
vocabulary list that students should refer to and build on when preparing for the duration of 
their study for the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu. 
However, students entered for the Foundation tier are required to understand and respond to 
common or familiar words and/or forms of words that are not on the vocabulary list. 
Similarly, students entered for the Higher tier are required to understand and respond to 
common or familiar words and/or forms of words that are not on the vocabulary list and 
which are less common or familiar than those used in relation to Foundation tier 
assessments. 
Word lists 
Section 1: High-frequency language 
Common verbs 
Common adjectives 
Common adverbs 
Prepositions 
Colours 
Numbers 
Ordinal numbers 
Quantities and measures 
Some useful connecting words 
Time expressions 
Times of day 
Days of the week 
Months and seasons of the year 
Question words 
Other useful expressions 
Other high-frequency words 
Countries 
Continents 
Nationalities 
Areas/mountains/seas 
Useful acronyms 
Social conventions 
Language used in dialogue and messages 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
80 
Section 2: Topic-specific language 
Although words are listed under specific topic headings, the words are not exclusive to those 
particular headings. Many words also relate to other themes but may be listed in only one 
theme. Many common verbs are given in the verb list, with a few others included under a 
specific topic. 
Each topic has been highlighted in bold. 
All topics must be studied in the context of both the student’s home country and 
that of countries and communities where Urdu is spoken. 
 
Theme 1: Identity and culture 
Who am I?: relationships; when I was younger; what my friends and family are like; what 
makes a good friend; interests; socialising with friends and family; role models 
Daily life: customs and everyday life; food and drink; shopping; social media and 
technology (use of, advantages and disadvantages) 
Cultural life: celebrations and festivals; reading; music; sport; film and television 
 
Theme 2: Local area, holiday and travel 
Holidays: preferences, experiences and destinations 
Travel and tourist transactions: travel and accommodation; asking for help and dealing 
with problems; directions; eating out; shopping 
Town, region and country: weather; places to see; things to do 
 
Theme 3: School 
What school is like: school types; school day; subjects; rules and pressures; 
celebrating success 
School activities: school trips; events and exchanges 
 
Theme 4: Future aspirations, study and work 
Using languages beyond the classroom: forming relationships; travel; employment 
Ambitions: further study; volunteering; training 
Work: jobs; careers and professions 
 
Theme 5: International and global dimension 
Bringing the world together: sports events; music events; campaigns and good causes 
Environmental issues: being ‘green’; access to natural resources 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
81 
 
Section 1: High-frequency language 
Common verbs  
to accept ﻗﺑوُل ﮐرﻧﺎ  
to accompany ﺳﺎﺗﮭ دﯾﻧﺎ 
to add اِﺿﺎﻓہ ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to advise ﻣﺷوره دﯾﻧﺎ 
to allow اِﺟﺎزت دﯾﻧﺎ 
to answer/reply ﺟواب دﯾﻧﺎ 
to argue ﺑﺣث ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to arrive ﭘﮩُﻧﭼﻧﺎ 
to ask ﭘُوﭼﮭﻧﺎ 
to ask for ﻣﺎﻧﮕﻧﺎ 
to avoid ﺑﭼﻧﺎ 
to bath, to bathe ﻧﮩﺎﻧﺎ/ﻧﮩﻼﻧﺎ 
to be able to ﻗﺎﺑل ﮨوﻧﺎ 
to be born ﭘﯾدا ﮨوﻧﺎ 
to be called ﺑُﻼﻧﺎ 
to be careful ﻣﺣُﺗﺎط رﮨﻧﺎ 
to be hot/cold ﺳردی /  ﮔرﻣﯽ  ﻣﺣﺳوس  ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to be in a hurry ﺟﻠدی ﻣﯾں ﮨوﻧﺎ 
to be keen to دِﻟﭼﺳﭘﯽ ﻟﯾﻧﺎ 
to be lucky ﺧوُش ﻗﺳﻣت ﮨوﻧﺎ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
82 
 
Common verbs (cont) 
 
to be sorry ﺷرﻣﻧده ﮨوﻧﺎ 
to be thirsty ﭘﯾﺎﺳﺎ  ﮨوﻧﺎ 
to borrow اُدھﺎر ﻟﯾﻧﺎ 
to break ﺗوڑﻧﺎ 
to buy ﺧرﯾدﻧﺎ 
to call (telephone call) ﮐﺎل ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to cancel ﻣﻧﺳوُخ ﮐرﻧﺎ  
to change ﺑدﻟﻧﺎ 
to check ﺟﺎﻧﭼﻧﺎ  
to choose ﻣﻧﺗﺧب ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to clean ﺻﺎف ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to click (ICT) ﮐِﻠﮏ ) ﮐﻣﭘﯾوﮢر ﮐﺎ ﺑﮢن دﺑﺎﻧﺎ(  
to climb; get on(to) ﭼڑھﻧﺎ 
to close ﺑﻧد ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to collect ﺟﻣﻊ ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to come آﻧﺎ 
to contact راﺑطہ ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to continue/carry on ﺟﺎری رﮐﮭﻧﺎ 
to convince ﻗﺎﺋل ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to cope/manage/get by  ﻧِﻣﮢﻧﺎ 
to copy ﻧﻘل ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to cost ﻗﯾﻣت دﯾﻧﺎ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
83 
 
Common verbs (cont) 
 
to count, intend; count on (someone) ﮐِﺳﯽ ﭘر اﻧﺣﺻﺎرﮐرﻧﺎ 
to cross, go across ﭘﺎر ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to cry روﻧﺎ 
to decide ﻓﯾﺻﻠہ ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to depart/leave رُﺧﺻت ﮨوﻧﺎ 
to describe ﺑﯾﺎن ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to deserve ﻣُﺳﺗﺣﻖ  ﮨوﻧﺎ 
to die ﻣرﻧﺎ/وﻓﺎت ﭘﺎﻧﺎ/ﻓوت ﮨوﻧﺎ 
to discuss ﺑﺎت ﭼ ﯾت ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to draw ﺧﺎﮐہ ﺑﻧﺎﻧﺎ 
to drink ﭘﯾِﻧﺎ  
to drive ﮔﺎڑی ﭼﻼﻧﺎ 
to earn ﮐﻣﺎﻧﺎ 
to eat ﮐﮭﺎﻧﺎ 
to end ﺧﺗم ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to enjoy oneself ﺧُود ﻟطف اﮢﮭﺎﻧﺎ 
to enter/go in داﺧل ﮨوﻧﺎ 
to escape ﺑﭼﻧﺎ 
to explain وﺿﺎﺣت ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to fail ﻧﺎﮐﺎم ﮨوﻧﺎ 
to fall ﮔرِﻧﺎ  
to fall asleep ﺳوﺟﺎﻧﺎ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
84 
 
Common verbs (cont) 
 
to feed, nourish ﮐﮭﻼﻧﺎ 
to fill/fill in ﺑَﮭرﻧﺎ 
to find ﻣﻌﻠوُم ﮐرﻧﺎ  
to finish, end ﺧﺗم ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to fly اُڑﻧﺎ/اُڑاﻧﺎ  
to follow ﭘﯾِﭼﮭﺎ ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to forget; to leave something behind ﮐوﺋﯽ   ﭼﯾز ﺑﮭُول ﺟﺎﻧﺎ 
to forgive ﻣُﻌﺎف ﮐرﻧﺎ  
to get angry ﻏُﺻہ ﮨوﻧﺎ 
to get bored اُﮐﺗﺎ ﺟﺎﻧﺎ/ﺑور ﮨوﻧﺎ 
to get dressed ﮐﭘڑے ﭘﮩﻧﻧﺎ 
to give دﯾﻧﺎ 
to give back واﭘس دﯾﻧﺎ 
to give (a gift) )ﺗﺣﻔہدﯾﻧﺎ 
to go ﺟﺎﻧﺎ  
to get dressed ﮐﭘڑے ﭘﮩﻧﻧﺎ 
to get into (bus, car, train) ﻣﯾں ﺑﯾﮢﮭﻧﺎ/ﮐﮭڑا ﮨوﻧﺎ/ ﺳوار ﮨوﻧﺎ  
to get out of (bus, car, train)  ﺳﮯاُﺗرﻧﺎ 
to get up اُﮢﮭﻧﺎ 
to go down ﻧﯾﭼﮯ ﺟﺎﻧﺎ 
to go for a walk ﭼﮩل ﻗدﻣﯽ ﮐﮯ  ﻟﯾﮯ  ﺟﺎﻧﺎ  
to go out ﺑﺎﮨر ﺟﺎﻧﺎ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
85 
 
Common verbs (cont) 
 
to go to bed ﺳوﻧﮯ ﺟﺎﻧﺎ 
to go up اُوﭘر ﺟﺎﻧﺎ 
to harm/damage ﻧُﻘﺻﺎن ﭘﮩﻧﭼﺎﻧﺎ 
to hate ﻧﻔرت ﮐرﻧﺎ  
to have to/must ﻻزﻣﺎ ً ﮐرﻧﺎ ﮨﮯ     
to hear ﺳُﻧﻧﺎ  
to help ﻣدد ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to hold ﭘﮑڑﻧﺎ 
to hope اُﻣﯾد ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to hurry ﺟَﻠدی ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to hurt (oneself) ﭼوٹ ﻟﮕﻧﺎ 
to improve ﺑِﮩﺗر ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to inform اِطﻼع دﯾﻧﺎ 
to introduce (an item, an idea) آﻏﺎز ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to introduce (a person)ﻟﻨﺎ  ﻣﺗُﻌﺎرف ﮐرﻧﺎ ) ﮐوﺋﯽ ﻓرد( /ﺗﻌﺎرف ﮐراﻧﺎ 
to invite ﺑُﻼﻧﺎ 
to jump ﮐوُد ﺟﺎﻧﺎ /اُﭼﮭﻠﻧﺎ  
to justify وﺿﺎﺣت ﮐرﻧﺎ )دﻟﯾل  ﺳﮯ 
to knock, hit ﻣﺎرﻧﺎ ﭘﯾﮢﻧﺎ 
to knock over اﻟُﮢﺎ    ﮔرِاﻧﺎ 
to know (a fact) ﻣﻌﻠوُم ﮨوﻧﺎ 
to know (person, place) ﺟﺎﻧﻧﺎ  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
86 
 
Common verbs (cont) 
 
to land (a plane)  اُﺗرﻧﺎ 
to last ﻗﺎﺋم رﮨﻧﺎ/ﺑﺎﻗﯽ رﮨﻧﺎ  
to laugh ﮨﻧﺳﻧﺎ 
to learn ﺳﯾﮑﮭﻧﺎ 
to leave; to depart رُﺧﺻت ﮨوﻧﺎ 
to leave (somewhere, somebody) ﭼﮭوڑ ﮐر ﺟﺎﻧﺎ 
to leave behind (an object) ﭘﯾِﭼﮭﮯ ﭼﮭوڑ ﺟﺎﻧﺎ 
to lend اُدھﺎر دﯾﻧﺎ 
to light, turn/switch on ﺑﺗﯽ ﺟﻼﻧﺎ 
to like ﭘﺳﻧد ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to listen ﺳُﻧﻧﺎ  
to live (inhabit) رِﮨﻧﺎ  
to live ﺟﯾِﻧﺎ/رﮨﻧﺎ/زﻧده رﮨﻧﺎ  
to look after دﯾﮑﮭ ﺑﮭﺎل ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to look after/mind (child, dog) ﻧِﮕراﻧﯽ ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to look for ڈُھوﻧڈﻧﺎ 
to look like, to resemble ﻣﺷُﺎﺑہ ﮨوﻧﺎ 
to lose ﮐﮭو دﯾﻧﺎ/ﮔمُ      ﮐرﻧﺎ  
to love ﻣﺣُﺑت ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to manage, to cope ﻧِﻣﮢﻧﺎ 
to manage (business) ﭼَﻼﻧﺎ  
to mean to (do) ﻧِﯾتّ ﮐرﻧﺎ  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
87 
 
Common verbs (cont) 
 
to mean/to signify ﻧِﺷﺎﻧدﮨﯽ ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to meet ﻣﻼُﻗﺎت ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to miss; to be lacking ﯾﺎدآﻧﺎ  
to miss (train, bus etc) ﺧطﺎ ﮨوﻧﺎ/ﭼﮭُٹ ﺟﺎﻧﺎ  
to need ﺿرُورت ﮨوﻧﺎ  
to note ﻏور ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to offer; to give a present ﭘﯾش ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to open ﮐﮭوﻟﻧﺎ 
to order ﺣﮑم دﯾﻧﺎ 
to organise/to arrange ﻣُﻧظّم ﮐرﻧﺎ/اﻧﺗظﺎم ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to park (vehicle) ﭘﺎرک ﮐرﻧﺎ/ ﮔﺎڑی ﮐﮭڑی ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to pass ﮔُذرﻧﺎ 
to pass ﭘﺎس/ﮐﺎﻣﯾﺎب ﮨوﻧﺎ 
to phon ﻓون ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to place رﮐﮭﻧﺎ 
to please ﺧُوش ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to prefer ﺗرﺟﯾﺢ دﯾﻧﺎ 
to present ﭘﯾش ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to prevent/to stop روﮐﻧﺎ 
to produce ﭘَﯾدا ﮐرﻧﺎ /ﺗﺧﻠﯾِﻖ ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to pull ﮐﮭﯾﻧﭼﻧﺎ 
to push دھﮑﺎ دﯾﻧﺎ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
88 
 
Common verbs (cont) 
 
to put رﮐﮭﻧﺎ 
to put back واﭘس رﮐﮭﻧﺎ 
to read ﭘڑھﻧﺎ 
to run دوڑﻧﺎ/ﺑﮭﺎﮔﻧﺎ 
to receive وُﺻوُل ﮐرﻧﺎ  
to recommend ﺻﻼح/ﻣﺷوره دﯾﻧﺎ  
to refund ﭘﯾﺳﮯ واﭘس دﯾﻧﺎ 
to regret, be sorry ﭘﭼﮭﺗﺎﻧﺎ 
to remember ﯾﺎد رﮐﮭﻧﺎ 
to rent/to hire ﮐراۓ ﭘرﻟﯾﻧﺎ 
to repair ﻣرﻣت ﮐرﻧﺎ  
to repeat دُﮨراﻧﺎ 
to replace ﺗﺑدﯾل ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to reply ﺟواب دﯾﻧﺎ 
to research ﺗﺣِﻘﯾﻖ ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to reserve/to book رَﮐﮭ ﭼﮭوڑﻧﺎ /ﻣﺧﺻوص ﮐرﻧﺎ/ 
 ﺑُﮏ ﮐرﻧﺎ/ﺑُﮏ ﮐراﻧﺎ 
to rest آرام ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to return; to come/go back واﭘس ﺟﺎﻧﺎ/آﻧﺎ 
to ring (a bell) ﮔﮭﻧﮢﯽ ﺑﺟﺎﻧﺎ 
to save   ﺑﭼﻧﺎ /ﺑﭼﺎﻧﺎ 
to say ﮐﮩِﻧﺎ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
89 
 
Common verbs (cont) 
 
to see دﯾﮑﮭﻧﺎ 
to seem دﮐﮭﺎﺋﯽ دﯾﻧﺎ  / ﻟﮕﻧﺎ  
to sell ﺑﯾﭼﻧﺎ 
to send ﺑﮭﯾﺟﻧﺎ 
to serve ﺧِدﻣت ﮐرﻧﺎ  
to show دِﮐﮭﺎﻧﺎ 
to sign دﺳﺗﺧط ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to sing ﮔﺎﻧﺎ 
to sit down ﺑﯾﮢﮭﻧﺎ 
to sleep ﺳوﻧﺎ  
to smile ﻣُﺳﮑراﻧﺎ 
to speak ﺑوﻟﻧﺎ 
to spend (money) ﺧرچ ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to spend (time) ﮔُذارﻧﺎ 
to squash ﮐُﭼﻠﻧﺎ  
to stay ﮢِﮭﮩرﻧﺎ 
to steal ﭼُراﻧﺎ  
to stick ﻗﺎﺋم رﮨﻧﺎ /ﭼﺳﭘﺎں ﮐرﻧﺎ  
to stop رُﮐﻧﺎ/روﮐﻧﺎ 
to study ﭘڑھﻧﺎ 
to succeed ﮐﺎﻣﯾﺎب ﮨوﻧﺎ 
to swim ﺗﯾرﻧﺎ/ﺗﯾراﮐﯽ ﮐرﻧﺎ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
90 
 
Common verbs (cont) 
 
to switch off ﺑﻧد ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to take ﻟﯾﻧﺎ 
to take off (plane) آﻏﺎزِ ﭘرواز 
to take off (change clothes etc) ﮐﭘڑے اﺗﺎرﻧﺎ 
to talk ﺑﺎﺗﯾں ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to teach  ﭘڑھﺎﻧﺎ/ﺳﮑﮭﺎﻧﺎ 
to tell/recount ﺗﻔﺻﯾل ﺑﯾﺎن ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to tell ﺑﺗﺎﻧﺎ 
to thank ﺷُﮑرﯾہ ادا ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to think (about) ﺳوﭼﻧﺎ 
to think, believe ﯾﻘﯾن ﮐرﻧﺎ/ﻋﻘﯾده رﮐﮭﻧﺎ 
to throw ﭘﮭﯾﻧﮑﻧﺎ 
to touch ﭼُﮭوﻧﺎ 
to travel ﺳﻔر ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to try ﮐوﺷش ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to understand ﺳﻣﺟﮭﻧﺎ 
to use اِﺳﺗﻌﻣﺎل ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to visit (person) ﻣُﻼﻗﺎت ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to visit (place) دوره ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to wait for اِﻧﺗظﺎر ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to wake up ﺟﺎﮔﻧﺎ  
to walk ﭘﯾدل ﭼﻠﻧﺎ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
91 
 
Common verbs (cont) 
to want ﭼﺎﮨﻧﺎ 
to want, desire ﺧواﮨش ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to warn ﺧﺑَردار ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to wash دھوﻧﺎ 
to wear ﭘِﮩﻧﻧﺎ 
to weigh وزن ﮐرﻧﺎ/ﺗوﻟﻧﺎ  
to win ﺟِﯾﺗﻧﺎ  
to wish ﺧواﮨش ﮐرﻧﺎ /ﺧواﮨش رﮐﮭﻧﺎ 
to work ﮐﺎم ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to work (function) ﭼﺎﻟوُ ﮨوﻧﺎ  
to write ﻟِﮑﮭﻧﺎ 
 
Common adjectives 
 
active ﭘُﮭرﺗﯾﻼ /ﭼُﺳت  
alike; the same اﯾﮏ ﺟﯾﺳﺎ /ﻣﻠﺗﺎ ﺟﻠﺗﺎ  
approximately/about/almost ﺗﻘرﯾﺑﺎً 
boring اُﮐﺗﺎ  دﯾﻧﮯ واﻻ /ﻏﯾر
دﻟﭼﺳپ/ﺧُﺷﮏ  
easy آﺳﺎن 
expensive ﻣﮩِﻧﮕﺎ 
exciting ﺟوﺷﯾﻼ 
fair ﻣﻧُﺻﻔﺎﻧہ 
famous ﻣﺷﮩوُر  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
92 
 
Common adjectives (cont) 
fantastic ﻻﺟواب 
fashionable ﻓﯾﺷن اﯾﺑل 
fast ﺗﯾز 
fat ﻣوﮢﺎ 
favourite ﭘﺳﻧدِﯾده 
formal/informal رَﺳﻣﯽ/ ﻏﯾر رَﺳﻣﯽ  
former ﺳﺎﺑِﻘہ 
free (at no cost) ﻣﻔُت  
free آزاد 
free (unoccupied, available) ﺧﺎﻟﯽ  
friendly ﻣِﻠﻧﺳﺎر )روﯾہ( 
frightening ڈراؤﻧﺎ/ﺧوﻓﻧﺎک 
full ﻣﮑﻣل 
fun; amusing ﺗﻔرﯾﺢ/دﻟﭼﺳپ  
funny (comical) ﻣزاﺣﯾہ/ﮨﻧﺳﺎﻧﮯ واﻻ  
generous ﺳﺧﯽ 
good اﭼﮭﺎ  
good (well behaved/mannered) اﭼﮭﺎﺑﺎادب/ﻣﮩذب/ﺑﺎ  اﺧﻼق  
grateful ﺷﮑرﮔذار 
great (fantastic) ﻻﺟواب/ﺷﺎﻧدار  
great (marvellous) ﺣﯾرت اﻧﮕﯾز 
happy ﺧُوش  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
93 
 
Common adjectives (cont) 
hard ﺳَﺧت 
hardworking ﻣِﺣﻧﺗﯽ 
healthy (food/way of life) ﺻﺣت ﺑﺧش/ﺻﺣت ﻣﻧد  
heavy ﺑﮭﺎری 
high; tall (building) اُوﻧﭼﺎ/اُوﻧﭼﯽ/ﻟﻣﺑﺎ /ﻟﻣﺑﯽ 
honest دِﯾﺎﻧت دار/اﯾﻣﺎن دار  
ideal ﻣِﺛﺎﻟﯽ/ﺗﺻوراﺗﯽ/ﺧﯾﺎﻟﯽ 
important اﮨم  
in a good mood/jolly ﺧُوش ﺑﺎش 
in a hurry ﺟﻠدی ﻣﯾں ﮨوﻧﺎ 
independent آزاد 
inexpensive ﺳَﺳﺗﺎ   ۔ ﺳَﺳﺗﯽ 
intelligent; clever ﻻ ﺋﻖ/ﻗﺎﺑل/ذﮨﯾن  
interesting دل ﭼﺳپ 
kind ﻣِﮩرﺑﺎن 
large ﺑڑا 
last آﺧری  
lazy ﺳُﺳت  
light ﮨﻠﮑﺎ   ۔ ﮨﻠﮑﯽ 
locked ﻣﻘُﻔل  
long ﻟﻣﺑﺎ/طوﯾل 
lost ﮔمُ ﺷده 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
94 
 
Common adjectives (cont) 
magnificent ﺷﺎﻧدار 
marvellous ﺣﯾرت اﻧﮕﯾز 
mature ﺑﺎِﻟﻎ 
modern ﺟدﯾد/  ﻧﯾﺎ  
naughty ﺷرِﯾر  
necessary ﺿروُری  
negative ﻣﻧَﻔﯽ 
new (brand new) ﺑﺎﻟﮑل ﻧﯾﺎ/ ﻧﺋﯽ 
new ﻧﯾﺎ 
next اﮔﻠﯽ/اﮔﻼ 
nice; likeable ﻋُﻣده /اﻋﻠﯽٰ  
noisy ﺷور ﻣﭼﺎﻧﮯ واﻻ 
normal ﺑﺎﻗﺎﻋده 
numerous ﮐﺛﯾِر 
old ﺑُوڑھﺎ/ﺑُوڑھﯽ/ ﺑزرگ 
old (former) ﭘُراﻧﺎ/ ﭘُراﻧﯽ 
old fashioned ﭘُراﻧﯽ وَﺿﻊ ﮐﺎ 
open ﮐﮭﻼُ 
optimistic ﺧُوش اُﻣﯾداﻧہ/ رِﺟﺎﺋﯾت ﭘﺳﻧد 
other دِﯾﮕر 
own اﭘﻧﺎ/ذاﺗﯽ  
im)patient ﺑﮯ ﺻﺑر 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
95 
 
Common adjectives (cont) 
 
peaceful ﭘُراﻣن 
perfect ﮐﺎ ﻣل/ﻣﮑﻣل 
pessimistic ﻣﺎﯾوُﺳﺎﻧہ  /ﻗﻧوُطﯽ /ﻣﺎﯾوُس ﮐنُ  
pleased ﺧُوش  
pleasant ﺧُوﺷﮕوار 
im)polite ﺑَد ﺗﻣﯾز 
popular ﻣﺷﮩوُر  
positive ﻣﺛُﺑت  
practical ﻋﻣﻠﯽ 
pretty ﺧوُﺑﺻورت  
quiet ﺧﺎﻣوش 
ready ﺗﯾﺎر 
real اﺻﻠﯽ 
reasonable ﻣﻌﻘوُل  
recent ﺣﺎِﻟﯾہ  
recognised/well known ﺟﺎﻧﺎ ﭘﮩﭼﺎﻧﺎ/ ﺟﺎﻧﯽ ﭘﮩﭼﺎﻧﯽ 
responsible ذِﻣہ دار 
rich اﻣﯾر 
ridiculous ﻣﺿﺣﮑہ ﺧﯾز 
ripe ﭘﮑﺎ ﮨوا  
rotten ﺳڑا  ﮨوا 
sacred ﻣﻘدس 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
96 
 
Common adjectives (cont) 
sad اُداس 
safe ﻣﺣﻔوُظ  
same اﯾﮏ ﺟﯾﺳﺎ 
satisfied ﻣطﻣِﺋن 
selfish ﺧُودﻏَرض 
sensational ﺳَﻧﺳﻧﯽ ﺧﯾز 
serious ﺳَﻧِﺟﯾده  
short ﻣُﺧﺗﺻر 
shy ﺷرﻣﯾﻼ/ﺷرﻣﯾﻠﯽ 
silent ﺧﺎﻣوش 
silly ﺑﯾوﻗُوف  
situated واﻗﻊ 
slim ﭘﺗﻼ/ﭘﺗﻠﯽ 
small; short (person) ﭼﮭوﮢﺎ ﻗد 
strict ﺳﺧت 
strong ﻣﺿﺑوُط  
superb ﺷﺎﻧدار 
surprised ﺣﯾران 
talkative ﺑﺎ   ﺗو ﻧﯽ 
thin, narrow ﺗﻧﮓ  
tidy ﺻﺎف  
tired ﺗﮭﮑﺎ ﮨُوا 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
97 
 
Common adjectives (cont) 
tiring ﺗﮭﮑﺎوَٹ آﻣﯾز  
true ﺳﭻ 
typical ﻋﺎم 
ugly ﺑدﺻُورت  
unbelievable ﻧﺎﻗﺎﺑِل ﯾﻘﯾن 
unfair ﻏﯾر ﻣﻧُﺻﻔﺎﻧہ 
unhappy ﻧﺎﺧوُش  
unhealthy ﺑﯾﻣﺎر 
unpleasant ﻧﺎﺧوُﺷﮕوار  
useful ﻣُﻔﯾد 
useless ﺑﮯ ﮐﺎر 
valid درُﺳت 
valuable ﻗﯾِﻣﺗﯽ 
weak ﮐﻣزور 
wet ﺑﮭﯾِﮕﺎ 
worried ﭘرﯾﺷﺎن 
wise ﻋﻘﻠﻣﻧد 
young ﻧوﺟوان/ ﮐم ﻋُﻣر 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
98 
 
Common adverbs 
 
straight away اﺳﯽ وﻗت 
for) a long time ﻟﻣﺑﮯ ﻋرﺻﮯ ﮐﮯ ﻟﯾﮯ 
un)fortunately ﺑدﻗﺳﻣﺗﯽ ﺳﮯ 
again ﭘِﮭر ﺳﮯ  
again and again/frequently ﺑﺎر ﺑﺎر 
already ﭘﮩﻠﮯ ﮨﯽ 
always ﮨﻣﯾﺷہ 
cheap(ly) ﻧﺎﻗص 
especially ﺧﺎص طور ﭘر 
everywhere ﮨر ﺟﮕہ 
fairly ﻣﻧُﺻﻔﺎﻧہ 
frequently اﮐﺛر 
hardly ﻣﺷُﮑل ﺳﮯ 
here ﯾﮩﺎںاِدھر  
immediately ﻓوراً /اﺑﮭﯽ 
loud(ly) زور زور ﺳﮯ 
never ﮐﺑﮭﯽ ﻧﮩﯾں  
not yet اﺑﮭﯽ ﺗﮏ ﻧﮩﯾں 
nowhere ﮐﮩﯾں ﻧﮩﯾں 
often اَﮐﺛر 
once اﯾﮏ ﺑﺎر 
over there وﮨﺎں ﭘر 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
99 
 
Common adverbs (cont) 
 
perhaps/maybe ﺷﺎﯾد 
quickly ﺟﻠدی ﺳﮯ 
rarely ﮐﺑﮭﯽ ﮐﺑﮭﺎر 
rather ﺑﻠﮑہ 
really واﻗﻌﯽ 
recently ﺣﺎل ﮨﯽ ﻣﯾں 
sometimes ﺑﻌض اوﻗﺎت/ﮐﺑﮭﯽ ﮐﺑﮭﯽ 
somewhere ﮐﮩﯾں ﻧہ ﮐﮩﯾں 
soon ﺟَﻠد 
standing ﮐﮭڑا  
still اب ﺑﮭﯽ 
there وﮨﺎں/اُدھر  
together اﯾﮏ ﺳﺎﺗﮭ 
too/also ﺑﮭﯽ 
up there وﮨﺎں اُوﭘر 
usually اﮐﺛر 
very ﺑُﮩت 
well ﺻﺣﯾﺢ ، ﻣﻧُﺎﺳب، ﮢِﮭﯾﮏ 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
100 
 
Prepositions/postpositions 
 
above اُوﭘر 
after  ﺑﻌد  
against ﺑرَﺧﻼ ف  
among ﻣﯾں ﺳﮯ 
around اِرد ﮔرِد  
at (someone’s house) ﭘرَ 
at the end of آﺧَر ﻣﯾں 
at, on ﭘَر،اوُﭘر   
before ﭘﮩﻠﮯ 
behind ﭘﯾِﭼﮭﮯ 
between  ﮐﮯ درﻣﯾﺎن 
far from دُور ﺳﮯ  
from/since ﺳﮯ  
in (inside) ﻣﯾں 
in front of; in the front ﮐﮯ ﺳﺎﻣﻧﮯ 
in the background; at the back ﭘس ِﻣﻧظر 
in the foreground ﭘﯾشِ ﻣﻧظر 
in the middle (of) ﮐﮯ ﺑﯾﭻ ﻣﯾں /درﻣﯾﺎں  
near (to) ﮐﮯ/ﺳﮯ ﻧزدﯾﮏ 
next to ﮐﮯ ﭘﺎس 
nowhere ﮐﮩﯾں ﻧﮩﯾں 
of ﮐﺎ   ۔ ﮐﯽ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
101 
 
Prepositions/postpositions (cont) 
 
on (on top of) ﮐﮯ اوﭘر 
opposite ﮐﮯ ﺳﺎﻣﻧﮯ 
outside ﮐﮯ /ﺳﮯﺑﺎﮨر 
through ﮐﮯ ذرﯾﻌﮯ 
to ﮐو 
towards ﮐﯽ طرف 
under ﮐﮯ ﻧﯾﭼﮯ 
till/until ﺟب ﺗﮏ 
Colours 
 
black ﮐﺎﻻ 
blue ﻧِﯾﻼ  
brown ﺑُﮭورا 
grey ﺳُرﻣﺋﯽ 
dark ﺗﯾز/ﮔﮩرا 
green ﺳﺑز 
beige ﺧﺎﮐﺳﺗری 
light ﮨﻠﮑﺎ 
pink ﮔُﻼﺑﯽ 
red  ﺳُرخ 
violet ﺟﺎﻣﻧﯽ  
white ﺳﻔﯾد 
yellow ﭘِﯾﻼ  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
102 
 
Numbers 1-1000 
 
1    اﯾﮏ 
2 دو  
3 ﺗﯾن  
4 ﭼﺎر  
5 ﭘﺎﻧﭻ 
6 ﭼﮭﮯ 
7 ﺳﺎت 
8 آﮢﮭ 
9 ﻧو  
10 دس 
11 ﮔﯾﺎره 
12 ﺑﺎره 
13 ﺗﯾره 
14 ﭼوده 
15 ﭘﻧدره 
16 ﺳوﻟہ 
17 ﺳﺗره 
18 اﮢﮭﺎره 
19 اُﻧﯾس 
20 ﺑِﯾس  
21 اِﮐﯾس 
22 ﺑﺎﺋِﯾس 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
103 
 
Numbers 1-1000 (cont) 
 
23 ﺗﺋِﯾس  
24 ﭼوﺑِ ﯾس 
25 ﭘﭼِﯾس  
26 ﭼﮭﺑِﯾس 
27 ﺳﺗﺎﺋِﯾس 
28 اﮢﮭﺎﺋِﯾس 
29 اُﻧﺗِﯾس  
30 ﺗِﯾس  
31 اِﮐﺗِﯾس 
39 ◌ 
40 ﭼﺎﻟﯾس  
41 اِﮐﺗﺎﻟﯾس 
49 اُﻧﭼﺎس  
50 ﭘﭼﺎس  
51 اِﮐﺎون 
59 اُﻧﺳﮢﮭ 
60 ﺳﺎﮢﮭ 
61 اِﮐﺳﮢﮭ 
69 اُﻧﮩﺗر 
70 ﺳﺗر 
71 اِﮐﮩﺗر 
79 اُﻧﺎﺳﯽ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
104 
 
Numbers 1-1000 (cont) 
 
80 اَﺳﯽ 
81 اِﮐﯾﺎﺳﯽ/اِﮐﺎﺳﯽ 
89 ﻧواﺳﯽ  
90 ﻧوَے  
91 اِ ﮐﺎﻧوے 
99  ﻧﻧﺎﻧوے وﻏﯾره 
100 ﺳو  
101 اﯾﮏ ﺳو اﯾﮏ 
120 اﯾﮏ ﺳو ﺑﯾس 
200 دو ﺳو 
1000 اﯾﮏ ﮨزار 
1100 ﮔﯾﺎره ﺳو 
2000 دو  ﮨزار 
1.000.000 دَس ﻻﮐﮭ 
2.000.000 ﺑﯾس ﻻﮐﮭ 
hundreds ﺳﯾﻧﮑڑوں 
thousands ﮨزاروں 
hundreds of thousands ﻻﮐﮭوں 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
105 
 
Ordinal numbers 1-1000 
 
first ﭘِﮩﻼ 
second دُوﺳرا  
eleventh ﮔﯾﺎرھواں 
twenty first etc اِﮐﯾِﺳواں وﻏﯾره 
Quantities and measures 
 
a bottle (of) ﮐﯽ اﯾﮏ ﺑوﺗل 
about twenty ﺗﻘرﯾﺑﺎً    ﺑﯾس 
about a hundred ﺗﻘرﯾﺑﺎً   اﯾﮏ ﺳو  
a dozen اﯾﮏ درﺟن 
a jar (of) ﮐﺎ اﯾﮏ ﺟﺎر 
a little of/few ﺗﮭوڑا ﺳﺎ/ ﭼﻧد 
a litre (of) ﮐﺎ اﯾﮏ ﻟﯾﮢر 
a lot (of) ﺑﮩت ﺳﺎرا 
a little (of) ﮐﺎ ﺗﮭوڑا ﺳﺎ 
a kilo (of) ﮐﺎ اﯾﮏ ﮐﻠو 
gramme ﮔرام 
centilitre ﺳﯾﻧﮢﯽ ﻟﯾﮢر 
centimetre ﺳﯾﻧﮢﯽ ﻣﯾﮢر 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
106 
 
Quantities and measures (cont) 
 
metre ﻣﯾِ ﮢر 
kilometre ﮐﻠو ﻣﯾﮢر 
less ﮐم 
more زِﯾﺎده  
a packet (of) ﮐﺎ اﯾﮏ ﭘﯾﮑٹ 
a piece (of) ﮐﺎ اﯾﮏ ﮢُﮑڑا  
a slice (of) ﮐﺎ اﯾﮏﮢُﮑڑا 
a tin, box (of) ﮐﺎ اﯾﮏ ﮢِن، ﺑﮑس 
enough ﮐﺎﻓﯽ  
half آدھﺎ 
many ﮐﺋﯽ 
quantity ﻣﻘدار  
quarter ﭼوﺗﮭﺎﺋﯽ 
quite a few ﮐﺎﻓﯽ ﺳﺎرا/ﮐﺎﻓﯽ ﺳﺎرے 
several ﮐﺋﯽ 
some/a few ﮐﭼُﮭ  
third ﺗِﯾﺳرا  
too much; too many ﺑُﮩت زِﯾﺎده  
weight وَزن  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
107 
 
Some useful connecting words 
 
according to ﮐﮯ ﻣطُﺎﺑﻖ 
also ﺑﮭﯽ 
although اَﮔر ﭼہ  
and اَور 
because/as  ﮐﯾوُﻧﮑہ 
because of ﮐﯽ وﺟہ ﺳﮯ   / اِسﻟﯾﮯ ﮐہ  
but ﻟﯾِ ﮑن 
even if ﭘِﮭر ﺑﮭﯽ اَﮔر / اَﮔرﭼہ 
finally آﺧر ﻣﯾں/ﺑﺎﻵﺧر 
first of all ﺳب ﺳﮯ ﭘﮩﻠﮯ 
however ﺗﺎﮨم /ﺑﮩر ﺣﺎل 
if اَﮔر 
in order to اﯾﺳﺎ ﮐرﻧﮯ ﮐﮯ ﻟﯾﮯ  
or ﯾﺎ 
perhaps ﺷﺎﯾد 
since ﺗَب ﺳﮯ  
so ﺗو / ﭼُﻧﺎﻧﭼہ 
then ﭘﮭر 
therefore اِس ﻟﯾﮯ  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
108 
 
Time expressions 
 
after ﮐﮯ ﺑﻌد / ﺑﻌد ﻣﯾں 
afternoon ﺳِہ ﭘﮩر  
already ﭘﮩﻠﮯ ﮨﯽ 
always ﮨﻣﯾﺷہ 
as soon as ﺟﺗﻧﺎ ﺟﻠدی ﮨوﺳﮑﮯ 
at the start ﺷروع ﻣﯾں 
at the same time اﯾﮏ ﮨﯽ وﻗت ﻣﯾں 
before ﭘﮩﻠﮯ ﮨﯽ 
century ﺻَدی  
daily روزاﻧہ 
date ﺗﺎرِﯾﺦ  
day دِن / روز 
day (a whole day) ﺳﺎرا دِن 
during دوران      / درﻣﯾﺎن 
early ﺳوﯾرے 
evening ﺷﺎم 
evening (a whole evening) ﺳﺎری ﺷﺎم 
every day روزاﻧہ 
fortnight ﭘﻧدرھواڑه 
from/since ﺳﮯ  
from time to time وﻗﺗﺎً ﻓوﻗﺗﺎً /ﮐﺑﮭﯽ ﮐﺑﮭﺎر 
future ﻣﺳُﺗﻘﺑل 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
109 
 
Time expressions (cont) 
 
just now, in a little while اﺑﮭﯽ اﺳﯽ وﻗت، ﺗﮭوڑی دﯾر ﻣﯾں 
immediately ﻓوراً / اﺑﮭﯽ  
later ﺑﻌد ﻣﯾں 
last night (yesterday evening) ﮐل ﺷﺎم )ﮔذری ﮨوﺋﯽ 
last night (during the night) ﮐل رات )رات ﮐﮯ دوران 
midday دوﭘﮩر  
midnight آدھﯽ رات 
minute ﻣﻧٹ 
month ﻣﺎه / ﻣﮩﯾﻧہ 
morning ﺻُﺑﺢ  
morning (the whole morning) ﺳﺎری   ﺻُﺑﺢ 
next, coming اﮔﻼ/ اﮔﻠﮯ/اﮔﻠﯽ، آ ﻧﮯ واﻻ/آﺋﻧده 
night رات 
now اﺑﮭﯽ /  ﻓوراً  
once اﯾﮏ ﺑﺎر 
on time وﻗت ﭘر 
past ﻣﺎﺿﯽ  
present ﺣﺎل  
since ﺗب ﺳﮯ  
soon ﺟﻠدی 
the day after tomorrow ﭘرﺳوں )آﻧﯾواﻻ 
time expressions (cont)  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
110 
 
Time expressions (cont) 
 
the day before yesterday ﭘرﺳوں  ) ﮔذرا ﮨوا 
the next day; following day ﮐل ) آﻧﯾواﻻ 
the night before; eve ﮐل ﺷﺎم )ﮔذری ﮨوﺋﯽ 
time وﻗت 
today آج  
tomorrow ﮐل ) آﻧﯾواﻻ 
twice دو ﺑﺎر  
week ﮨﻔﺗہ 
weekend وﯾﮏ اﯾﻧڈ 
year ﺳﺎل / ﺑَرس  
yesterday ﮐل   )  ﮔزُرا   ﮨوُا  
 
Times of day 
 
(at) 1 a.m. رات ﮐﮯ1ﺑﺟﮯ 
1 p.m. دوﭘﮩر1ﺑﺟﮯ  
nine o’clock in the evening رات ﮐﮯ9 ﺑﺟﮯ 
13.00 دن ﮐﺎ1ﺑﺟﺎ 
at exactly 2 o’clock ﮢﮭﯾﮏ2ﺑﺟﮯ  
at about… o’clock ﺗﻘرﯾﺑﺎً  ۔۔۔۔۔۔ﺑﺟﮯ 
it is five past three 
اس وﻗت ﺗﯾن ﺑﺞ ﮐر ﭘﺎﻧﭻ ﻣﻧٹ
ﮨﯾں  
five to three ﺗﯾن ﺑﺟﻧﮯ ﻣﯾں ﭘﺎﻧﭻ ﻣﻧٹ 
half past ten ﺳﺎڑھﮯ دس 
ten past four ﭼﺎر ﺑﺟﮑر دس ﻣﻧٹ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
111 
 
Times of day (cont)  
ten to four ﭼﺎر ﺑﺟﻧﮯ ﻣﯾں دس ﻣﻧٹ 
quarter to six ﭘوﻧﮯ ﭼﮭﮯ 
quarter past seven ﺳوا ﺳﺎت 
Days of the week 
 
Monday ﭘِﯾر  
Tuesday ﻣﻧﮕل 
Wednesday ﺑُدھ  
Thursday ﺟُﻣﻌرات 
Friday ﺟُﻣﻌہ 
Saturday ﮨَﻔﺗہ 
Sunday اِﺗوار 
on) Monday  ﭘِﯾرﮐﮯ دن)ﮐو(  
on) Monday morning ﭘﯾر ﮐﯽ ﺻُﺑﺢ)ﮐو(  
on) Monday evening ﭘِﯾر ﮐﯽ ﺷﺎم)ﮐو(  
on Mondays 
ﮨر         ﭘﯾِر ﮐو / ﮐﮯ دِن۔ ﭘﯾر  
ﮐﮯ ﭘﯾر  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
112 
 
Months and seasons of the year 
 
month ﻣﮩﯾﻧہ / ﻣﺎه 
January ﺟﻧوَری  
February ﻓروَری  
March ﻣﺎرچ 
April اﭘرﯾل 
May ﻣﺋﯽ 
June ﺟُون 
July ﺟُوﻻﺋﯽ 
August اَﮔﺳت 
September ﺳﺗﻣﺑر 
October اِﮐﺗوﺑر 
November ﻧوﻣﺑر 
December دﺳﻣﺑر 
season ﻣوﺳم  
in) autumn ﺧِزاں  
in) spring ﺑﮩﺎر 
in) summer ﻣوﺳم ِﮔرﻣﺎ 
in) winter ﻣوﺳم ِﺳرﻣﺎ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
113 
 
Question words 
 
how? ﮐﯾﺳﮯ؟ 
how much, how many? 
ﮐس ﻗدر،  ﮐﺗﻧﮯ )ﻣﻘدار/ﺗﻌداد(؟
ﮐﺗﻧﮯ ﮐﺎ )ﻗﯾﻣت(؟  
what? ﮐﯾﺎ؟ 
what colour? ﮐوﻧﺳﺎ رﻧﮓ؟ 
what like? ﮐس طرح؟/ﮐﯾﺳﮯ 
at) what time? ﮐس وﻗت؟/ﮐب 
what/which? ﮐﯾﺎ/ﮐوﻧﺳﺎ؟ 
when? ﮐب؟ 
where? ﮐﮩﺎں؟ 
which one (s)? ﮐوﻧﺳﺎ/ﮐوﻧﺳﮯ /ﮐوﻧﺳﯽ؟ 
who? ﮐون ؟ 
why? ﮐﯾوں؟ 
Other useful expressions 
 
all the better ﺑُﮩت اﭼﮭﮯ 
good luck ﺧُوش ﻗﺳﻣﺗﯽ 
here is/are ﯾﮩﺎں ﮨﮯ /ﮨﯾں 
how do you spell that? 
آپ اِﺳﮑﮯ ﮨﺟﮯ ﮐﯾﺳﮯ ﺑﻧﺎﺗﮯ  
ﮨﯾں؟  
I don’t know 
ﻣﺟُﮭﮯ ﻧﮩﯾں ﻣﻌﻠوم/ﻣﯾں ﻧﮩﯾں  
ﺟﺎﻧﺗﺎ  
I don’t mind ﻣَﯾَں ﭘرواه ﻧﮩﯾں ﮐرﺗﺎ/ﮐرﺗﯽ 
I don’t understand ﻣﺟُﮭﮯ ﺳﻣﺟﮭ ﻧﮩﯾں آﺗﯽ 
I’m fine; it’s OK ﻣﯾں ﮢﮭﯾﮏ ﮨوں،ﺧﯾر ﮨﮯ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
114 
 
Other useful expressions (cont) 
 
I’ve had enough ﻣﯾں ﻧﮯ ﮐﺎﻓﯽ ﺑرداﺷت ﮐﯾﺎ 
I like it ﻣﺟُﮭﮯ ﯾہ ﭘﺳﻧد ﮨﮯ 
in my opinion ﻣﯾرے ﺧﯾﺎل ﻣﯾں 
it annoys me ﯾہ ﻣﺟﮭﮯ ﻏُﺻہ دﻻﺗﺎ ﮨﮯ 
it depends ﯾہ اِس ﺑﺎت ﭘر ﻣُﻧﺣﺻر ﮨﮯ ﮐہ 
it doesn’t matter ﮐوﺋﯽ ﺑﺎت ﻧﮩﯾں 
it’s all the same to me ﻣﯾرے ﻟﯾﮯ  ﺳب  ﺑراﺑر ﮨﮯ  
it makes me laugh ﯾہ ﺑﺎت ﻣﺟﮭﮯ ﮨﻧﺳﺎﺗﯽ ﮨﮯ 
it’s not worth it ﯾہ اِس ﻗﺎﺑل ﻧﮩﯾں 
you are not allowed to ﺗﻣﮩﯾں اِﺟﺎزت ﻧﮩﯾں ﮨﮯ ﮐہ 
you must (one must) ﺗم ﭘر ﻻزم ﮨﮯ 
personally ذاﺗﯽ طور ﭘر 
of course ﺑﺎِﻟﮑل 
okay (in agreement) اﭼﮭﺎ  
once again اﯾﮏ ﺑﺎر ﭘﮭر 
so, so ﺑس ﮔُذاره ﮨﮯ 
so much the better ﺑِﮩﺗر 
that doesn’t interest/appeal to me 
ﻣﺟُﮭﮯ اِس ﺳﮯ ﮐوﺋﯽ دِﻟﭼﺳﭘﯽ
ﻧﮩﯾں  
that’s enough ﮐﺎﻓﯽ ﮨوﮔﯾﺎ 
there is/are وﮨﺎں ﭘرﮨﮯ/ ﮨﯾں 
to be in the process of  ﮐﺎرواﺋﯽ ﮐﮯ ﻋﻣل ﻣﯾں 
too bad, what a shame ﺑﮩت ﺑُرا،ﺷرم ﮐﯽ ﺑﺎت ﮨﮯ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
115 
 
Other useful expressions (cont) 
 
what does that mean? اﺳﮑﺎ ﮐﯾﺎ ﻣطﻠب ﮨﮯ 
with pleasure ﺧُوﺷﯽ ﮐﯾﺳﺎﺗﮭ /ﺑﺧوُﺷﯽ  
Other high-frequency words 
 
as, like ﮐﯽ طرح/  ﮐﯽ ﻣﺎﻧﻧد 
end آﺧر/  اِﺧﺗﺗﺎم /ﺧﺎﺗﻣہ 
everybody ﮨرَ ﮐوﺋﯽ 
except ﻋﻼوه 
figure (number) ﮔﻧﺗﯽ 
for example ﻣﺛﻼً / ﻣﺛﺎل ﮐﮯ طور ﭘر 
idea ﺧﯾﺎل 
interest دِﻟﭼﺳﭘﯽ  
Miss آﻧﺳہ 
Mr (also sir) ﺟﻧﺎب  
Mrs (also madam)  ﺑﯾﮕم، ﻣﺎدام 
number ﻧﻣﺑر 
number (e.g. phone number) ﻓون ﻧﻣﺑر 
opinion راۓ 
someone ﮐوﺋﯽ 
something ﮐوﺋﯽ ﭼﯾز 
that وه 
thing/item/article ﭼﯾِز 
this ﯾہ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
116 
 
Other high-frequency words(cont) 
 
time (occasion) ﻣوﻗﻊ 
type (kind of) ﻗِﺳم  
way (manner) طرِﯾﻘہ  
with ﮐﮯ ﺳﺎﺗﮭ 
without ﺑﻐﯾر 
Countries 
 
Afghanistan اﻓﻐﺎﻧﺳﺗﺎن 
Algeria اﻟﺟزاﺋر 
Austria آﺳﮢرﯾﺎ 
Bangladesh ﺑﻧﮕﻠہ دﯾش 
Barma ﺑرﻣﺎ 
Belgium ﺑﯾﻠﺟﯾﺋم 
Canada ﮐﯾﻧڈا 
China ﭼﯾن 
Denmark ڈﻧﻣﺎرک 
Dubai دُﺑﺋﯽ  
Egypt ﻣﺻر 
England اﻧﮕﻠﯾﻧڈ/اﻧﮕﻠﺳﺗﺎن 
France ﻓراﻧس 
Germany ﺟرﻣﻧﯽ  
Great Britain ﺑرطﺎﻧﯾہ  
Greece ﯾوﻧﺎن 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
117 
 
Countries (cont) 
 
Holland ﮨﺎﻟﯾﻧڈ 
India ﺑﮭﺎرت ، ﮨﻧدوﺳﺗﺎن  
Iran اﯾران 
Ireland آﺋرﻟﯾﻧڈ 
Italy اﮢﻠﯽ 
Jordan اُردن 
Netherlands ﻧﯾدرﻟﯾﻧڈ 
Pakistan ﭘﺎﮐﺳﺗﺎن 
Portugal ﭘُرﺗﮕﺎل 
Qatar ﻗطر  
Russia رُوس 
Saudi Arabia ﺳﻌودی ﻋرب 
Scotland ﺳﮑﺎٹ ﻟﯾﻧڈ 
Senegal ﺳﯾﻧﯾﮕﺎل 
Spain ﮨﺳﭘﺎﻧﯾہ 
Switzerland ﺳوﺋﮢزرﻟﯾﻧڈ 
Syria ﺷﺎم 
Tunisia ﺗﯾوﻧس 
Turkey ﺗرﮐﯽ 
United Kingdom ﯾوﻧﺎﺋﯾﮢڈ ﮐﻧﮕڈم 
United States of America رﯾﺎﺳﺗﮩﺎﺋﮯ ﻣﺗﺣده اﻣرﯾﮑہ 
Wales وﯾﻠز 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
118 
 
Continents 
 
Africa ﺑرِاﻋظم اﻓرﯾﻘہ  
Asia ﺑرِاﻋظم اﯾﺷﯾﺎء  
Australia ﺑر   ِاﻋظم آﺳﮢرﯾﻠﯾﺎ 
Europe ﺑرِاﻋظم ﯾورپ 
North America ﺑر ِ اﻋظم ﺷﻣﺎﻟﯽ اﻣرﯾﮑہ 
South America ﺑر ِ   اﻋظم ﺟﻧوﺑﯽ اﻣرﯾﮑہ 
Subcontinent India and Pakistan ﺑرِﺻﻐﯾ ر  ﭘﺎک و ﮨﻧد  
Nationalities 
 
Afghan اﻓﻐﺎﻧﯽ 
Algerian اﻟﺟﯾرﯾن 
American اﻣرﯾﮑﯽ 
Austrian آﺳﮢرﯾن 
Belgian ﺑﯾﻠﺟﺋﯾﻣﯽ 
British ﺑرطﺎﻧوی 
Canadian ﮐﻧﯾڈﯾن 
Chinese ﭼﯾﻧﯽ 
Corsican ﮐورﺳﯾﮑن 
Danish ڈﯾﻧش 
Dutch وﻟﻧدﯾزی 
English اﻧﮕرﯾز /اﻧﮕﻠﺳﺗﺎﻧﯽ /اﻧﮕرﯾزی 
European ﯾورﭘﯽ 
French ﻓراﻧﺳﯾﺳﯽ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
119 
 
Nationalities (cont) 
 
German ﺟرﻣن  
Greek ﯾوﻧﺎﻧﯽ 
Indian ﺑﮭﺎرﺗﯽ/ﮨﻧدوﺳﺗﺎﻧﯽ 
Iranian اِﯾراﻧﯽ 
Irish آﺋرﺳﺗﺎﻧﯽ 
Italian اطﺎﻟوی 
Pakistani ﭘﺎﮐﺳﺗﺎﻧﯽ 
Russian روﺳﯽ 
Scottish ﺳﮑﺎﮢش 
Spanish ﮨﺳﭘﺎﻧوی 
Swiss ﺳوﺋس  
Turkish ﺗرک 
Welsh وﯾﻠش 
Areas/mountains/seas 
 
north ﺷﻣﺎل 
south ﺟﻧوُب  
east ﻣﺷرِق  
west ﻣﻐرَب  
Azad Kashmir آزاد ﮐﺷﻣﯾر 
Baluchistan, Baluchi ﺑﻠوﭼﺳﺗﺎن / ﺑﻠوﭼﯽ 
Punjab/punjabi ﭘﻧﺟﺎب / ﭘﻧﺟﺎﺑﯽ 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwah ﺧﯾﺑر  ﭘﺧﺗوﻧﺧواه 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
120 
 
Areas/mountains/seas (cont) 
 
Sindh, Sindhi ﺳﻧدھ، ﺳﻧدھﯽ  
Baluchistan ﺑﻠوﭼﺳﺗﺎن 
Satluj (river) درﯾﺎ  ﺋﮯ  ﺳﺗﻠﺞ 
Raavi (river) درﯾﺎ ﺋﮯ راوی 
Chenab (river) درﯾﺎﺋﮯ  ﭼﻧﺎب 
Jhelum (river) درﯾﺎﺋﮯ ﺟﮩﻠم 
Indus (river) درﯾﺎﺋﮯ ﺳﻧدھ 
Khyber Pass درّهِ ﺧﯾﺑر 
Indus valley وادئ  ﺳﻧدھ 
Kaghan valley وادئ  ﮐﺎﻏﺎن 
Swat valley وادئ ﺳوات 
Himalayas ﮐوه ﮨﻣﺎﻟﯾہ 
K2 ﮐﮯ  ﮢو 
Arabian Sea ﺑﺣﯾره   ِﻋرب 
Indian Ocean ﺑﺣر ِ  ﮨﻧد 
Northern Areas ﺷﻣﺎﻟﯽ  ﻋﻼﻗہ ﺟﺎت 
Islamabad اﺳﻼم آﺑﺎد 
Karachi ﮐراﭼﯽ  
Lahore ﻻﮨور  
Faisalabad ﻓﯾﺻل آﺑﺎد 
Pashawar ﭘﺷﺎور 
Quetta ﮐوﺋﮢہ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
121 
 
Areas/mountains/seas (cont) 
 
Multan ﻣُﻠﺗﺎن 
Jhelum ﺟﮩﻠم 
Sialkot ﺳﯾﺎﻟﮑوٹ 
Hyderabad ﺣﯾدر آﺑﺎد 
Mirpur ﻣﯾر ﭘور 
Muzaffarabad ﻣظﻔرآﺑﺎد 
Chiniot ﭼﻧﯾوٹ 
Social conventions 
 
best wishes ﻧﯾﮏ ﺧواﮨﺷﺎت ﮐﮯ ﺳﺎﺗﮭ 
don’t mention it اﺳﮑﺎ ذﮐر ﻣت ﮐرو 
enjoy yourself/yourselves! ﻟطف اﮢﮭﺎؤ، ﻣزے ﮐرو 
goodbye ﺧدا ﺣﺎﻓظ    ۔ ﷲ ﺣﺎﻓظ 
good morning ﺻﺑﺢ ﺑﺧﯾر 
goodnight ﺷب ﺑﺧﯾر  
have a good journey ﺗﻣﮩﺎرا ﺳﻔر اﭼﮭﺎ ﮔذرے 
have a good day/evening 
آﭘﮑﺎ دن اﭼﮭﺎ ﮔُذرے/ آﭘﮑﯽ ﺷﺎم
اﭼﮭﯽ ﮔُذرے 
hello (on the telephone) ﮨﯾﻠو  
help! ﮐوﺋﯽ ﮨﮯ   ،  ﺑﭼﺎؤ 
I beg your pardon? Pardon? ﻣﻌﺎﻓﯽ ﭼﺎﮨﺗﺎ /ﭼﺎﮨﺗﯽ ﮨوں 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
122 
 
Social conventions (cont) 
 
It’s a pleasure ﯾہ ﻣﯾرے ﻟﯾﮯ ﺑﺎﻋث ﻣﺳرت ﮨﮯ  
meeting; meeting place ﻣُﻼﻗﺎت  
meet you at 6 o’clock ﭼﮭ ﺑﺟﮯ ﻣﻠﯾں ﮔﮯ 
no thank you ﻧﮩﯾں ﺷُﮑرﯾہ 
of course ﺑﺎﻟﮑل 
please (request - formal) ﺑراﺋﮯ ﻣﮩرﺑﺎﻧﯽ 
please (informal) please (polite) ﺑراﺋﮯ ﻣﮩرﺑﺎﻧﯽ 
see you later  ﺑﻌد ﻣﯾں    / ﭘِﮭرﻣﻠﯾں ﮔﮯ 
see you soon ﺟﻠدﮨﯽ ﻣﻠﯾں ﮔﮯ 
see you tomorrow/on Friday ﮐل ﻣﻠﯾں ﮔﮯ/ ﺟُﻣﻌہ ﮐو 
sorry ﺳوری/ اﻓﺳوس 
I’m) sorry (informal/formal) ﻣﯾں ﺷرﻣﻧده ﮨوں 
thank you (very much) ﺑُﮩت ﺑُﮩت ﺷﮑرﯾہ 
Language used in dialogues and messages 
address ﭘﺗہ  
area code اﯾرﯾﺎ ﮐوڈ 
call me (informal/formal) ﻣﺟﮭﮯ ﻓون ﮐرﯾں 
dial the number ﯾہ ﻧﻣﺑر ﻣﻼؤ 
email ای۔ ﻣﯾل 
for the attention of ﮐﯽ ﺗوﺟہ ﮐﮯ ﻟﯾﮯ  
further to/following ﻣزﯾد / ﻣﻧدرﺟہ زﯾل 
I will put you through ﻣﯾں آپ ﮐﺎ راﺑطہ ﮐرواﺗﺎ/ﮐرواﺗﯽ ﮨوں 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
123 
 
Language used in dialogues and messages (cont) 
I’ll be right back اﺑﮭﯽ آﺋﯽ/اﺑﮭﯽ آﯾﺎ 
I’m listening ﺳُن رﮨﺎ/رﮨﯽ ﮨوں 
message ﭘﯾﻐﺎم  
mobile phone ﻣوﺑﺎﺋل ﻓون 
moment اﯾﮏ ﻟﻣﺣہ 
online آن ﻻﺋن 
on the line/speaking ﻻﺋن ﭘر ﮨوں / ﺑول رﮨﺎ ﮨوں/ﺑول رﮨﯽ ﮨوں 
please repeat that ﺑراۓ ﻣﮩرﺑﺎﻧﯽ ﭘﮭر ﺳﮯ ﺑﺗﺎﯾﺋﮯ  
postcode ﭘوﺳٹ ﮐوڈ 
receiver (telephone) ﮢﯾﻠﯾﻔون 
sent by ۔۔۔ﮐﯽ ﺟﺎﻧب ﺳﮯ ﺑﮭﯾﺟﺎ ﮔﯾﺎ ﮨﮯ 
stay on the line اﻧﺗظﺎر ﮐﯾﺟﺋﮯ 
telephone ﮢﯾﻠﯽ ﻓون 
text message ﮢﯾﮑﺳٹ ﻣﯾﺳﺞ 
tone ﮢون 
voice mail واﺋس ﻣﯾل 
wait اِﻧﺗظﺎر ﮐﯾﺟﺋﮯ 
wrong number رَوﻧﮓ ﻧﻣﺑر 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
124 
 
Section 2 – Topic-specific vocabulary 
Identity and culture: daily life, food and drink, including eating out 
Foundation tier 
 
appetite اِﺷﺗﮩﺎ/ ﺑﮭُوک 
apple ﺳﯾب  
apricot ﺧُوﺑﺎﻧﯽ 
banana ﮐﯾﻼ 
bean ﭘﮭﻠﯽ 
beef ﮔﺎﺋﮯ ﮐﺎ ﮔوﺷت 
bill ﺑِل 
biryani ﺑِرﯾﺎﻧﯽ 
biscuit ﺑِﺳﮑٹ  
bottle ﺑوﺗل  
bread روﮢﯽ 
breakfast ﻧﺎﺷﺗہ 
butter ﻣﮑﮭن 
cabbage ﺑَﻧد ﮔوﺑﮭﯽ 
café ﮐﯾﻔﮯ 
cake ﮐﯾﮏ 
carrot ﮔﺎﺟر  
cauliflower ﭘﮭول ﮔوﺑﮭﯽ 
cereals ﺳﯾرﯾﻠز 
cheese ﭘﻧﯾر 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
125 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
cherry ﭼﯾری 
chicken ﻣرُﻏﯽ/ ﻣرُﻏﺎ 
chips ﭼِﭘس  
chocolate ﭼﺎﮐﻠﯾٹ 
choice ﭘﺳﻧد 
chop (e.g. pork/lamb) ﭼﺎﻧپ  
closed (on Mondays) ﺑَﻧد  
cocoa ﮐوﮐو 
coffee ﮐﺎﻓﯽ  
cooked, boiled ﭘﮑﺎ ﮨُوا/اﺑﻼ ﮨُوا 
cream ﻣﻼﺋﯽ/ﮐرﯾم 
cucumber ﮐﮭِﯾرا 
cup ﭘﯾِﺎﻟہ 
customer ﮔﺎﮨﮏ 
delicious ﻟذﯾذ 
dessert ﻣِﯾﮢﮭﺎ 
dining room ﮐﮭﺎﻧﮯ ﮐﺎ ﮐﻣره 
dinner ﮐﮭﺎﻧﺎ 
dish of the day آج ﮐﺎ ﺳﭘﯾﺷل 
egg اَﻧڈا  
enjoy your meal! ﮐﮭﺎﻧﮯ ﺳﮯ ﻟطف اُﮢﮭﺎﺋﯾﮯ 
entertainment ﺗﻔرﯾﺢ/ ﮐﮭﯾل 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
126 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
evening meal, dinner رات ﮐﺎ ﮐﮭﺎﻧﺎ 
fish ﻣﭼﮭﻠﯽ  
food ﺧَوراک  
food ﮐﮭﺎﻧﺎ 
food shopping ﺳودا ﺳﻠف 
fork ﮐﺎﻧﮢﺎ 
fruit ﭘَﮭل 
fruit pie ﻓروٹ ﭘﺎئ 
fruit juice ﭘﮭﻠوں ﮐﺎ رس 
glass ﮔﻼس 
grapefruit ﭼﮑوﺗرا  
grapes اﻧﮕور 
green beans   ﺳﺑز ﭘﮭﻠﯾﺎں 
hot chocolate ﮨﺎٹ ﭼوﮐﻠﯾٹ 
ice cream آﺋس ﮐرﯾم 
ice-cream parlour آﺋس ﮐرﯾم ﭘﺎرﻟر 
inn (traditional) ﺳراۓ 
jar ﺟﺎر  
jam ﻣرُﺑہ 
juice رَس 
kebab ﮐﺑَﺎب 
knife ﭼُﮭری  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
127 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
lamb, sheep دُﻧﺑہ، ﺑﮭﯾڑ 
lemon ﻟِﯾﻣوں 
lemonade ﻟَﯾﻣوﻧﯾڈ 
lettuce, salad ﺳَﻼد ﮐﮯ ﭘﺗﮯ 
lunch دوﭘﮩر ﮐﺎ ﮐﮭﺎﻧﺎ 
main course ﻣﯾن ﮐورس 
margarine ﻣﺎرﺟرﯾن 
meal ﮐﮭﺎﻧﺎ 
meat ﮔوﺷت 
meatball ﮐوﻓﺗﮯ 
melon ﺗرﺑوُز  
menu ﻣﯾﻧﯾو 
milk دُودھ 
mince ﻗِﯾﻣہ 
mineral water ﻣﻌدﻧﯽ ﭘﺎﻧﯽ 
mixed ﻣرﮐب  
money ﭘﯾَﺳﮯ  
mustard ﺳرَﺳوں 
napkin رُوﻣﺎل  
nutrious food ﻏذاﺋﯾت ﺑﺧش /ﺻﺣﺗﻣﻧد  ﺧوراک  
oil ﺗﯾل  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
128 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
onion ﭘِﯾﺎز 
omelette آﻣﻠﯾٹ 
orange ﻣﺎﻟﮢﺎ 
packet ﭘﯾﮑٹ  
pasta ﭘﺎﺳﺗﺎ 
pastries ﭘﯾﺳﮢرﯾﺎں 
peas ﻣﮢر 
peach آڑُو 
pear ﻧﺎﺷﭘﺎﺗﯽ 
pizza ﭘِﯾزا 
pepper ﮐﺎﻟﯽ ﻣرچ 
pepper (vegetable) ﺷِﻣﻠہ ﻣرچ/ ﭘﮩﺎڑی ﻣرچ 
piece/slice of bread (with butter/jam  ڈﺑل روﮢﯽ ﮐﺎ ﮢﮑڑاﻣﮑﮭن /ﺟﺎم 
ﮐﮯﺳﺎﺗﮭ( 
pineapple اَﻧﻧﺎس 
pizzeria, pizza restaurant ﭘزﯾرﯾﺎ /   ﭘﯾزا رﯾﺳﮢو راﻧٹ 
place setting ﻣﯾز ﭘر ﺑرﺗن ﻟﮕﺎﻧﺎ 
plate رُﮐﺎﺑﯽ  
plum آﻟوُ ﺑﺧُﺎرا  
portion ﺣِﺻہ  
pot of coffee ﮐﺎﻓﯽ ﮐﯽ ﭼﯾﻧﮏ 
potato آﻟوُ 
prepared food/ready meal ﺗﯾﺎر ﮐﮭﺎﻧﺎ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
129 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
radish ﻣوُﻟﯽ  
raspberry رَس ﺑﮭری  
restaurant رﯾﺳﮢورا   ﻧٹ  
rice ﭼﺎول  
roast ﺑُﮭﻧﺎ 
rupee رُوﭘﯾہ 
roll (bread) ڈﺑل روﮢﯽ ﮐﺎ رول 
salt ﻧﻣﮏ 
salty/savoury ﻧﻣِﮑﯾن /ﭼٹ ﭘﮢﯽ 
salad dressing ﺳﻼد ڈرﯾﺳﻧﮓ  
samosa ﺳﻣوﺳہ 
sandwich ﺳﯾﻧڈوچ 
self-service ﺳﯾﻠف ﺳروس / اَﭘﻧﯽ ﻣدد آپ 
service ﺧِدﻣت  
slice ﮢُﮑڑا 
snack ﮨﻠﮑﺎ ﻧﺎﺷﺗہ / ﺳﻧﯾﮏ 
snack bar ﺳﻧﯾﮏ ﺑﺎر 
snails ﮔﮭوﻧﮕﮭﺎ 
soup ﯾﺧﻧﯽ 
speciality ﺧﺎص ﭼِﯾز 
spoon ﭼﻣَﭼہ  
starter ﺳﮢﺎرﮢر 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
130 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
strawberry ﺳَﮢراﺑری 
steak ﺳﮢﯾﮏ 
sweet ﻣِﯾﮢﮭﺎ 
sugar ﭼِﯾﻧﯽ /ﺷﮑّر  
table ﻣﯾز 
table cloth ﻣﯾزﭘوش 
tasty ذاﺋﻘہ دار 
tea ﭼﺎۓ  
tea-time snack ﭼﺎۓ ﮐﮯ ﻟوازﻣﺎت  
teaspoon ﭼﺎۓ ﮐﺎ ﭼﻣﭼہ  
to order آرڈر دﯾﻧﺎ 
tip ﮢِپ   ۔ ﺑﺧﺷش 
to pay ﭘﯾﺳﮯ دﯾﻧﺎ 
to serve ﺧِدﻣت ﮐرﻧﺎ  
to taste ذاﺋﻘہ ﭼﮑﮭﻧﺎ 
to wait at table, to serve 
ﺳروس ﮐﮯ ﻟﯾﮯ ﻣﯾز ﭘر اِﻧﺗظﺎر  
ﮐرﻧﺎ 
tomato ﮢﻣﺎﮢر 
vanilla وﻧﯾِﻼ 
vegetable ﺳﺑزی  
vegetarian ﺳﺑزی ﺧور 
vinegar ﺳرِﮐہ  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
131 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
waiter/waitress وﯾﮢر/ وﯾﮢرس/ ﺑﯾرا 
water ﭘﺎﻧﯽ 
wine اﻧﮕوُر ﮐﯽ ﺷراب  
yoghurt دَﮨﯽ 
Higher tier 
 
appetising ﺑﮭُوک ﭼﻣﮑﺎﻧﮯ /ﺑڑھﺎﻧﮯواﻻ 
bitter ﮐڑوا 
boiled egg; hard-boiled egg ﺳﺧت اُﺑﻼ ﮨوا  اﻧڈا 
cucumber ﮐﮭِﯾرا 
duck ﻣرُﻏﺎﺑﯽ 
fried egg ﺗﻼ ﮨوا اﻧڈا 
garlic ﻟِﮩﺳن 
goat’s cheese ﺑﮑری ﮐﺎ ﭘﻧﯾر 
gravy ﺷورﺑہ 
homemade ﮔﮭر ﮐﺎ ﺑﻧﺎﮨُوا  
honey ﺷِﮩد  
lettuce ﺳﻼد ﮐﮯ ﭘﺗﮯ 
loaf (of bread) ڈَﺑل روﮢﯽ 
noodles ﻧُوڈﻟز  
organic food 
)ﮐﯾﻣﯾﺎﺋﯽ ﮐﮭﺎد ﮐﮯ ﺑﻐﯾر اُﮔﻧﮯ
واﻟﯽ( ﺻﺣت ﺑﺧش ﺧوراک 
balanced diet ﻣﺗوازن ﻏذا 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
132 
 
Higher tier (cont) 
 
pistachio ﭘِﺳﺗہ  
rare (steak) ﺳﮢﯾﮏ ﮐﯽ اﯾﮏ ﻗﺳم 
raw ﮐﭼﺎ  
raw vegetables starter ﮐﭼﯽ ﺳﺑزﯾوں ﮐﺎ ﺳﮢﺎرﮢر 
salmon ﺳﯾﻠﻣن ﻣﭼﮭﻠﯽ 
saucer ﭘِرچ 
smoked دُھوﺋﯾں ﺳﮯ ﭘﮑﺎ ﯾﺎ ﮔﯾﺎ 
spicy ﻣﺻﺎﻟﺣہ دار 
spinach ﭘﺎﻟﮏ 
steamed (boiled) ﺑﮭﺎپ ﺳﮯ ﭘﮑﯽ ﮨُوﺋﯽ 
supper رات ﮐﺎ ﮐﮭﺎﻧﺎ 
sweet ﻣِﯾﮢﮭﺎ 
tasty ﻟذِﯾذ 
tea ﭼﺎﺋﮯ 
veal ﺑﭼﮭڑے ﮐﺎ ﮔوﺷت 
vegetable ﺳﺑزی  
water ﭘﺎﻧﯽ 
well cooked ﭘُورا ﭘﮑﺎ ﮨُوا 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
133 
 
Identity and culture – what my friends and family are like  
Words relating to dress and style  
Foundation tier 
 
article ﭼِﯾز  
article/essay ﻣﺿﻣوُن  
belt ﭘﯾﮢﯽ 
boots ﺑوُٹ  
boxer shorts ﺑوﮐﺳرﺷﺎﮢس 
bra اﻧﮕﯾﺎ 
bracelet ﮐﻧﮕن 
cap ﮢوﭘﯽ  
casual jacket ﮨر ﻣوﻗﻊ ﭘر ﭘﮩﻧﻧﮯ واﻟﯽ ﺟﯾﮑٹ 
changing room ﮐﭘڑے  ﺗﺑدﯾل ﮐرﻧﮯ ﮐﺎ ﮐﻣره 
clothes ﮐﭘڑے 
clothes (familiar – i.e. gear) ﮐﭘڑے 
clothes shop ﮐﭘڑوں ﮐﯽ دﮐﺎن 
coat/overcoat ﮐوٹ / اوور ﮐوٹ 
cotton (made of cotton) ﺳوُﺗﯽ  
cotton wool رُوﺋﯽ 
dress ﻟِﺑﺎس 
dressed in ﻣﻠﺑوس 
earring ﺑﺎﻟﯽ/ﺑﺎﻟﯾﺎں 
fashion ﻓﯾﺷن 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
134 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
fashionable ﻓﯾﺷن اﯾﺑل 
fitting room ﻓﮢﻧﮓ روم 
glove دﺳﺗﺎﻧہ 
handbag ﮨﯾﻧڈ ﺑﯾﮓ 
hat ﮢوﭘﯽ  
it fits/suits you 
آپ ﭘر اﭼﮭﺎ ﻟﮕﺗﺎ ﮨﮯ/آپ ﭘر
اﭼﮭﯽ ﻟﮕﺗﯽ ﮨﮯ / ﺟﭼﺗﺎ  ﮨﮯ  
jacket ﺟﯾﮑٹ 
jeans ﺟﯾﻧز 
jeweller’s (shop); jewellery (craft) زﯾورات ﮐﯽ دﮐﺎن 
jewels ﺟواﮨرات / زﯾورات 
leather/made of leather ﭼﻣڑه/ ﭼﻣڑے ﮐﺎ ﺑﻧﺎ ﮨُوا 
linen (made of linen) ﮐﺗﺎن ﮐﯽ ﭼﺎدرﯾں 
lipstick ﺳُرﺧﯽ  
loose (i.e. too big) ڈِھﯾﻼ  
make, brand ﻣﺎرﮐہ/ﺑراﻧڈ 
makeup ﺳُرﺧﯽ ﭘﺎؤڈر 
medium (size) درﻣﯾﺎﻧہ 
necklace ﮨﺎر 
nightdress رات ﮐو ﺳوﻧﮯ ﮐﮯ ﮐﭘڑے 
old fashioned ﭘُراﻧﯽ وﺿﻊ ﮐﺎ 
old fashioned (vintage, retro style) ﭘُراﻧﯽ وﺿﻊ ﮐﺎ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
135 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
pants, briefs ﺟﺎﻧﮕﯾہ 
perfume ﺧُوﺷﺑوُ/ﻋِطر  
polo shirt ﭘوﻟو ﺷرٹ 
pyjamas ﭘﺎﺟﺎﻣہ 
ring اﻧﮕوُﮢﮭﯽ  
scarf ﺳﮑﺎرف 
shirt ﻗﻣِﯾص 
shoe ﺟُوﺗﺎ 
shoe shop ﺟُوﺗوں ﮐﯽ دﮐﺎن 
shorts ﻧِﯾﮑر 
size (general); shoe size ﻧﺎپ 
skirt ﺳﮑرٹ 
slipper ﭼﭘل 
small ﭼﮭوﮢﺎ 
smart ﺳﻣﺎرٹ 
sock ﻣوزه 
sports kit ﺳﭘورﮢس  ﮐٹ  
sports shirt ﺳﭘورﮢس ﮐﯽ ﻗﻣﯾض  
spotted ﺳﭘوﮢڈ/ دھﺑﮯ دار 
striped دھﺎری دار 
suit ﺳوٹ  
style اﻧداز 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
136 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
sweater, jumper ﺳوﺋﯾﮢر 
swimming costume/trunks ﺗﯾراﮐﯽ ﮐﺎ ﻟﺑﺎس 
tattoo ﮢﯾﮢوُ 
tee shirt ﮢﯽ ﺷرٹ 
tie ﮢﺎﺋﯽ 
tracksuit ﮢرﯾﮏ ﺳوٹ 
trainers ﮢرﯾﻧرز 
trousers ﭘﺗﻠون 
umbrella ﭼﮭَﺗری 
watch ﮔﮭڑی 
wool (woollen) اُون )اُوﻧﯽ 
 
Words relating to dress and style 
 
Higher tier 
 
cap/hat ﮢوﭘﯽ  
cardigan ﺳوﯾﮢر 
dressing gown ڈرﯾﺳﻧﮓ ﮔﺎؤن 
dyed رﻧﮕﺎ ﮨُوا 
model ﻣﺎڈل 
silk (made of silk) رﯾﺷم ) رﯾﺷم ﮐﺎ ﺑﻧﺎ  ﮨُوا  رﯾﺷﻣﯽ  
slippers ﭼﭘل 
tight ﺗﻧﮓ  
to have one’s hair cut ﺑﺎل ﮐﮢواﻧﺎ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
137 
 
Higher tier (cont) 
 
to have one’s hair done ﺑﺎل ﺑﻧواﻧﺎ 
velvet (made of velvet) ﻣﺧﻣل) ﻣﺧﻣل ﮐﺎ ﺑﻧﺎ ﮨُوا 
Words on relations, relationships, personal and physical 
characteristics 
Foundation tier 
 
adolescent ﻋُﻧﻔوان ﺷﺑﺎب 
adult, grown-up ﺑﺎﻟﻎِ  
adventurous ﺟِﯾﺎﻻ، ﺟﺎن ﺑﺎز  
age ﻋُﻣر 
alone ﺗﻧﮩﺎ 
armchair آرام ﮐرﺳﯽ 
at home; at my/our house ﮔﮭر ﭘر 
aunt 
ﺧﺎﻟہ، ﭘﮭوﭘﮭﯽ ، ﭼﭼﯽ، ﻣﻣﺎﻧﯽ، 
ﺗﺎﺋﯽ 
baby ﺑﭼہ/ ﺑﭼﯽ 
bald ﮔﻧﺟﺎ/ﮔﻧﺟﯽ 
bathroom ﻏﺳل ﺧﺎﻧہ 
beard داڑھﯽ   
bearded داڑھﯽ واﻻ 
beautiful ﺧوﺑﺻورت 
bedroom ﺳوﻧﮯ ﮐﺎ ﮐﻣره /ﺧواب ﮔﺎه  
birth ﭘﯾداﺋش 
date of) birth ﺗﺎرﯾﺦ ﭘﯾداﺋش 
birthday ﺳﺎﻟﮕره 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
138 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
birthplace ﻣﻘﺎم ﭘﯾداﺋش 
block (of flats) ﻓﻠﯾﮢس ﮐﺎ ﺑﻼک 
born ﭘَﯾدا  
bossy رُﻋب ڈاﻟﻧﮯ واﻻ رﻋب دار 
body piercing 
ﺟﺳم ﻣﯾں ) ﻧﺎک ﮐﺎن ( ﻣﯾں
ﺳوراخ ﮐرﻧﺎ 
boy ﻟڑﮐﺎ  
brother ﺑﮭﺎﺋﯽ 
brother-in-law/sister-in-law 
دﯾور،  ﺑﮩﻧوﺋﯽ، ﺳﺎﻻدﯾوراﻧﯽ،  
ﺑﮭﺎﺑﮭﯽ،   ﻧﻧد، ﺳﺎﻟﯽ 
brothers and sisters, siblings ﺑِﮩن ﺑﮭﺎﺋﯽ 
cat ِﻼ ،ﺑِﻠﯽ
ﺑ
 
celebrity ﻣﺷﮩوُر ﺷَﺧﺻﯾت  
chair ﮐرُﺳﯽ 
character ﮐِردار 
character, personality ﮐِردار، ﺷﺧﺻﯾت 
charming دِﻟﮑش 
chatty ﺑﺎﺗُوﻧﯽ 
child ﺑﭼہ 
clothes ﮐﭘڑے 
comfortable (house, furniture) آرام ده 
cousin 
ﮐزن،ﻣﺎﻣوں/ﺧﺎﻟہ/ﭘﮭوﭘﮭﯽ/ﺗﺎﯾﺎ/  
ﭼﭼﺎ زاد  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
139 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
curly ﮔﮭوﻧﮕﮭرﯾﺎﻟﮯ 
dad  اﺑﺎ/اﺑو/ﭘﺎﭘﺎ/ ڈﯾڈ/اﺑﯽ/ﺑﺎﺑﺎ ﺟﺎن  
daughter ﺑﯾﮢﯽ 
dead ﻣرده 
dining room ﮐﮭﺎﻧﮯ ﮐﺎ ﮐﻣره 
divorced طﻼق ﺷُده 
elderly ﺑزرگ 
engaged ﻣﻧﮕﻧﯽ ﮨوﻧﺎ 
eyes آﻧﮑﮭﯾں 
face ﭼﮩره 
family ﺧﺎﻧدان 
famous ﻣﺷﮩور 
father وا ﻟدِ 
feeling اِﺣﺳﺎس  
first name ﭘِﮩﻼ ﻧﺎم 
flat; apartment ﻓﻠﯾٹ 
friend/s(m/f) دوﺳت   
friend/s (f) ﺳﮩﯾﻠﯽ 
friendly دوﺳﺗﺎﻧہ 
friendship دوﺳﺗﯽ 
furniture ﻓرﻧِﯾﭼر  
garden ﺑﺎغ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
140 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
garage ﮔﯾراج  
girl ﻟڑﮐﯽ 
glasses/spectacles ﻋﯾﻧﮏ / ﭼﺷﻣہ 
goldfish ﺳﻧُﮩری ﻣﭼﮭﻠﯽ 
grandchild ﻧواﺳﺎ،ﻧواﺳﯽ،ﭘوﺗﺎ،ﭘوﺗﯽ 
grandfather دادا،ﻧﺎﻧﺎ 
grandmother دادای،ﻧﺎﻧﯽ 
grandparents ﻧﺎﻧﺎ،ﻧﺎﻧﯽ، دادا، دادی 
hair ﺑﺎل 
half (half-sister etc) ﺳوﺗﯾﻼ 
house ﻣﮑﺎن  
husband ﺷوَﮨ ر/ﺧﺎوﻧد  
identity ﭘِﮩﭼﺎن / ﺷﻧَﺎﺧت 
in love ﻣﺣﺑت ﮐرﻧﺎ 
intelligent ذﮨﯾن 
interests/hobbies ﺷوق / ﻣﺷﻐﻠﮯ، ﻣﺷﺎﻏل  
invitation ﺑُﻼوه / دَﻋوت 
issue ﻣﺳﺋﻠہ 
kitchen ﺑﺎوَرﭼﯽ ﺧﺎﻧہ  
kiss ﺑوﺳہ  
life زِﻧدﮔﯽ  
lively زِﻧده دل /ﺧوش ﺑﺎش  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
141 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
living room, front room ﺑﯾﮢﮭﻧﮯ ﮐﺎ ﮐﻣره 
loft ﺑﺎﻻ ﺧﺎﻧہ 
lounge ﻻؤﻧﺞ 
man ﻣرَد  
married ﺷﺎدی ﺷُده 
mean, nasty ﮐﻣﯾِﻧہ 
member of the family ﺧﺎﻧدان ﮐﺎ ﻓرد 
mood ﻣزاج  
mother واﻟده / ﻣﺎں  
moustache ﻣوُﻧﭼﮭ  
mouth ﻣُﻧہ 
mum ﻣم / اﻣﯽ 
naughty ﺷرﯾر 
neighbour ﮨﻣﺳﺎﯾہ 
nephew ﺑﮭﺎﻧﺟﺎ،ﺑﮭﺗﯾِﺟﺎ 
nice, kind ﺧوُش اِﺧﻼق، ﻣﮩرﺑﺎن  
nice, likeable اﭼﮭﺎ، ﭘﺳﻧدﯾده 
nickname 
ﭘﯾﺎر ﺳﮯ دﯾﺎﮔﯾﺎ دوﺳرا اور 
ﭼﮭوﮢﺎ ﻧﺎم 
niece ﺑﮭﺎﻧﺟﯽ،ﺑﮭﺗﯾﺟﯽ 
normal ﻋﺎم 
old ﭘُراﻧﺎ 
old fashioned ﭘُراﻧﯽ وﺿﻊ ﮐﺎ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
142 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
older ﺳﮯ ﺑڑا  
oldest (brother/sister) ﺳب ﺳﮯ ﺑڑا/ ﺳب ﺳﮯ ﺑڑی 
only child واﺣد ﺑﭼہ/ﺑﭼﯽ/اﮐﻠوﺗﺎ/اﮐﻠوﺗﯽ 
parents واﻟدﯾن 
party دﻋوت 
party 
 ﭘﺎرﮢﯽ ) ﻣل ﺟل ﮐر ﮐﺎم
ﮐرﻧﯾواﻟﯽ( 
penfriend ﻗﻠﻣﯽ دوﺳت 
people ﻟوگ   
person ﻓرد 
pet ﭘﺎﻟﺗوُ 
place of residence ﻣﻘﺎمِ رﮨﺎﺋش 
present; gift ﺗُﺣﻔہ  
public ﻋوام  
rabbit ﺧَرﮔوش 
reasonable ﻣُﻧﺎﺳب 
relationship/s ﺗﻌﻠﻖ  / ﺗﻌﻠﻘﺎت 
religion ﻣذﮨب 
self (myself, yourself etc) ﺧوُد، )ﻣﯾں،آپ 
selfish ﺧُود ﻏرض 
sense of humour ذوقِ ظراﻓت /ﺣسِ ﻣزاح  
separated ﻋﻠﯾٰﺣده 
serious ﺳﻧﺟِﯾده 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
143 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
single/unmarried ﻏﯾر ﺷﺎدی ﺷُده 
sister ﺑﮩن 
socialising ﻣﯾل ﺟول  / ﻣﯾل ﻣِﻼپ 
sofa; settee ﺻوﻓہ 
son ﺑﯾﮢﺎ 
son-in-law/daughter-in-law داﻣﺎد/ ﺑﮩوُ 
step (members of family)  ﺳوﺗﯾﻼ /ﺳوﺗﯾﻠﯽ 
straight (hair)  ﺳﯾدھﮯ ﺑﺎل 
study (room) ﭘڑھﻧﮯ ﮐﺎ ﮐﻣره 
surname ﺧﺎﻧداﻧﯽ ﻧﺎم 
teamwork ◌ 
tidy; neat ﺻﺎف ﺳُﺗﮭرا 
twin ﺟُڑواں/ﺗوام 
to annoy ﻧﺎراض/ﺗﻧﮓ ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to argue, to quarrel ﺑﺣث ﮐرﻧﺎ ، ﺟﮭﮕڑا ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to babysit ﺑﮯ ﺑﯽ ﺳﮢﻧﮓ 
to be called ﺑُﻼوه 
to be in a good/bad mood ﺧُوش / ﻧﺎﺧُوش ﮨوﻧﺎ 
to care for, to look after دﯾﮑﮭ ﺑﮭﺎل ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to celebrate ﻣَﻧﺎﻧﺎ 
to chat, chatter ﺑﺎﺗﯾں ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to get/give divorced طَﻼق  ﮨوﺟﺎﻧﺎ/ ﻟﯾﻧﺎ/ دﯾﻧﺎ  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
144 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
to get on (well) with ﮔﮭل    ﻣل ﺟﺎﻧﺎ 
to look (e.g. angry/happy etc)  ﻧظر آﻧﺎ 
to respect اِﺣﺗرام ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to separate, to split up ﻋﻠﯾٰﺣده  ﮨوﻧﺎ 
twin ﺟُڑواں 
twin brothers ﺟُڑواں ﺑﮭﺎﺋﯽ 
ugly ﺑَدﺻورت 
uncle ﭼﭼﺎ، ﻣﺎﻣوں، ﺗﺎﯾﺎ،  ﭘﮭوﭘﮭﺎ، ﺧﺎﻟوُ  
unemployed ﺑﮯروزﮔﺎر 
unbearable ﻧﺎﻗﺎﺑل ﺑرداﺷت 
untidy ﻣﯾﻼ ﮐﭼﯾﻼ ،  ﮔﻧده  ، ﺑﮯ ﺗرﺗﯾب  
visit ﻣﻼﻗﺎت 
well behaved ﺑﺎاﺧﻼق/ﺑﺎ ﺗﻣﯾز/ ﻣودب   
wife, woman ﺑﯾوی ، ﻋورت 
young, younger ﻧوﺟوان، ﮐم ﻋُﻣر، ﭼﮭوﮢﺎ/ﭼﮭوﮢﯽ 
youth (i.e the time of life) ﺟواﻧﯽ ، ﻧوﺟوان 
 
Higher tier  
 
a good deed ﻧﯾﮏ ﮐﺎم 
acquaintance    ﺷﻧﺎﺳﺎ 
adopted ﻟﮯﭘﺎﻟﮏ 
adventurous ﺟِﯾﺎﻻ /ﻣﮩم  ﺟُو  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
145 
 
Higher tier (cont) 
 
annoying 
ﻏُﺻہ دِﻻﻧﮯ واﻻ 
 ﺗﻧﮓ ﮐرﻧﮯ واﻻ  
argument ﺑﺣث 
career ﻣﻌَﺎش 
character trait ﮐِردار ﮐﺎ ﺧﺎﺻہ 
cheeky ﺷوخ 
comfortable (at ease) ﻣطﻣﺋن 
conceited ﺧُود ﭘﺳﻧد 
depressed اُداس / ﻣﺎﯾوس  
discrimination اِﻣﺗﯾﺎز 
faith (religious) ﻋﻘِﯾده 
fiancé(e) ﻣﻧﮕﯾﺗر 
furnished ﻓرﻧِﯾﭼر ﺳﮯ آراﺳﺗہ 
gang ﮔروه 
gender, sex ﺟِﻧس / ﺻﻧف 
generous ﺳﺧﯽ 
hall (in house); lobby ﮨﺎل، ﺑڑا ﮐﻣره 
identical twins ﮨم ﺷﮑل ﺟُڑواں 
independent ﺧُودﻣﺧﺗُﺎر  
jealous ﺣﺎﺳدِ 
loyal, faithful وﻓﺎدار 
mad, crazy دِﯾواﻧہ  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
146 
 
Higher tier (cont) 
 
meeting ﻣﻼُﻗﺎت  
multicultural ﮐﺛِﯾراﻟﺛﻘﺎﻓﺗﯽ 
old age/third age ﺑُڑھﺎﭘﺎ 
pensioner, senior citizen  ﭘِﻧﺷ ن ﯾﺎﻓﺗہ، ﺳﯾﻧﺋر ﺳﮢﯾزن  
pretentious ﺗﺻﻧﻊُ   آﻣﯾز 
priest ﭘﺎدری 
racial ﻧﺳﻠﯽ 
racism  ﻧَﺳﻠﯽ اِﻣﺗﯾﺎز 
relationship ﺗﻌﻠﻖ 
relative, relation رِﺷﺗہ دار 
reliable ﻗﺎﺑل ِاﻋﺗﺑﺎر /ﻗﺎﺑِل اِﻋﺗﻣﺎد 
self-confident ﺧُود اِﻋﺗﻣﺎد 
sensitive ﺣِﺳﺎس  
sexist ﺻِﻧﻔﯽ اﻣﺗﯾﺎز  
similar ﻣﺷُﺎﺑہ 
single parent اﮐﯾﻠﯽ واﻟده/ اﮐﯾﻼ واﻟد 
single person; single اﮐﯾﻼ ﻓرد 
spoilt ﺑِﮕڑا ﮨوا 
spot, pimple ﭘِﮭﻧﺳﯽ 
stubborn ﺿدی  
study; research ﺗِﺣﻘِﯾﻖ 
to experience ﺗَﺟرﺑہ ﮐرﻧﺎ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
147 
 
Higher tier (cont) 
 
to pick on, to harass, to bully 
ﭼﮭﯾڑﻧﺎ، ﮨراﺳﺎں ﮐرﻧﺎ،ڈراﻧﺎ 
دھﻣﮑﺎﻧﺎ 
to resemble/look like ﻣﺷﺎﺑہ 
to support ﺣﻣﺎﯾت ﮐرﻧﺎ 
underage ﮐم ﻋُﻣر 
understanding ﺗﻔﮩِﯾم/ﺳﻣﺟﮭ ﺑُوﺟﮭ  
well balanced ﺧوُب ﻣِﺗوازن  
Identity and culture: cultural life 
 
Foundation tier 
 
activity ﺳرَﮔرﻣﯽ 
advantage/s ﻓﺎﺋده /ﻓواﺋد، ﻣُﻔﺎد/ﻣُﻔﺎدات 
adventure film ﻣُﮩمِ ﺟوُﺋﯽ  ﮐﯽ /ﻣﮩﻣﺎﺗﯽ  ﻓﻠم 
athletics اﺗﮭﻠﯾﮢﮑس /ﮐﮭﯾل 
badminton ﺑﯾڈ ﻣﻧﮢن 
ball ﮔﯾﻧد 
band/group ﺑﯾﻧڈ ﮔروپ 
basketball ﺑﺎﺳﮑٹ ﺑﺎل 
book ﮐﺗﺎب 
boring اﮐﺗﺎ دﯾﻧﮯ واﻟﯽ 
boxing ﺑﺎﮐﺳﻧﮓ /ﻣُﮑہ ﺑﺎزی 
bridegroom دُوﻟﮩﺎ 
camera ﮐﯾﻣره 
canoeing ﮐﺷﺗﯽ راﻧﯽ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
148 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
cartoon ﮐﺎرﮢُون 
cat ِّﻠﯽ/ ﺑِﻼّ
ﺑ
 
CD (compact disc) ﺳﯽ ڈی 
celebration, party ﺗﻘرﯾب   ، دﻋوت 
changing rooms ﮐﭘڑے ﺑدﻟﻧﮯ ﮐﮯ ﮐﻣرے 
chess ﺷطرﻧﺞ 
Christmas ﮐرِﺳﻣس  
civilization ﺗﮩذﯾب/ﺗﻣدن 
clarinet اﻟﻐوزه 
classical, classic ﮐﻼﺳﯾﮑﯽ 
climbing/rock climbing ﭼڑھﻧﺎ 
club ﮐﻠب 
collection ﻣﺟﻣوُﻋہ  
comic (magazine) ﮐوﻣﮏ / ﻣذاﺣﯾہ   
competition ﻣُﻘﺎﺑﻠہ  
computer game ﮐﻣﭘﯾُوﮢر ﮔﯾم 
concert 
ﻧﻐﻣہ وﺳﺎز ﮐﯽ ﻣﺣﻔل / ﻣﺣﻔلِ
ﻣوﺳﯾﻘﯽ /ﮐﻧﺳرٹ  
cultural life ﺛِﻘﺎﻓﺗﯽ زﻧدﮔﯽ 
cultural ﺛِﻘﺎﻓﺗﯽ 
culture ﺛِﻘﺎﻓت 
cultured ﺧوش ذوق، ﺷﺎﺋﺳﺗہ 
customs/traditions رِواج / رِوا ﯾت 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
149 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
traditional رِواﯾﺗﯽ  
cycling ﺳﺎﺋﯾﮑل ﭼﻼﻧﺎ 
daily life 
روزﻣره ﮐﯽ زﻧدﮔﯽ /روزﻣره
ﮐﮯ ﻣﻌﻣوﻻت  
dance/dancing ﻧﺎچ / ﻧﺎﭼﻧﺎ 
detective/police (story)  ﺟﺎﺳوس ﭘوﻟﯾس )ﮐﮩﺎﻧﯽ( 
disadvantage/s ﻧﻘﺻﺎن۔ﻧﻘﺻﺎﻧﺎت 
disco (place) ڈﺳﮑو  
documentary دَﺳﺗﺎوﯾزی 
drums ڈھول  
Easter اِﯾﺳﮢر 
engagement ﻣﻧﮕﻧﯽ 
entertainment ﺗﻔرِﯾﺢ  
episode واﻗﻌہ، ﻗﺻہ، ﻗِﺳط 
equipment ﺳﺎز و ﺳﺎﻣﺎن 
extreme sports اﻧﺗﮩﺎﺋﯽ ﮐﮭﯾل 
everyday life ﮨر روز ﮐﯽ زﻧدﮔﯽ /روز ﻣره  
fan/fans ﺣﻣﺎﯾﺗﯽ/ﺷﺎﺋﯾﻘﯾن/ﻣﺗواﻻ 
fantasy film ﺗﺻوراﺗﯽ ﻓﻠم 
festival ﺟﺷن 
fete/fair/carnival ﻣﯾﻠہ 
film ﻓِﻠم 
flute ﺑﺎﻧﺳری 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
150 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
folk music ﻟوک ﻣوﺳﯾﻘﯽ 
food and drink ﮐﮭﺎﻧﺎ ﭘﯾﻧﺎ  /  ﺧور  و ﻧوش 
football ﻓُٹ ﺑﺎل 
free time ﻓﺎرغ وﻗت 
game ﮐﮭﯾل 
games console ﮔﯾﻣز ﮐﻧﺳول 
Good Friday ﮔڈ ﻓراﺋڈے 
guitar ﮔﮢِﺎر 
gymnastics ﺟﻣﻧﺎﺳﮢﮏ 
handball ﮨﯾﻧڈﺑﺎل 
Happy birthday!  ﺳﺎﻟﮕره ﻣُﺑﺎرک 
Happy New Year! ﻧﯾﺎ ﺳﺎل ﻣُﺑﺎرک 
hobby; leisure activity ﺗﻔرِﯾﺣﯽ ﻣﺷﻐﻠہ  
hockey ﮨﺎﮐﯽ 
horror film ڈراؤﻧﯽ ﻓﻠم 
ice skating آﺋﯾس ﺳﮑﯾﮢﻧﮓ 
judo ﺟُوڈو 
karate ﮐِراﮢﮯ 
keyboard ﮐﯽ ﺑورڈ 
leisure ﺗﻔرِﯾﺢ  
Lent (period leading up to Easter) ﻗﺑل اِﯾﺳﮢرﭼِﻠہ  
life زِﻧدﮔﯽ  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
151 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
magazine رِﺳﺎﻟہ  
marriage; wedding ﺷﺎدی  
martial arts ﻣﺎرﺷل آرﮢس 
mobile phone ﻣوﺑﺎﺋل ﻓون 
mothers’ day ﻣدرز ڈے 
mountain bike ﻣﺎؤﻧﮢن ﺑﺎﺋﯾﮏ 
mountaineering ﮐوه ﭘﯾَﻣﺎئ/  ﭘﮩﺎڑوں ﭘر ﭼڑھﻧﺎ 
MP3 player اﯾم ﭘﯽ ﺗﮭری ﭘﻠﯾﺋر 
music ﻣوَﺳﯾﻘﯽ  
New Year ﻧﯾﺎ ﺳﺎل 
news ﺧﺑرﯾں 
nightclub ﻧﺎﺋٹ ﮐﻠب 
orchestra ﺳﺎزِﻧدے  
piano ﭘِﯾﺎﻧو  
play (theatre) ڈَراﻣہ 
player ﮐﮭﻼڑی 
pleasure/amusement ﺗﻔرِﯾﺢ  
pocket money ﺟﯾب ﺧرچ  
pop music ﭘوپ ﻣﯾوزک 
puppit show ﭘُﺗﻠﯽ ﮐﺎ ﺗﻣﺎﺷﺎ 
race/racing رﯾس /دوڑ  
reading ﭘڑھﻧﺎ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
152 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
recorder (instrument) رﯾﮑﺎرڈر 
referee رﯾﻔری 
riding ﮔﮭڑُ  ﺳواری  
rock music راک ﻣوﺳﯾﻘﯽ 
role model ﻣِﺛﺎﻟﯽ ﺷﺧﺻﯾت 
roller blading روﻟر ﺑﻠﯾڈﻧﮓ 
romantic رُوﻣﺎﻧﯽ  
romantic film/love film رُوﻣﺎﻧوی ﻓﻠم 
rugby رَﮔﺑﯽ  /رﮔڑ ﮢﭻ 
sailing ﮐﺷﺗﯽ راﻧﯽ 
saxophone ﺳﯾﮑﺳوﻓون 
science fiction film  ﺳﺎﺋﻧس ﻓﮑﺷن ﻓﻠم 
Series /serial  ﺳِﻠﺳِﻠہ، ﺳﻠﺳﻠہ وار/ﻗﺳط وار 
shopping ﺧرﯾداری/ ﺷﺎﭘﻧﮓ  
show (theatre etc); TV show ﺷو  
singer ﮔﻠوُ  ﮐﺎر 
skate boarding ﺳﮑﯾٹ ﺑورڈ 
skiing ﺳﮑﺋﯾﻧﮓ 
soap (opera) آوﭘرا 
social media ﺳوﺷل  ﻣﯾڈﯾﺎ 
song ﮔﺎﻧﺎ 
sport/s ﮐﮭﯾل 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
153 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
sports ground ﮐﮭﯾل ﮐﺎ ﻣﯾدان  
sportsman ﮐﮭﻼڑی 
spy story ﺟﺎﺳوﺳﯽ ﮐﮩﺎﻧﯽ 
squash ﺳﮑواش 
stage ﺳﮢﯾﺞ 
stereo system/music centre ﺳﮢﯾرﯾوﺳﺳﮢم 
straight (hair) ﺳﯾدھﮯ 
swimming ﺗﯾراﮐﯽ/ ﺗﯾرﻧﺎ  
table tennis ﮢﯾﺑل ﮢﯾﻧس 
team ﮢِﯾم  
technology ﮢﯾﮑﻧوﻟوﺟﯽ 
television ﮢﯾﻠﯽ وﯾژن 
tennis ﮢﯾﻧس 
thriller ﺳﻧﺳﻧﯽ ﺧﯾز 
to take out for a walk (dog) ﭘﯾدل ﭼﻠﻧﮯ ﮐﮯ ﻟﯾﮯ   ﻟﯾﺟﺎﻧﺎ 
toy ﮐِﮭﻠوﻧﺎ 
TV channel ﮢﯽ وی ﭼﯾﻧل 
use  اِﺳﺗﻌﻣﺎل 
violin واﺋﻠن 
volleyball واﻟﯽ ﺑﺎل 
water skiing واﮢر ﺳﮑﺋﯾﻧﮓ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
154 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
Western (film etc) ﻣﻐرﺑﯽ 
youth club ﯾُوﺗﮭ ﮐﻠب  
Higher tier 
 
archery ﺗﯾِر اﻧدازی 
board game, electronic game ﺑورڈ ﮔﯾم/ اﻟﯾﮑﮢروﻧﮏ ﮔﯾم 
cable TV ﮐﯾﺑل ﮢﯽ وی 
camcorder/video camera ﮐﯾﻣﮑورڈر/ وڈﯾو ﮐﯾﻣره 
championship ﭼﯾﻣﭘﯾن ﺷپ 
detective/mystery/police (film) ﺟﺎﺳوُﺳﯽ/ ﭘُراﺳرار، ﭘوﻟﯾس ﻓﻠم  
drama (TV etc) ڈراﻣہ 
earphones اﯾﺋر ﻓون  
engagement ﻣﻧﮕﻧﯽ 
fishing  ﻣﺎﮨﯽ ﮔﯾری )ﮐرﻧﺎ( 
goal ﮔول 
half-time وﻗﻔہ 
knowledge ﻋﻠم /ﺳﻣﺟﮭ ﺑُوﺟﮭ 
league; division (sports) ﻟﯾﮓ 
marriage ceremony; wedding ﺷﺎدی ﮐﯽ ﺗﻘرِﯾب 
melody/tune ﺳُر /ﻟﮯَ/ ﺗﺎن  
musical comedy (a musical) ﻣوﺳﯾﻘﯽ ﺳﮯ ﺑﮭری ﻣزاﺣﯾہ 
remote control رﯾﻣوٹ ﮐﻧﮢرول 
rowing ﮐﺷﺗﯽ ﭼﻼﻧﺎ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
155 
 
Higher tier (cont) 
 
satellite TV ﺳﯾﮢﻼﺋٹ ﮢﯽ وی 
scuba diving ﺳﮑوﺑﺎ ڈاﺋﯾوﻧﮓ 
sitcom ﻣزاﺣﯾہ ڈراﻣہ 
sports equipment ﮐﮭﯾﻠوں ﮐﺎ ﺳﺎﻣﺎن 
subtitles ﺳب ﮢﺎﺋﮢل 
tournament ﮐﮭﯾﻠوں ﮐﮯ ﻣﻘﺎﺑﻠﮯ 
viewer/audience ﻧﺎظرﯾن/ﺣﺎﺿرﯾن 
  
Verbs associated with cultural life 
to attend (match etc) ﺣﺎﺿِر ﮨوﻧﺎ  
to be a member of رُﮐن ﺑﻧﻧﺎ 
to congratulate ﻣُﺑﺎرﮐﺑﺎد دﯾﻧﺎ 
to get married ﺷﺎدی ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to go bowling (tenpin) ﺑﺎؤﻟﻧﮓ ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to dance ﻧﺎﭼﻧﺎ 
to do sport ﮐﮭﯾﻠﻧﺎ 
to do gymnastics ﺟِﻣﻧﺎﺳﮢﮏ ﮐرﻧﺎ  
to exercise وَرزِش ﮐرﻧﺎ  
to fish/go fishing ﻣﭼﮭﻠﯽ ﭘﮑڑﻧﺎ 
to go for a walk/stroll ﭼِﮩَل ﻗدﻣﯽ ﮐرﻧﺎ  
to go for a walk/stroll ﮢِﮩﻠﻧﮯ ﺟﺎﻧﺎ 
to go horse riding ﮔﮭڑُ  ﺳواری ﮐرﻧﺎ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
156 
 
Verbs associated with cultural life (cont) 
 
to hike, ramble ﭘﮩﺎڑ ﭘر ﭼڑھﻧﺎ 
to roller-skate روﻟر ﺳﮑﯾﮢر ﭘر ﭼﻠﻧﺎ 
to sail ﮐﺷﺗﯽ راﻧﯽ ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to score a goal ﮨدَف ﺣﺎﺻل ﮐرﻧﺎ/ﮔول ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to shoot ﻧِﺷﺎﻧہ ﺑﺎزی 
to skateboard ﺳﮑﯾٹ ﺑورڈ ﭘر ﭼﻠﻧﺎ 
to swim ﺗﯾراﮐﯽ ﮐرﻧﺎ  / ﺗﯾرﻧﺎ 
to take part (in) ﺣِﺻہ ﻟﯾﻧﺎ  
to train ﺗَرﺑِﯾت دﯾﻧﺎ 
Identity and culture: using social media  
blog ﺑﻼگ  /ﺑﻠوگ  
chatroom ﭼﯾٹ روم 
to) chat online آن ﻻﺋن ﺑﺎﺗﯾں ﮐرﻧﺎ 
computer ﮐﻣﭘﯾوُﮢر 
connection ﻧﺎطہ 
cyber bullying ﺳﺎﺋﺑر ﺑﻠﯾﯾﻧﮓ 
digital ڈﯾﺟﯾﮢل 
disk ڈِﺳﮏ  
email ای ﻣﯾل 
facebook ﻓﯾس ﺑُﮏ 
home page ﮨوم ﭘﯾﺞ 
internet اِﻧﮢر ﻧﯾٹ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
157 
 
Identity and culture: using social media (cont) 
internet page اِﻧﮢر ﻧﯾٹ ﭘﯾﺞ 
new technology ﻧﺋﯽ ﮢﯾﮑﻧوﻟوﺟﯽ 
password ﭘﺎس ورڈ 
risk ﺧطره 
risky ﭘُر ﺧطر  
screen ﺳﮑرِﯾن  
security ﺣِﻔﺎظت  
social network ﺳﻣﺎﺟﯽ ﻧﯾٹ ورک 
software ﺳوﻓٹ  وﺋﯾر 
to download ڈاؤن ﻟوڈ ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to erase, delete ﻣِﮢﺎﻧﺎ 
to load ﻟوڈ ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to save, to store ﻣﺣﻔوُظ ﮐرﻧﺎ  
to surf (the net) ﺳَرف ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to upload اَﭘﻠوڈ ﮐرﻧﺎ 
virus واﺋرس 
web وﯾب  
web page وﯾب ﭘﯾﺞ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
158 
 
Local area, holiday and travel  
Foundation tier 
 
abroad ﺑﯾرونِ  ﻣﻠﮏ  
accommodation رِﮨﺎﺋش  
adult ﺑﺎﻟﻎ 
agricultural زَرﻋﯽ  
air conditioning/air-con اﺋﯾر ﮐﻧڈﯾﺷﻧﮓ 
airport ﮨواﺋﯽ اڈه 
area (in town) ﻋﻼﻗہ 
arrival آﻣد 
art gallery آرٹ ﮔﯾﻠری 
asking for help ﻣدد ﻣﺎﻧﮕﻧﺎ 
bakery; baker’s shop ﺑﯾﮑری 
balcony ﺑﺎﻟﮑوﻧﯽ 
bank ﺑﯾﻧﮏ 
basement ﺗﮩہ ﺧﺎﻧہ 
bath ﻧﮩﺎﻧﺎ/ﻏﺳل ﮐرﻧﺎ  
bathroom ﻏﺳل ﺧﺎﻧہ 
beach/seaside ﺳﺎﺣل 
bed ﭘﻠﻧﮓ  
bed linen ﭘﻠﻧﮓ ﮐﯽ ﭼﺎدر 
bicycle/bike ﺑﺎﺋﺳﯾﮑل/  
boat ﮐﺷﺗﯽ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
159 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
book of tickets ﮢﮑﮢس ﮐﺎ ﮐﺗﺎﺑﭼہ 
border ﺳَرﺣد 
bowling alley ﺑﺎؤﻟﻧﮓ اﯾﻠﯽ 
brand/make ﻣﺎرﮐہ  / ﺑراﻧڈ 
bridge ﭘل 
brochure/leaflet ﺑروﺷر 
building ﻋﻣﺎرت  
bus (by bus) ﺑس 
bus/coach station  ﺑس ﮐﺎ اڈه/ﮐوچ اﺳﮢﯾﺷن 
bus stop ﺑساﺳﮢﺎپ  
business/trade ﺗﺟﺎرت  
butcher’s shop ﻗﺻﺎﺋﯽ ﮐﯽ دﮐﺎن 
café ﮐﯾﻔﮯ/ﮐﺎﻓﯽ ﮨﺎؤس 
calm/peaceful ﭘرﺳﮑون 
campsite ﺧﯾﻣوں ﮐﯽ ﺧﺎص ﺟﮕہ 
to camp ﺧﯾﻣہ زن ﮨوﻧﺎ 
car ﮔﺎڑی  
caravan ﮐﺎرواں  
car park ﮐﺎر ﭘﺎرک 
castle ﻗﻠﻌہ 
cathedral ﮐﺗﮭﯾڈرل 
Cattle/live stock ﻣوﯾﺷﯽ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
160 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
church ﮔرﺟﺎ  
cinema ﺳﻧﯾﻣﺎ 
closed ﺑﻧد 
closing ﺑﻧد ﮨوﻧﯾواﻻ 
coach ﮐوچ 
coast ﺳﺎﺣل 
comfortable آرام ده 
commercial ﺗﺟﺎرﺗﯽ 
compartment ﮐﻣﭘﺎرﮢﻣﻧٹ 
connection ﻧﺎطہ 
corner ﮐوﻧہ 
country  ﻣﻠﮏ 
countryside دﯾﮩﺎﺗﯽ ﻋﻼﻗہ 
crop ﻓﺻل 
crossing (ferry) ﮔزرﮔﺎه 
crossroads ﭼوراﮨﺎ /ﭼوک 
cycle path ﺳﺎﺋﯾﮑل ﭼﻼﻧﮯ ﮐﺎ راﺳﺗہ 
dealing with problem ﻣﺳﺋﻠہ ﺣل ﮐرﻧﺎ 
degree ڈﮔری 
delay ﺗﺎﺧﯾر 
department (in a shop) ﺷﻌﺑہدُ ﮐﺎن ﮐﺎ اﯾﮏ ﺣﺻہ  
department store ڈﯾﭘﺎرﮢﻣﻧٹ ﺳﮢور 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
161 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
departure رواﻧﮕﯽ 
destination/s ﻣﻧزِل  
diesel (fuel) ڈِﯾزل 
direct ﺑراه ِراﺳت 
direction/s ﺳﻣت/ﺳﻣﺗﯾں    ،  ﮨداﯾت /ﮨداﯾﺎت  
disco ڈﺳﮑو  
double room ڈﺑل روم 
driver ڈراﺋﯾور 
driving licence ڈراﺋﯾوﻧﮓ ﻻﺋﯾﺳﻧس 
eating out 
  رﯾﺳﮢوراﻧٹ  ﻣﯾں ﮐﮭﺎﻧﺎ  )ﮔﮭر
ﺳﮯ ﺑﺎﮨر(  
electrical goods (retailer) ﺑﺟﻠﯽ ﮐﺎ ﺳﺎﻣﺎن 
emergency اﯾﻣرﺟﻧﺳﯽ/ﮨﻧﮕﺎﻣﯽ ﺣﺎﻻت 
enjoy your stay! اﭘﻧﮯﻗﯾﺎم ﺳﮯ ﻟطف اﮢﮭﺎﺋﯾﮯ  
entertainment, things to do ﺗﻔرﯾﺢ 
entrance داﺧﻠﯽ دروازه 
exhibition ﻧﻣﺎﺋش 
exit ﺑﺎﮨر ﻧﮑﻠﻧﮯ ﮐﺎ راﺳﺗہ 
experience/s ﺗﺟرﺑہ/ﺗﺟرﺑﺎت 
factory ﮐﺎرﺧﺎﻧہ 
fare/rent ﮐراﯾہ 
farm (agricultural) اِراﺿﯽ ، ﮐﮭﯾت )زرﻋﯽ 
ferry ﻧﺎؤ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
162 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
free (available, vacant) ﺧﺎﻟﯽ  
flight ﭘَرواز 
floor (1st, 2nd) ﻣﻧزل )ﭘﮩﻠﯽ ، دوﺳری 
it is) forbidden  ﻣﻣﻧوﻋہ 
foreigner ﻏﯾرﻣﻠﮑﯽ 
form ﻓﺎرم  
full (hotel etc) ﺑﮭرا ﮨُوا 
full board (all meals included)  ﻗﯾﺎم ، ﮐﮭﺎﻧﮯ ﮐﮯ ﺳﺎﺗﮭ 
games room ﮐﮭﯾﻠوں ﮐﺎ ﮐﻣره 
garage, service station, petrol station 
ﮔﯾراج، ﺳروس اﺳﮢﯾﺷن، ﭘﯾﮢرول  
اﺳﮢﯾﺷن  
grain اﻧﺎج 
grocery; grocer’s shop ﺳودا ﺳﻠف 
ground floor زﻣﯾﻧﯽ ﻣﻧزل 
guest (in a hotel)/customer  ﻣﮩﻣﺎن )ﮨوﮢل ﻣﯾں( ﮔﺎﮨﮏ 
guided tour ﮔﺎﺋﯾڈڈ ﮢوؤر /راﮨﻧﻣﺎﺋﯽ دوره 
half board (B and B) ﮨﺎف ﺑورڈ )ﺑﺳﺗر ، ﻧﺎﺷﺗہ(   
heating ﮔرﻣﺎﺋش 
hill ﭘﮩﺎڑی 
to hire ﮐراﯾہ ﭘر ﻟﯾﻧﺎ 
historic ﺗﺎرِﯾﺧﯽ  
holiday, fair, festival ﭼُﮭﮢﯾﺎں، ﻣﯾﻠہ، ﺗﮩوار/ﺟﺷن 
hospital ﮨﺳﭘﺗﺎل 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
163 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
hotel ﮨوﮢل  
household goods shop  ﮨﺎؤس ﮨوﻟڈ ﮔڈز ﺷﺎپ 
ice rink آﺋﯾس رﻧﮏ 
identification; ID ﺷﻧﺎﺧﺗﯽ ﮐﺎرڈ 
in advance ﭘﯾﺷﮕﯽ 
included ﺑﺷﻣوُل  
indoor swimming pool 
اﻧدرُوﻧﯽ ﺳوﺋﻣﻧﮓ ﭘُول )ﺗﯾرﻧﮯ
ﮐﺎ ﺗﺎﻻب( 
industry ﺻﻧﻌت  
industrial ﺻﻧﻌﺗﯽ 
information اطﻼع 
information office دﻓﺗر ﻣﻌﻠوﻣﺎت 
inside اﻧدر ﮐﯽ طرف 
journey ﺳﻔر 
journey (short) ﺳﻔر )ﭼﮭوﮢﺎ 
key ﮐﻧﺟﯽ / ﭼﺎﺑﯽ 
lake ﺟِﮭﯾل  
left luggage office/locker ﻻﮐر 
leisure centre ﻟﯾژر ﺳﯾﻧﮢر /ﺗﻔرﯾﺣﯽ ﻣرﮐز  
library ﻻﺋﺑرﯾری 
lift ﻟﻔٹ 
line/route ﻻﺋن /راﺳﺗہ 
litter/rubbish bin ﮐوُڑا/ ﮐوُڑے ﮐﺎ ڈﺑہ  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
164 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
local area ﻣﻘﺎﻣﯽ ﻋﻼﻗہ 
local inhabitant ﻣﻘﺎﻣﯽ رﮨﺎﺋﺷﯽ 
lorry ﻻری 
lost property office دﻓﺗر ﺑراﺋﮯ ﮔﻣﺷده اﺷﯾﺎء 
luggage ﺳﺎﻣﺎن 
luxurious ﭘُرﺗﮑﻠف 
map (of a country, road map) ﻧﻘﺷہ 
map (of the town) ﻧﻘﺷہ 
market ﻣﺎرﮐﯾٹ  
means of transport ذرﯾﻌہ آﻣدورﻓت 
monument ﯾﺎدﮔﺎر 
moped اَﻓﺳُرده 
mosque ﻣﺳﺟِد  
motorbike ﻣوﮢر ﺑﺎﺋﮏ 
motorway ﻣوﮢر وے 
mountain ﭘﮩﺎڑ 
museum ﻋﺟﺎﺋب ﮔﮭر 
newspaper stall/kiosk 
ﻧﯾوز ﭘﯾﭘر ﺳﮢﺎل/ اﺧﺑﺎروں ﮐﺎ 
ﮐﮭوﮐﮭﺎ  
night club ﻧﺎﺋٹ ﮐﻠب 
occupied/taken زﯾر رﮨﺎﺋش 
office دﻓﺗر 
open ﮐﮭﻼ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
165 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
on foot ﭘﯾدل 
on the left ﺑﺎﺋﯾں ﺟﺎﻧب 
on the right داﺋﯾں ﺟﺎﻧب 
one way street/road ﯾﮑطرﻓہ ﺳڑک/ ﮔﻠﯽ 
outing; trip ﺳَﯾر ﮐﮯ ﻟﯾﮯ ﺟﺎﻧﺎ 
outside ﺑﺎﮨر 
outside/in the open air ﺑﺎﮨر ﮐﮭﻠﯽ ﻓﺿﺎ ﻣﯾں 
to pack/unpack (cases) ﺑﻧد ﮐرﻧﺎ/ ﮐﮭوﻟﻧﺎ 
palace ﻣﺣل  
park ﭘﺎرک 
passenger ﻣﺳُﺎﻓر  
passport ﭘﺎﺳﭘورٹ 
passport control ﭘﺎﺳﭘورٹ ﮐﻧﮢرول 
pedestrian ﭘﯾدل ﭼﻠﻧﮯ واﻟﮯ 
pedestrian area ﭘﯾدل ﭼﻠﻧﮯ واﻟوں ﮐﺎ راﺳﺗہ 
pedestrian crossing 
ﭘﯾڈﯾﺳﮢرﯾن ﮐراﺳﻧﮓ  / ﺳڑک ﭘﺎر
ﮐرﻧﮯ ﮐﺎ راﺳﺗہ   
petrol ﭘﯾﮢرول 
picturesque دﻵوﯾز 
pillow ﺗﮑﯾہ 
pitch (for tent) ﻧﺻب ﮐرﻧﺎ 
place ﺟﮕہ  
places to see 
 دﯾﮑﮭﻧﮯ ﮐﯽ ﺟﮕﮩﯾں، ﻗﺎﺑلِ دﯾد
ﻣﻘﺎﻣﺎت  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
166 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
playground ﮐﮭﯾل ﮐﺎ ﻣﯾدان 
plane ﺟﮩﺎز/ﮨواﺋﯽ ﺟﮩﺎز  
platform ﭘﻠﯾٹ ﻓﺎرم 
policeman ﭘوﻟﯾس ﻣﯾن /ﺳﭘﺎﮨﯽ 
police station ﺗﮭﺎﻧہ 
port ﺑﻧدرﮔﺎه 
postcard ﭘوﺳٹ ﮐﺎرڈ 
poster/notice ﭘوﺳﮢر 
post office ڈاﮐﺧﺎﻧہ 
prefer  ﻓوﻗﯾت ، ﺗرﺟﯾﺢ / ﺗرﺟﯾﺢ دﯾﻧﺎ 
preference/s ﺗرﺟﯾﺢ  / ﺗرﺟﯾﺣﺎت 
price list ﻓﮩرﺳت ِﻗﯾﻣت 
priority ﻓوﻗﯾت  /اوﻟﯾت 
problem/issue ﻣﺳﺋﻠہ 
public holiday ﭘﺑﻠﮏ ﮨﺎﻟﯾڈے / ﻋﺎم ﺗﻌطﯾل 
public transport 
ﻋواﻣﯽ ﮢراﻧﺳﭘورٹ/ ﻋواﻣﯽ 
ﺳواری 
public/municipal ﻋوام/ ﺑﻠدﯾﺎﺗﯽ 
railway رﯾﻠوے 
reception اﺳﺗﻘﺑﺎﻟﯾہ 
receptionist رﯾﺳﭘﺷﻧﺳٹ /اﺳﺗﻘﺑﺎﻟﯾہ ﻋﻣﻠہ 
reduction ﮐم ﮐرﻧﺎ 
region ﻋﻼﻗہ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
167 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
rent; rental ﮐِراﯾہ 
rented holiday cottage ﮐِراﺋﮯ ﮐﺎ ﮨﺎﻟﯾڈے ﮐوﮢﯾﺞ 
reservation ﺑﮑﻧﮓ /ﻣﺧﺻوص ﮐراﻧﺎ 
return ticket واﭘﺳﯽ ﮐﺎ ﮢﮑٹ 
river درﯾﺎ 
road ﺳڑک 
road map ﺳڑک ﮐﺎ ﻧﻘﺷہ 
bed)room (in a hotel) ﺑﯾڈ روم/  ﮨوﮢل ﮐﺎ ﮐﻣره 
sea ﺳﻣﻧدر 
at the) seaside/beach ﺳﺎﺣل ِﺳﻣﻧدر 
season ﻣوﺳم  
sheet ﭼﺎدر  
ship ﺑﺣری ﺟﮩﺎز 
shop دﮐﺎن 
shopping centre ﺷﺎﭘﻧﮓ ﺳﯾﻧﮢر/ﺑﺎزار 
show ﺷو  
shower ﺷﺎور 
shower block (e.g.on campsite) ﺷﺎور ﺑﻼک 
sign ﻧﺷﺎن 
single ticket  ﯾﮑطرﻓہ ﮢﮑٹ 
single room ﺳﻧﮕل روم 
situated واﻗﻊ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
168 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
sleeping bag ﺳﻠﯾﭘﻧﮓ ﺑﯾﮓ 
soap ﺻﺎﺑن 
souvenir ﯾﺎدﮔﺎر 
sports centre ﮐﮭﯾﻠوں ﮐﺎ ﻣرﮐز 
spacious ﮐﺷﺎده /ﮐﮭﻼ 
square (in town) ﭼوک 
stadium ﺳﮢﯾڈﯾم 
staff ﺳﮢﺎف/ﻋﻣﻠہ 
star ﺳﺗﺎره 
stairs; staircase/ladder ﺳﯾڑھﯾﺎں 
station (railway) رﯾﻠوےاﺳﮢﯾﺷن  
stop (bus, tram etc) ﺑس،ﮢراماﺳﮢﺎپ 
suburb; outskirts of town )ﺷﮩر ﮐﺎﻣﺿﺎﻓﺎت /ﮔرد و ﻧواح   
suitable for drinking ﭘﯾﻧﮯ ﮐﮯ ﻗﺎﺑل 
suitcase ﺳوٹ ﮐﯾس 
summer camp ﻣوﺳم ِﮔرﻣﺎ ﮐﯾﻣپ 
summer holidays 
ﻣوﺳمِ  ﮔرﻣﺎ ﮐﯽ ﭼﮭُﮢﯾﺎں
/ﺗﻌطﯾﻼت  
supplement ﺿﻣﯾﻣہ 
supermarket ﺳُﭘرﻣﺎرﮐﯾٹ 
swimming pool ﺗﯾراﮐﯽ ﮐﺎ ﺗﺎﻻب 
taxi ﮢﯾﮑﺳﯽ 
television set ﮢﯾﻠﯽ وژن ﺳﯾٹ  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
169 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
tent ﺧﯾﻣہ 
tennis court ﮢﯾﻧس ﮐورٹ 
theatre ﺗﮭﯾﮢر 
things to do ﮐرﻧﮯ ﮐﯽ ﭼﯾزﯾں ، ﺳرﮔرﻣﯾﺎں 
ticket; tram, bus or metro ticket ﮢﮑٹ 
ticket inspector ﮢِﮑٹ اﻧﺳﭘﮑﮢر 
ticket office ﮢِﮑٹ ﮐﺎ دﻓﺗر 
till; cash desk ﮢِل /ﮐﯾش ڈﯾﺳﮏ  
timetable ﮢﺎﺋم ﮢﯾﺑل 
tobacconist’s shop ﺳﮕرﯾٹ ﮐﯽ دﮐﺎن 
toilets ﮢﺎﺋﻠﮢس/ ﺑﯾت اﻟﺧﻼ 
toilet paper ﮢﺎﺋﻠٹ ﭘﯾﭘر 
toothbrush داﻧﺗوں ﮐﺎ ﺑرش 
toothpaste ﮢوﺗﮭ ﭘﯾﺳٹ  
tour ﮢوؤر  / دوره 
tourist ﺳﯾﺎح 
tourist attraction ﺳﯾﺎﺣوں ﮐﯽ دﻟﭼﺳﭘﯽ 
tourist information office ﺳﯾﺎﺣوں ﮐﮯ ﻟﯾﮯ  دﻓﺗرِ ﻣﻌﻠوﻣﺎت  
tourism ﺳﯾﺎﺣت 
tower ﮢﺎور       ۔ﻣﯾﻧﺎر 
town ﮢﺎؤن /ﻗﺻﺑہ / ﺷﮩر 
town centre ﮢﺎؤن ﺳﯾﻧﮢر /ﺷﮩر ﮐﺎ ﻣرﮐز 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
170 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
town hall ﮢﺎؤن ﮨﺎل 
traffic ﮢرﯾﻔﮏ 
traffic jam ﮢرﯾﻔﮏ ﺟﯾم/  ﮢرﯾﻔﮏ  ﮐﺎ ﮨﺟوم  
traffic lights ﮢرﯾﻔﮏ ﮐﯽ ﺑﺗﯾﺎں 
train رﯾل ﮔﺎڑی 
tram ﮢرام 
transaction/s ﺳودا /ﺳودے،   ﻣﻌﺎﻣﻠہ/ﻣﻌﺎﻣﻼت 
travel ﺳﻔر 
travel agency ﮢرﯾول اﯾﺟﻧﺳﯽ 
traveller ﻣﺳﺎﻓر  
to) turn/switch on ﺑﺗﯽ ﺟَﻼﻧﺎ 
to) turn/switch off ﺑﺗﯽ ﺑﺟُﮭﺎﻧﺎ 
twin-bedded room دو ﭘﻠﻧﮕوں واﻻ ﮐﻣره 
underground railway  زﯾرِ زﻣﯾن رﯾﻠوے  
underground station زﯾر ِزﻣﯾن ﺳﮢﯾﺷن 
view (over) ﻧظﺎره ﮐرﻧﺎ 
village ﮔﺎؤں 
waiting period/time limit اﻧﺗظﺎر ﮐﺎ وﻗت 
waiting room اﻧﺗظﺎر ﮔﺎه 
wash basin واش ﺑﯾﺳن 
way out/exit ﺑﺎﮨر ﺟﺎﻧﮯ ﮐﺎ راﺳﺗہ 
weather ﻣوﺳم  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
171 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
welcome ﺧوش آﻣدﯾد 
window ﮐﮭڑﮐﯽ 
shop) window ﮐﮭڑﮐﯽ )دﮐﺎن ﮐﯽ(  
winter holidays ﻣوﺳم ﺳرﻣﺎ ﮐﯽ ﭼﮭُﮢﯾﺎں 
youth hostel ﯾوُﺗﮭ ﮨوﺳﮢل 
zoo ﭼڑﯾﺎ ﮔﮭر 
Higher tier 
 
ATM/cash point اے ﮢﯽ اﯾم/ ﮐﯾش ﭘواﺋﻧٹ 
air transport ﮨواﺋﯽ ﮢراﻧﺳﭘورٹ 
bedlinen ﭘﻠﻧﮕوں ﮐﯽ ﭼﺎدرﯾں 
bike) hire ﮐراۓﭘر ﺳﺎﺋﮑﻠﯾں  
to) board (plane, ship) ﺑﺣریﯾﺎ  ﮨواﺋﯽ ﺟ ﮩﺎزﻣﯾں ﺑﯾﮢﮭﻧﺎ  
to) brake ﺑرﯾﮏ ﻟﮕﺎﻧﺎ 
brakes ﺑرﯾﮑس 
canal ﻧﮩر 
coming/arriving from (planes, trains) آﻣد )ﺟﮩﺎز، رﯾل ﮔﺎڑی 
Customs ﮐﺳﮢﻣز 
door (of train etc) دروازه 
dry cleaner’s; dry cleaning ڈراﺋﯽ ﮐﻠﯾﻧر 
emergency exit اﯾﻣرﺟﻧﺳﯽ اﺧراج 
event ﺗﻘرﯾب 
fast train ﺗﯾز رﯾل 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
172 
 
Higher tier (cont) 
 
fireworks آﺗﺷﺑﺎزی 
fountain ﻓواره 
heavy goods vehicle (HGV) ﺑﮭﺎری ﮔﺎڑﯾﺎں 
helicopter ﮨﯾﻠﯽ ﮐﺎﭘﮢر 
hospitality ﻣﮩﻣﺎن ﻧوازی 
level crossing ﻟﯾول ﮐراﺳﻧﮓ 
motorway junction ﻣوﮢر وے ﺟﻧﮑﺷن 
motorway services ﻣوﮢروے ﺳروﺳﺳز 
no entry (when driving) داﺧﻠہ ﻣﻣﻧوع 
no parking ﭘﺎرﮐﻧﮓ ﻣﻣﻧوُع 
no smoking ﺳﮕرﯾٹ ﻧوﺷﯽ ﻣﻣﻧوُع  
noise ﺷور 
to) overtake آﮔﮯ ﻧﮑل ﺟﺎﻧﺎ 
package holiday ﭘﯾﮑﺞ ﮨﺎﻟﯾڈے 
park; green space ﭘﺎرک 
policeman ﭘوﻟﯾس واﻻ 
police station ﺗﮭﺎﻧہ 
Procession ﺟﻠوُس  
registration/booking in اﻧدراج/ﺑﮑﻧﮓ 
roundabout (in road) ﭼوَک  
run over (traffic accident) 
ﮐﺳﯽ ﮐﮯ اوﭘر ﮔﺎڑی ﭼڑھﺎﻧﺎ
)ﮢرﯾﻔﮏ ﺣﺎدﺛہ( 
rush hour ﮨﺟوُم ﮐﺎ وﻗت 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
173 
 
Higher tier (cont) 
 
savings bank ﺳﯾوﻧﮕز ﺑﯾﻧﮏ 
seat belt ﺳﯾٹ ﺑﯾﻠٹ /ﺣﻔﺎظﺗﯽ ﭘﯾﮢﯽ 
speed رﻓﺗﺎر  
speed limit ﺣدِ رﻓﺗﺎر 
surrounding area, vicinity آس ﭘﺎس 
to put someone up; accommodate ﮐﺳﯽ ﮐو رِﮨﺎﺋش ﻓراﮨم ﮐرﻧﺎ  
to take place ﮨوﺟﺎﻧﺎ 
to stay (for a holiday) ﮢِﮭﮩرﻧﺎ 
toll ﮢول  
to) validate a ticket (e.g. train, tram) ﮢﮑٹ ﮐﯽ ﺗوﺛﯾﻖ ﮐرﻧﺎ 
winter/skiing holiday ﻣوﺳمِ ﺳرﻣﺎ /ﺳﮑﯾﯾﻧﮓ ﮨﺎﻟﯾڈے 
vehicle ﮔﺎڑی  
Phrases associated with weather 
 
Foundation tier 
 
bad ﺑُرا 
bright روﺷن 
climate آب وﮨوا 
cloud ﺑﺎدِل 
cloudy ﺑﺎدِل ﭼﮭﺎ ﺟﺎﻧﺎ 
cold ﮢَﮭﻧڈا 
degree (temperature)  درﺟہِ ﺣرارت 
dry ﺧُﺷﮏ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
174 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
fog دُھﻧد  
heat ﮔرﻣﺎﺋش 
highest temperature زﯾﺎده ﺳﮯ زﯾﺎده درﺟہ ِﺣرارت 
hot ﮔرم 
in the east ﻣﺷرق ﻣﯾں 
in the north ﺷﻣﺎل ﻣﯾں 
in the south ﺟﻧوب ﻣﯾں 
in the west ﻣﻐرب ﻣﯾں 
it is freezing ﻣﻧﺟﻣد ﮐرﻧﮯ واﻟﯽ ﺳردی ﮨﮯ  
it is lightning ﺑﺟﻠﯽ ﭼﻣﮏ رﮨﯽ ﮨﮯ 
it is raining ﺑﺎرش ﮨورﮨﯽ ﮨﮯ 
it is snowing ﺑرﻓﺑﺎری ﮨو/ﺑرف ﭘڑ  رﮨﯽ ﮨﮯ  
it is thundering ﺑﺎدل ﮔرج رﮨﮯ ﮨﯾں 
lowest temperature ﮐم ﺳﮯ ﮐم درﺟہِ ﺣرارت 
mist/fog دُھﻧد  
nice (weather) اﭼﮭﺎ  
overcast ﮐﺎﻟﮯ ﮔﮭﻧﮯ ﺑﺎدل 
rain ﺑﺎرش  
Season/weather ﻣوﺳم  
sky آﺳﻣﺎن 
snow/snowfall ﺑرفﺑرﻓﺑﺎری 
storm طوُﻓﺎن 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
175 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
(it is) stormy طوُﻓﺎﻧﯽ  
sun ﺳوُرج  
sunny دُھوپ  
the sun is shining/it is sunny دُھوپ ﭼﻣﮏ رﮨﯽ ﮨﮯ 
to freeze ﻣُﻧﺟﻣِد ﮨوﻧﺎ / ﺟﻣﻧﺎ 
to rain ﺑﺎرِش ﮨوﻧﺎ  
to shine ﭼﻣﮑﻧﺎ  
to snow ﺑرﻓﺑﺎری ﮨوﻧﺎ 
weather/season ﻣوﺳم  
weather report ﻣوﺳم ﮐﯽ/ﻣوﺳﻣﯽ   رﭘورٹ 
wind ﮨَوا 
Phrases associated with weather 
 
Higher tier 
 
average temperature اَوﺳط درﺟہ ِﺣرارت 
bright spell/sunshine دُھوپ  
changeable ﻗﺎﺑل ِﺗﺑدﯾل 
hail اوﻟﮯ 
high temperature زﯾﺎده درﺟہ ِﺣرارت 
low temperature ﮐم درﺟہِ ﺣرارت 
misty دُھﻧدﻻ 
rainy ﺑﺎرِش ﮐﺎ 
showers ﺑوﭼﮭﺎڑ ﭘڑﻧﺎ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
176 
 
Higher tier (cont) 
 
stormy طوُﻓﺎﻧﯽ  
to brighten up دھوُپ ﻧﮑﻠﻧﺎ  
to hail اَوﻟﮯ ﭘڑﻧﺎ 
weather forecast ﻣوﺳﻣﯽ ﭘﯾﺷﮕوﺋﯽ 
Asking for directions 
 
are you going on foot/in a car? 
ﮐﯾﺎ آپ ﭘﯾدل ﺟﺎرﮨﮯ ﮨﯾں؟/ ﮔﺎڑی
ﻣﯾں ﮨﯾں؟  
as far as ﺟﮩﺎں ﺗﮏ 
continue  ﺟﺎری 
cross (over) ﭘﺎر ﮐرﻧﺎ 
go straight on ﺳﯾِدھﺎ ﺟﺎﻧﺎ 
high street/main street ﮨﺎﺋﯽ ﺳﮢرﯾٹ/ ﻣﯾن ﺳﮢرﯾٹ 
how do I get to? ﻣﯾں ﮐﯾﺳﮯ ﭘﮩﻧﭼوں؟ 
it is 100 metres away ﯾہ100 ﻣﯾڑ ﮐﮯ ﻓﺎﺻﻠﮯ ﭘر ﮨﮯ 
it is very close ﯾہ ﺑﮩت ﻗرﯾب ﮨﮯ 
take the first road on the left 
ﺑﺎﺋﯾں ﮨﺎﺗﮭ ﭘر ﭘﮩﻠﯽ ﺳڑک ﭘر ﭼﻠﮯ
ﺟﺎﺋﯾﮯ 
turn left ﺑﺎﺋﯾں ﻣڑ ﺟﺎﺋﯾﮯ 
turn right داﺋﯾں ﻣڑ ﺟﺎﺋﯾﮯ 
Dealing with problems 
 
Foundation tier  
accident ﺣﺎدﺛہ 
address ﭘﺗہ  
bill (invoice) ﺑِل 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
177 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
breakdown ﺧراﺑﯽ  
broken ﮢُوﮢﺎ ﮨُوا 
colour رَﻧﮓ  
complaint ﺷﮑﺎﯾت 
correct number ﺻﺣﯾﺢ ﻧﻣﺑر 
customer ﮔﺎﮨﮏ 
customer service ﮐﺳَﮢﻣر ﺳروس 
damage ﻧُﻘﺻﺎن 
delivery ﺣواﻟﮕﯽ 
email address ای ﻣﯾل اﯾڈرﯾس 
form ﻓﺎرم  
guarantee ﺿﻣﺎﻧت 
mistake ﻏَﻠط ﺳﻣﺟﮭﻧﺎ 
mistake/fault ﻏﻠطﯽ 
payment method ﭘﯾَﺳﮯ اَدا ﮐرﻧﮯ ﮐﺎ طرِﯾﻘہ 
purse ﭘَرس 
quantity ﻣﻘدار  
receipt رﺳﯾد 
reduction ﮐﻣﯽ/رﻋﺎﯾت 
repair ﻣرُﻣت  
replacement (part) ﺗﺑدِﯾل ﮐرﻧﺎ 
service ﺧِدﻣت  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
178 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
size ﻧﺎپ 
theft; robbery ڈاﮐہ 
to complain ﺷﮑﺎﯾت ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to deliver ﺣَواﻟﮯ ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to exchange ﺗﺑدِﯾل ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to guarantee ﺿَﻣﺎﻧت دﯾﻧﺎ 
to pay اَدا ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to repair ﻣرﻣت ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to replace ﺗﺑدِﯾل ﮐرﻧﺎ 
telephone number ﮢﯾﻠﯾﻔون ﻧﻣﺑر 
to work, function ﮐﺎم ﮐرﻧﺎ 
waiting time اِﻧﺗظﺎر ﮐﺎ وﻗت 
wallet ﺑَﮢوه  
wrong number رَوﻧﮓ ﻧﻣﺑر /ﻏﻠط ﻧﻣﺑر 
  
Dealing with problems 
 
Higher tier 
 
damage ﻧُﻘﺻﺎن 
instructions for use ﮨداﯾﺎت ﺑراۓ اﺳﺗﻌﻣﺎل  
insurance ﺑِﯾﻣہ 
guarantee/warranty ﮔﺎرﻧﮢﯽ 
progress, improvement ﺑِﮩﺗری  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
179 
 
Higher tier (cont) 
 
to bring back; take back واﭘِس ﻻﻧﺎ 
to complain ﺷﮑﺎﯾت ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to return/give back واﭘسﮐرﻧﺎ/ﻟوَﮢﺎﻧﺎ  
to repair ﻣرﻣت ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to insure ﺑِﯾﻣہ ﮐرﻧﺎ/ﮐرواﻧﺎ 
School 
 
Foundation tier 
 
absent ﻏﯾر ﺣﺎﺿِر  
A Levels (equivalent) اے ﻟﯾوﻟز )ﮐﮯ ﺑراﺑر/ﻣﺳﺎوی(  
achievement, performance ﮐﺎرﮐَردﮔﯽ 
answer/reply ﺟواب 
Art آرٹ 
Biology ◌ 
board (blackboard, whiteboard etc) ﺑﻠﯾﮏ ﺑورڈ ﯾﺎ ﺳﻔﯾد ﺑورڈ 
book ﮐﺗِﺎب 
break وَﻗﻔہ  
business (personal) ﮐﺎروﺑﺎر )ذاﺗﯽ 
calculator ﮐﯾﻠﮑوُﻟﯾﮢر 
canteen   ﮐﯾﻧﮢﯾِن 
careers adviser ﮐرﯾﺋر اﯾڈواﺋزر 
celebrating success ﮐﺎﻣﯾﺎﺑﯽ ﮐﺎ ﺟﺷن ﻣﻧﺎﻧﺎ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
180 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
caretaker دﯾﮑﮭ ﺑﮭﺎل ﮐرﻧﯾواﻻ 
changing room ﮐﭘڑے ﺗﺑدﯾل ﮐرﻧﮯ ﮐﺎ ﮐﻣره 
chef ﺷﯾف 
Chemistry ﻋﻠم ِﮐﯾﻣﯾﺎ 
class test, assessment ﮐﻼس ﮢﯾﺳٹ، اﺳﺳﻣﻧٹ 
classroom ﮐﻼس رُوم 
clever ﮨوﺷﯾﺎر 
college ﮐﺎﻟﺞ 
corridor ﮐورﯾڈور/راﮨداری  
desk ڈَﯾﺳﮏ  /ﺑﻧﭻ  
detention 
اﺳﮑول ﮐﯽ  ﭼﮭُﮢﯽ ﮨوﻧﮯ ﮐﮯ ﺑﻌد  
ﺳزا 
dictionary ڈِﮐﺷﻧری 
Drama ڈراﻣہ 
drama group, acting group ڈراﻣہ ﮔروُپ  
DT (design technology)  ڈﯾزاﺋن ﮢﯾﮑﻧوﻟوﺟﯽ 
education ﺗﻌﻠﯾِم  
English اﻧﮕرﯾزی 
examination اِﻣﺗﺣﺎن  
exam paper (copy; script) اِﻣﺗﺣﺎﻧﯽ ﭘرﭼہ 
exchange ﺗﺑدِﯾل ﮐرﻧﺎ  / ﺗﺑﺎدﻟہ 
exercise book ﮐﺎﭘﯽ 
exercise, practice ﻣَﺷﻖ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
181 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
experiment ﺗَﺟرُﺑہ 
fair  ﻣﻧﺻﻔﺎﻧہ 
first day back at school 
ﭼﮭُﮢﯾوں ﮐﮯ ﺑﻌدا ﺳﮑول ﻣﯾں ﭘﮩﻼ  
دن 
Food technology ﻓوُڈ ﮢﯾﮑﻧوﻟوﺟﯽ  
foreign languages ﻏﯾر ُﻣﻠﮑﯽ زﺑﺎﻧﯾں 
fountain pen ﻓﺎؤﻧﮢن ﭘﯾن 
French ﻓراﻧﺳِﯾﺳﯽ 
future plans ﻣُﺳﺗﻘﺑل ﮐﮯ ﻣﻧﺻوﺑﮯ 
GCSE equivalent ﺟﯽ ﺳﯽ اﯾس ﺳﯽ  ﮐﮯ ﺑراﺑر 
Geography ﺟُﻐراﻓﯾہ 
German ﺟَرﻣن  
gym ﺟِم /ورزش ﺧﺎﻧہ 
gymnastics ﺟِﻣﻧﺎﺳﮢﮏ  
half-term ﮨﺎف ﮢَرم 
hardworking ﻣِﺣﻧﺗﯽ 
headteacher ﮨﯾڈ ﮢِﯾﭼر 
History ﺗﺎرﯾﺦ 
school) holidays ﭼﮭُﮢﯾﺎں / ﺗﻌطﯾﻼت 
homework ﮨوم ورک 
ICT آﺋﯽ ﺳﯽ ﮢﯽ 
Italian اطﺎﻟوی 
kindergarten, nursery school ﮐﻧڈرﮔﺎرﮢن، ﻧرﺳریا ﺳﮑول 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
182 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
laboratory ﻟﯾﺑﺎرﮢری 
modern) languages ﺟدﯾد زَ ﺑﺎﻧﯾں  
language lab ﻟﯾﻧﮕوﺋﯾﺞ      ﻟَﯾب 
Latin ﻻطﯾِﻧﯽ  
lesson (on timetable) ﭘﯾرﯾَڈ 
lesson, hour ﭘﯾرﯾَڈ 
library ﻻﺋﺑرﯾری 
literature ادب 
lunch break ﮐﮭﺎﻧﮯ ﮐﺎ وﻗﻔہ 
mark, grade ﻧﻣﺑر، ﮔرﯾڈ 
Maths رِﯾﺎﺿﯽ  
Media Studies ﻣﯾڈﯾﺎ ﺳﮢڈی 
mixed ﻣِﻼﺟُﻼ  
Music ﻣَوﺳﯾﻘﯽ 
oral زَﺑﺎﻧﯽ  
pad of paper ﻟِﮑﮭﻧﮯ ﮐﺎ ﭘَﯾڈ 
page  ﺻَﻔﺣہ  
PE ﺟِﺳﻣﺎﻧﯽ ﺗﻌﻠﯾم 
pen, ballpoint pen ﺑﺎل ﭘَﯾن  
pencil ﭘِﻧﺳل  
pencil case ﭘِﻧﺳل ﮐﯾس 
physics طﺑﯾﻌﺎت 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
183 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
plan, project ﻣﻧﺻوُﺑہ   
playground ﮐﮭﯾل ﮐﺎ ﻣﯾَدان 
present (in school) ﺣﺎﺿِر اﺳﮑول ﻣﯾں( 
pressures دَﺑﺎؤ  
primary school ﭘراﺋﻣریاﺳﮑول  
private school ﭘراﺋﯾوﯾٹاﺳﮑول / ﻧﺟﯽ اﺳﮑول 
progress ﮐﺎﻣﯾﺎﺑﯽ 
projector ﭘروﺟﯾﮑﮢر 
Personal and Social Education (PSE) ﭘرﺳﻧل اﯾﻧڈ ﺳوﺷل اﯾﺟوﮐﯾﺷن   
pupil ﺷﺎﮔرِد  
qualification ﻗﺎﺑﻠﯾت 
question ﺳوال 
religion, Religious Studies ﻣذﮨب، ﻣذﮨﺑﯽ ﺗﻌﻠﯾم 
report رِﭘورٹ  
result ﻧﺗﯾﺟہ 
rubber رَﺑڑ  
rule/s ﺿﺎﺑطہ/ﺿواﺑط   ،  ﻗﺎﻋده /ﻗواﻋد   
ruler ﻓُﮢّﺎ/ﭘﯾﻣﺎﻧہ  
school اﺳﮑوُل / ﻣدرﺳہ   
school (secondary) ﺛﺎﻧویاﺳﮑُول  
school (primary) ﭘراﺋﻣری اﺳﮑُول 
school activity/activities اﺳﮑُول ﮐﯽ ﺳرﮔرﻣﯽ/ﺳرﮔرﻣﯾﺎں 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
184 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
school bag ﺑﺳﺗہ 
school book اﺳﮑُول ﮐﯽ ﮐﺗﺎب 
school bus اﺳﮑُول ﺑس  
school day اﺳﮑُول ڈے /ﺳﮑول  ﮐﺎ دِن 
school event/s اﺳﮑُول ﮐﯽ ﺳرﮔرﻣﯽ/ﺳرﮔرﻣﯾﺎں 
school exchange 
اﺳﮑُول  ﮐﮯ طﻠﺑﺎ/طﺎﻟﺑﺎت  ﮐﺎ 
ﺗﺑﺎدﻟہ 
school group/party اﺳﮑُول ﮔروپ/ ﭘﺎرﮢﯽ 
school hall اﺳﮑُول ﮨﺎل  
school keeper; caretaker اﺳﮑُول ﮐﺎ ﭼوﮐﯾدار 
school leaving certificate اﺳﮑُول ﭼﮭوڑﻧﮯ ﮐﺎ ﺳرﮢﯾﻔﯾﮑﯾٹ  
school report, certificate اﺳﮑُول رﭘورٹ۔ ﺳر ﮢﯾﻔﯾﮑﯾٹ  
school trip اﺳﮑُول ﮢرِپ  
school (types of) اﺳﮑُول  ﮐﯽ اﻗﺳﺎم  
school year اﺳﮑُول  اﺋﯾر 
Sciences ﺳﺎﺋﯾﻧﺳز 
scissors ﻗﯾﻧﭼﯽ 
serious (hardworking)  ﺳﻧﺟﯾده) ﻣﺣﻧﺗﯽ 
semester ﺳﯾﻣﺳﮢر 
sharpener ﭘِﻧﺳل ﺗراش 
sixth form ﺳﮑﺳﺗﮭ ﻓﺎرم 
skill ﻣﮩﺎرت/ﮨﻧر 
Sociology ﺳوﺷﯾﺎﻟوﺟﯽ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
185 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
Spanish ﮨﺳﭘﺎﻧوی 
sports field/playground ﺳﭘورﮢس ﻓﯾﻠڈ 
sports hall, gym ﺳﭘورﮢس ﮨﺎل،ﺟم )ورزش ﮔﺎه 
staff room اﺳﮢﺎف روم 
state رﯾﺎﺳت 
state school ﺳرﮐﺎریاﺳﮑول 
strict ﺳﺧت 
strong, good at (subject) ﻻﺋﻖ، ﻣﺿﻣون ﻣﯾں ﻻﺋﻖ 
student طﺎﻟبِ ﻋﻠم 
subject/s ﻣﺿﻣون/ ﻣﺿﺎﻣﯾن 
success ﮐﺎﻣﯾﺎﺑﯽ 
successful ﮐﺎﻣﯾﺎب 
summer holidays ﮔرﻣﯾوں ﮐﯽ ﭼﮭُﮢﯾﺎں 
team ﮢِﯾم  
Technology ﮢﯾﮑﻧوﻟوﺟﯽ 
term ﮢَرم 
test ﮢﯾﺳٹ 
tie ﮢﺎﺋﯽ 
timetable ﮢﺎﺋم ﮢﯾﺑل 
to calculate ﺣﺳﺎب ﻟﮕﺎﻧﺎ 
to correct ﺻﺣﯾﺢ /درُﺳت ﮐرﻧﺎ  
to pass (exam) اِﻣﺗﺣﺎن ﭘﺎس ﮐرﻧﺎ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
186 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
to pay attention; to be careful ﺗوَﺟہُ دﯾﻧﺎ  
to practise ﻣَﺷﻖ ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to revise ﻧَظر ﺛﺎﻧﯽ ﮐرﻧﺎ / دُﮨراﻧﺎ 
to sit an exam اِﻣﺗﺣﺎن ﻣﯾں ﺑﯾَﮢﮭﻧﺎ 
to work hard ﻣﺣﻧت ﮐرﻧﺎ 
unfair ﻏﯾر ﻣﻧﺻﻔﺎﻧہ 
uniform وردی / ﯾوﻧﯾﻔﺎرم 
university ﯾوﻧﯾورﺳﮢﯽ 
vocational school; technical college ووﮐﯾﺷﻧلاﺳﮑول؛ ﮢﯾﮑﻧﯾﮑل ﮐﺎﻟﺞ 
what school is like? 
اﺳﮑول ﮐﯾﺳﺎ ﮨﮯ؟ /اﺳﮑول ﮐﮯ  
ﺑﺎرے ﻣﯾں   
weak, bad at (subject) 
ﮐﻣزور،) ﻣﺿﻣون ( ﻣﯾں ﮐﻣزور
ﮨوﻧﺎ  
worksheet ورک ﺷﯾٹ 
year 7 اﯾﺋر 7، ﺳﺎﺗوِﯾں ﮐﻼسﺟﻣﺎﻋت  
year 8 اﯾﺋر8،آﮢﮭوِﯾں ﮐﻼس/ﺟﻣﺎﻋت  
year 9 اﯾﺋر9 ،ﻧوِﯾں ﮐﻼس/ ﺟﻣﺎﻋت  
year 10 اﯾﺋر10 ، دﺳوِﯾں ﮐﻼس/ﺟﻣﺎﻋت  
year 11 
اﯾﺋر11،ﮔﯾﺎرھوِﯾں  
ﮐﻼس/ﺟﻣﺎﻋت  
year 12 اﯾﺋر12،ﺑﺎرھوِﯾں ﮐﻼس/ﺟﻣﺎﻋت  
year 13 اﯾﺋر13، ﺗﯾرھوِﯾں ﮐﻼس/ﺟﻣﺎﻋت 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
187 
 
School 
 
Higher tier 
 
ballpoint pen ﺑﺎل ﭘﯾن 
Biology ﻋﻠمِ ﺣﯾﺎﺗﯾﺎت 
boarding school ﺑورڈﻧﮓ ا  ﺳﮑول  
Business Studies ﺑزﻧساﺳﮢڈﯾز  
choir 
ﮔرﺟﮯ ﻣﯾں ﮔﺎﻧﮯ واﻟوں ﮐﺎ
طﺎﺋﻔہ  
class register ﮐﻼس رﺟﺳﮢر 
core/compulsory subject ﻻزﻣﯽ ﻣﺿﻣوُن  
degree (university) ڈِﮔری 
do badly; fail ﻓﯾل / ﻧﺎﮐﺎم 
Economics اِﻗﺗﺻﺎدﯾﺎت 
essay/article ﻣﺿﻣوُن  
final exam/annual exam آﺧری اﻣﺗﺣﺎن /ﺳﺎﻻﻧہ اﻣﺗﺣﺎن 
meeting, discussion, debate ﻣﻼﻗﺎت، ﺑﺣث ﻣﺑﺎﺣﺛہ 
optional (subject) اﺧﺗﯾﺎری ) ﻣﺿﻣون 
parents’ evening واﻟدﯾن ﮐﯽ ﺷﺎم 
permission اﺟﺎزت  
Physics and Chemistry طﺑﯾﻌﺎت اور ﮐﯾﻣﯾﺎ 
pressure دﺑﺎؤ  
pronunciation ﺗﻠﻔُظ 
Sociology ﺳوﺷﯾﺎﻟوﺟﯽ 
studies ﭘڑھﺎﺋﯽ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
188 
 
Higher tier (cont) 
 
supervisor ﺳﭘرواﺋﯾزر 
to agree ﮐﺳﯽ ﭼﯾز ﭘر راﺿﯽ ﮨوﻧﺎ 
to be cancelled (lessons) ﮐﻼس ﻣﻧﺳوُخ ﮨوﻧﺎ  
to drop a subject ﮐوﺋﯽ ﻣﺿﻣوُن  ﭼﮭوڑ دﯾﻧﺎ  
to have a detention ﺳزا ﻣﻠﻧﺎ 
to improve (one’s knowledge/skills in) ﺑﮩﺗر ﮐرﻧﺎ )ﺗﻌﻠﯾم ،ﮨﻧر 
to move up (to the next form/year) 
اﮔﻠﮯ ﻓورم/ﺳﺎل ﻣﯾں ﭘﺎس
ﮨوﮐرﺟﺎﻧﺎ  
to pronounce اداﺋﯾﮕﯽ )اﻟﻔﺎظ  ﮐﯽ 
to spell ﮨﺟﮯ ﺑﻧﺎﻧﺎ/ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to translate ﺗرﺟُﻣہﮐرﻧﺎ  
training centre ﮢرﯾﻧﻧﮓ ﺳﯾﻧﮢر/ﺗرﺑﯾت ﮔﺎه  
translation ﺗرﺟُﻣہ  
waste of time وﻗت ﮐﺎ ﺿﯾﺎع/زﯾﺎں  
to do a) written punishment, lines ﺗﺣرﯾری ﺳزا ﮐرﻧﺎ 
Future aspirations, study and work 
Foundation tier 
 
actor, actress اداﮐﺎر، اداﮐﺎره 
advertisement اﺷﺗﮩﺎر 
air hostess/air steward/stewardess ﻓﺿﺎﺋﯽ ﻣﯾزﺑﺎن 
ambition/s اُﻣﯾد/ اُﻣﯾدﯾں 
answerphone آﻧﺳر ﻓون 
apprenticeship ﮐﺎر آﻣوزی 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
189 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
architect ﻓنِ ﺗﻌﻣﯾر ﮐﺎ ﻣﺎﮨر 
artist ﻓﻧﮑﺎر  
aspirations 
اُﻣﯾدﯾں / اِرادے/ ﺣوﺻﻠﮯ  
)ﺳﺗﻘﺑِل ﮐﮯ(  
badly paid ﻏﯾر ﻣﻧﺻﻔﺎﻧہ اداﺋﯾﮕﯽ 
baker ﺑﯾﮑر /ﻧﺎن ﺑﺎﺋﯽ 
beyond the classroom ﮐﻣرهِ ﺟﻣﺎﻋت ﺳﮯ ﺑﺎﮨر 
builder ﻣﻌﻣﺎر، ﻣﺳﺗری 
building relationships ﺗﻌﻠﻘﺎت ﺑڑھﺎﻧﺎ 
business/shop ﮐﺎروﺑﺎرﺑزﻧس /دﮐﺎن 
busy ﻣﺻروف 
butcher ﻗﺻﺎﺋﯽ/ﻗﺻﺎب  
career/s ﮐﯾرﺋﯾر 
cashier ﮐﯾﺷﺋﯾر/ﺧزاﻧﭼﯽ 
charity ﺧﯾرات 
civil servant ﺳرﮐﺎری ﻧوﮐر 
coffee (tea/lunch) break ﮐﺎﻓﯽ )ﭼﺎﺋﮯ، ﻟﻧﭻ ﮐﺎ( وﻗﻔہ 
colleague رﻓﯾﻖ ِﮐﺎر/ﮨﻣﮑﺎر  
computer science ﮐﻣﭘﯾُوﮢر ﺳﺎﺋﻧس 
computer scientist ﮐﻣﭘﯾُوﮢر ﺳﺎﺋﻧﺳدان 
conference ﮐﺎﻧﻔرﻧس 
cook ﺧﺎﻧﺳﺎﻣﺎں 
degree (university) ڈِﮔری 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
190 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
(a) day’s leave اﯾﮏ دن ﮐﯽ ﭼُﮭﮢﯽ /رُﺧﺻت 
dentist دَﻧدان ﺳﺎز 
designer ڈِﯾزاﺋﯾﻧر 
doctor ڈاﮐﮢر 
drama ڈراﻣہ 
dream ﺧواب 
driver ڈراﺋﯾور 
educational ﺗﻌﻠﯾﻣﯽ 
electrician اِﻟﯾﮑﮢرﯾﺷن/ ﺑﺟﻠﯽ ﮐﺎ ﮐﺎرﯾﮕر  
bank) employee ﻣُﻼزِم  
employer ﻣﺎ ِﻟﮏ 
employment/job/work ﻣﻼُزﻣت /ﻧوﮐری/ﮐﺎم 
engineer اِﻧﺟﯾﻧﺋر  
experienced ﺗﺟرُﺑہ ﮐﺎر 
farmer ﮐِﺳﺎن 
fashion ﻓﯾﺷن 
file ﻓﺎﺋل 
fireman ﻓﺎﺋر ﻣﯾن 
folder ﻓوﻟڈر 
form ﻓورم 
further study/education اﻋﻠﯽٰ ﺗﻌﻠﯾم 
gadget/s آﻟہ/آﻻت 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
191 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
inspiration ﺧواﮨِش / آرزوُ / ﺗﻣﻧﺎ  
inspire ﺷَوق / ﺣوﺻﻠہ دﻻﻧﺎ 
interview (job) اِﻧﮢروﯾو )ﻣُﻼزﻣت 
interview (TV or magazine) اِﻧﮢر وﯾو )ﮢﯽ وی ﯾﺎ ﻣﯾﮕزﯾن 
job/s, employment ﻣُﻼزﻣت ، ﻧوَﮐری ، ﮐﺎم 
journalist ﺻﺣﺎﻓﯽ  
language زَﺑﺎن 
manager ﻣﻧﯾﺟر 
marketing ﻣﺎرﮐﯾﮢﻧﮓ 
mechanic ﻣﮑﯾَﻧﮏ  
meeting ﻣُﻼﻗﺎت  
musician ﻣوَﺳﯾﻘﺎر  
nurse ﻧرَس  
part time ﭘﺎرٹ ﮢﺎﺋم 
per hour ﻓﯽ ﮔﮭﻧﮢہ 
pharmacist دَوا ﺳﺎز 
plan, project ﻣَﻧﺻوُﺑہ، ﭘروﺟﯾﮑٹ  
planned ﺑﻧﺎ ﮨُوا ﻣﻧﺻُوﺑہ 
plumber ﭘﻠﻣﺑر  /ﭘﻠﻣر 
poet ﺷﺎ  ﻋر 
police officer ﭘوﻟﯾس اﻓﺳر 
profession/s ﭘﯾﺷہ/ ﭘﯾﺷﮯ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
192 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
programmer ﭘروﮔراﻣر 
rep, sales representative ﻧﻣﺎﺋﻧده  ، ﺳﯾﻠز رﯾﭘرﯾزﻧﮢو 
salary/wages ﺗﻧﺧواه 
sewing, tailoring ﺳﯾِﻧﺎ، ﺳِﻼﺋﯽ 
situation wanted آﺳﺎﻣﯽ ﭼﺎﮨﺋﯾﮯ 
society/company ﺳوﺳﺎﺋﮢﯽ / ﮐﻣﭘﻧﯽ 
student طﺎﻟبِ ﻋﻠم 
study ﭘڑھﺎﺋﯽ، ﻣُطﺎﻟﻌہ 
Teacher  m/f اُﺳﺗﺎد /اُﺳﺗﺎﻧﯽ  
teacher (primary) اُﺳﺗﺎد )ﭘراﺋﻣری(  
technician ﮢﯾﮑﻧﯾﺷن/ﻣﺳﺗری  
telephone call ﮢﯾﻠﯽ ﻓون ﮐﺎل 
to apply for a job 
ﻣُﻼزﻣتﮐﮯ ﻟﯾﮯ درﺧواﺳت 
ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to do a course ﮐورس ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to fill in a form ﻓﺎرم ﭘُر ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to file a case داﺋر ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to organise ﻣُﻧظم ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to print ﭼﮭﺎﭘﻧﺎ 
to type ﮢﺎﺋپ ﮐرﻧﺎ 
training ﺗَرﺑﯾت 
travel agency ﮢرﯾول اﯾﺟﻧﺳﯽ 
unemployment ﺑﮯ روزﮔﺎری 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
193 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
university ﯾُوﻧﯾورﺳﮢﯽ 
voluntarily, without pay 
رﺿﺎ ﮐﺎراﻧہ، ﺑﻐﯾر
ﺗﻧﺧواه/ﻣﻌﺎوﺿﮯ ﮐﮯ ﮐﺎم ﮐرﻧﺎ 
volunteer رَﺿﺎﮐﺎر 
volunteering رﺿﺎﮐﺎراﻧہ ﮐﺎم ﮐرﻧﺎ 
waiter/waitress وﯾﮢر/ وﯾﮢرس /ﺑﯾرا 
well paid اَﭼﮭﯽ ﺗﻧﺧواه ﻣﻠﻧﺎ 
work ﮐﺎم 
work experience ﮐﺎم ﮐﺎ ﺗﺟرُﺑہ 
Future aspirations, study and work 
Higher tier 
 
(data) file ڈﯾﮢﺎ ﻓﺎﺋل 
aim; goal ﻣَﻘﺻد 
apply at/go to (e.g. ask) at reception 
اِﺳﺗﻘﺑﺎﻟﯾہ ﺳﮯ ﻣﻌﻠوﻣﺎت ﺣﺎ ﺻل
ﮐرﯾں 
apply; enroll دَرﺧواﺳت دﯾﻧﺎ 
appointment اَﭘواﺋﻧﮢﻣﻧٹ 
apprentice ﺷﺎِﮔرد 
charity sale (e.g. bake sale) ﺧﯾراﺗﯽ ﺳﯾل 
data base ڈﯾﮢﺎ ﺑﯾس 
enclosed ﻣﻠﻔُوف 
hard disk ﮨﺎرڈ ڈِﺳﮏ 
higher education اﻋﻠٰﯽ ﺗﻌﻠﯾم 
impression ﺗﺎﺛر 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
194 
 
Higher tier (cont) 
 
in aid of ﻣدد ﮐﯽ ﺧﺎِطر 
internship اِﻧﮢرن ﺷپ 
job advertisement اِﺷﺗﮩﺎر ِﻣﻼزﻣت /ﻣﻼزﻣت ﮐﺎ اِﺷﺗﮩﺎر 
keyboard ﮐﯽ ﺑورڈ 
law (study of the subject) ﻗﺎﻧون) ﭘڑھﻧﺎ 
letter of application درﺧواﺳت ﮐﺎ ﺧط  
link ﮐڑی 
medicine (study of the subject) طﺑﯽ ﺗﻌﻠﯾم/ڈاﮐﮢری ﮐﯽ ﺗﻌﻠﯾم  
memory card ﻣﯾﻣوری ﮐﺎرڈ 
mouse ﻣﺎؤس  
position (job) ﻣُﻼزﻣت ﮐﯽ آﺳﺎﻣﯽ 
printer ﭘرِﻧﮢر  
profession, job, occupation ﭘﯾﺷہ، ﻣﻼزﻣت، ﻧوﮐری 
programmer ﭘروﮔراﻣر 
promotion prospects ﺗرﻗﯽ ﮐﮯ اِﻣﮑﺎﻧﺎت 
qualification ﻗﺎﺑِﻠﯾت 
qualified ﻗﺎﺑِل 
school education اﺳﮑول ﮐﯽ ﺗﻌﻠﯾم  
translator ﻣﺗرﺟم/ﻣﺗرﺟﻣہ 
voluntary work رَﺿﺎﮐﺎراﻧہ ﮐﺎم  
signature دﺳﺗﺧط 
success ﮐﺎﻣﯾﺎﺑﯽ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
195 
 
Higher tier (cont) 
 
successful ﮐﺎﻣﯾﺎب 
teaching; education (as a subject) ﭘڑھﺎﻧﺎ/ﺳﮑﮭﺎﻧﺎ 
to enclose, to attach ﻣﻠﻔوُف ﮐرﻧﺎ، ﻧﺗﮭﯽ ﮐرﻧﺎ  
to introduce ﺗُﻌﺎرُف ﮐراﻧﺎ 
touch screen ﮢﭻ ﺳﮑرﯾن 
university (informal) ﯾوﻧﯾورﺳﮢﯽ 
webmail وَﯾب ﻣﯾل 
word processing وَرڈ ﭘروﺳﯾﺳﻧﮓ 
work (informal) ﮐﺎم /ﻣﻼزﻣت /ﻧوﮐری 
International and global dimension: bringing the world together, 
environmental issues, world events, campaigns and good causes 
Foundation tier 
 
access رﺳﺎﺋﯽ ، ﭘُﮩﻧﭻ 
advantages/disadvantages ﻓواﺋد/ ﻧُﻘﺻﺎﻧﺎت 
animals ﺟﺎﻧوَر  
being 'green' (environmentally friendly) ﻣﺎﺣول دوﺳت   
campaigns/good causes ﻣُﮩم/ اﭼﮭﮯ ﻣَﻘﺎﺻد 
cattle/livestock ﻣوﯾﺷﯽ 
charity ﺧﯾرات / ﺧﯾراﺗﯽ 
coal ﮐوﺋﻠہ 
country ﻣﻠﮏ 
crop ﻓﺻل 
disaster ﺗﺑﺎﮨﯽ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
196 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
drinking water ﭘﯾِﻧﮯ ﮐﺎ ﭘﺎﻧﯽ 
drought ﺧُﺷﮏ ﺳﺎﻟﯽ 
earth زﻣﯾن 
earthquake  زَﻟزِﻟہ  
electricity ﺑﺟِﻠﯽ  
energy; power ﺗواﻧﺎﺋﯽ ؛ طﺎﻗت 
environment ﻣﺎﺣول / ﻣﺎﺣوﻟﯾﺎت 
environmental ﻣﺎﺣوﻟﯾﺎﺗﯽ 
environmental issues ﻣﺎﺣوﻟﯾﺎﺗﯽ ﻣﺳﺎﺋل 
fair trade ﻓﯾﺋر ﮢرﯾڈ / ُﻣﻧﺻﻔﺎﻧہ ﺗﺟﺎرت 
music) festival ﺗِﮩوار 
flood; flooding ﺳَﯾﻼب  
for/against  ﺣَﻖ/ ﺧِﻼف 
rain)forest رﯾن ﻓﺎرﺳٹ)ﺑﺎراﻧﯽ (ﺟﻧﮕﻼت 
gas ﮔﯾس 
global; worldwide; universal ﻋﺎﻟﻣﯽ  
hunger; famine ﺑُﮭوک/ﻗِﺣط/ﻓﺎﻗہ ﮐﺷﯽ 
hurricane ﺳَﻣﻧدری طوﻓﺎن 
international/global dimension ﺑﯾنُ اﻻﻗواﻣﯽ / ﻋﺎﻟﻣﯽ ﭘﮩﻠوُ 
lack (of) ﮐﻣﯽ 
music event ﻣﺣﻔلِ  ﻣوﺳﯾﻘﯽ 
natural resources ﻗدرﺗﯽ وﺳﺎﺋل 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
197 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
oil ﺗﯾل  
Olympic games اوﻟﻣﭘﮏ ﮐﮭﯾل 
organization اِداره 
people ﻟوگ 
planet ﺳﯾﺎره  / ﮐُرّه 
pollution آﻟوُدﮔﯽ  
poverty ﻏُرﺑت 
protection ﺣِﻔﺎظت ﮐرﻧﺎ 
rubbish ﮐوُڑا  /ﮐُوڑا ﮐرﮐٹ 
sports event ﮐﮭﯾﻠوں ﮐﯽ ﺗﻘرﯾب  
to pollute آﻟوُده ﮐرﻧﺎ  
to protect ﺣِﻔﺎظت ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to recycle رﯾﺳﺎﺋﯾﮑل ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to save (water) ﺑَﭼﺎﻧﺎ  
racial discrimination ﻧﺳﻠﯽ اﻣﺗﯾﺎز 
war ﺟَﻧﮓ 
Higher tier  
world دُﻧﯾﺎ/زﻣﺎﻧہ 
World Cup (football) وَرﻟڈ ﮐپ َ/ﻋﺎﻟﻣﯽ ﮐپ  َ)ﻓُٹ ﺑﺎل  
common wealth دوﻟتِ  ﻣﺷُﺗرﮐہ 
climate آب وﮨوا 
fresh water ﺗﺎزه ﭘﺎﻧﯽ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
198 
 
Higher tier (cont) 
 
global warming ﮔﻠوﺑل وارﻣﻧﮓ 
instant ﻓوراً 
malnourished ﮐم/ﺧراب ﻏذاﺋﯾت ﮐﺎ ﺷﮑﺎر  
rights of man; peoples’ rights اﻧﺳﺎﻧﯽ ﺣﻘُوق 
salt water ﻧﻣﮑﯾن ﭘﺎﻧﯽ  
security ﺳﯾﮑﯾورﮢﯽ  / ﺗﺣﻔظ 
solar power ﺷﻣﺳﯽ ﺗواﻧﺎﺋﯽ 
species ﺟِﻧس  
United Nations اﻗوامِ   ُﻣﺗﺣده 
sports event ﮐﮭﯾﻠوں ﮐﯽ ﺗﻘرِﯾب 
spying ﺟﺎﺳُوﺳﯽ ﮐرﻧﺎ 
starvation ﺑﮭُوک/ﻓﺎﻗہ ﮐﺷﯽ 
starving ﺑﮭُوﮐﺎ 
to (make) compost ﮐﮭﺎد ﺑﻧﺎﻧﺎ 
to benefit ﻓﺎﺋده دﯾﻧﺎ 
to lack ﮐم ﮐرﻧﺎ/ ﮨوﻧﺎ 
to contaminate آﻟوُد ه ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to save; to keep safe ﺑﭼﺎﻧﺎ  
to sort/separate (e.g. rubbish) اﻟﮓ اﻟﮓ ﮐرﻧﺎ 
to stay in contact راﺑطہ رﮐﮭﻧﺎ 
to survive ﺑﭻ ﺟﺎﻧﺎ 
to threaten دَھﻣﮑﯽ دﯾﻧﺎ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
199 
 
Higher tier (cont) 
 
United Nations organization اﻧﺟﻣن اﻗوامِ ﻣﺗﺣده 
unfortunate; needy  ﺑدﻗِﺳﻣت ؛  ﺿرورﺗﻣﻧد  
volcano آﺗِش ﻓﺷﺎں 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
200 
Appendix 4: The context for the 
development of this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] and our 
ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
● reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with those 
taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
● consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including subject 
associations, academics and advisors, teachers and students to ensure this qualification is 
suitable for a UK context 
reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in their 
documents GCSE (9 to 1) Subject Level Guidance and GCSE Subject Level Conditions and 
Requirements for Modern Foreign Languages, published in April 2016. 
 
 
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification Principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
● demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning and 
measuring higher-order skills 
● rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and valid 
assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in end users of the knowledge, skills and 
competencies of certified students 
● inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students develop at 
different rates and have different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
● empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills, see Appendix 5.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
201 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
May 2014 
“The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important change to the 
education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications will assist them in 
helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an ‘Expert 
Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or because of 
our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the world as diverse as 
Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification development 
process that has included: 
● extensive international comparability of subject content against the highest-performing 
jurisdictions in the world 
● benchmarking assessments against UK and overseas providers to ensure that they are at 
the right level of demand 
● establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-specific 
expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
● subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future oriented. The 
design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, meaning learner outcomes 
have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a learner’s 
success in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident that we have 
supported the development of qualifications that are outstanding for their coherence, 
thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as representing world-class best 
practice.”    
  
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Lee Sing Kong  
Director, National Institute of Education, 
Singapore 
  
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
  
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
 
All titles correct as at May 2014 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
202 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently flagged the 
need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable them to respond with 
confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines skills, or 
competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that can be learned and 
that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform an activity or task and can be 
built upon and extended through learning.’
[1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected and 
evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this process, we 
identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the most evidence-based and 
robust skills framework. We adapted the framework slightly to include the Program for 
International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT Literacy and Collaborative Problem Solving 
(CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves:[2] 
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve general 
cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and communicate. [3]  
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, oral communication, written communication, assertive 
communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, service 
orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared understanding, 
taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team organisation. 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work stress, 
adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, and physical 
adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual teams, 
work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and able to acquire 
new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher education, 
as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the teaching and learning of 
this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning materials, developed with 
stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
 
[1]  OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012) 
[2]  Koenig J A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop (National 
Academies Press, 2011) 
[3]  PISA – The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy (2011) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Urdu – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
203 
Appendix 6: Codes 
 
Type of code Use of code Code 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for performance 
tables is assigned a discount code that 
indicates the subject area to which it 
belongs. 
Discount codes are published by the DfE. 
Please see the GOV.UK 
website* 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an 
Ofqual Regulated Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) code. 
The RQF code is known as a Qualification 
Number (QN). This is the code that 
features in the DfE Section 96 and on the 
LARA as being eligible for 16–18 and 19+ 
funding, and is to be used for all 
qualification funding purposes. The QN will 
appear on students’ final certification 
documentation. 
The QN for this 
qualification is: 
603/1114/9 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to 
enter students for a qualification. Centres 
will need to use the entry codes only when 
claiming students’ qualifications. 
GCSE – 1UR0 
 
Paper codes These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be 
entered for individual papers. 
Paper 1: 1UR0/01 
Paper 2: 1UR0/02 
Paper 3: 1UR0/03 
Paper 4: 1UR0/04 
*www.gov.uk/government/publications/2018-performance-tables-discount-code 
 
 
 
TM290922 9781446956465_GCSE2017_L12_URDU_ISSUE5.DOC.1–210/0 

 
 
About Pearson 
We are the world’s leading learning company operating in countries all around the world. We 
provide content, assessment and digital services to schools, colleges and universities, as well 
as professional and vocational education to learners to help increase their skills and lifelong 
employability prospects. We believe that wherever learning flourishes so do people.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This specification is Issue 5. We will inform centres of any changes to this issue. The latest 
issue can be found on the Pearson website: qualifications.pearson.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References to third party materials made in this specification are made in good faith. Pearson 
does not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may 
be subject to change, or any opinions expressed therein. (Materials may include textbooks, 
journals, magazines and other publications and websites.) 
 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
 
ISBN 978 1 446 95646 5 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2022 
 
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office:  80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121