This dra/f_t   qualiﬁ  cation has not yet been accredited by Ofqual. It is published to enable teachers to have early sight of our 
proposed approach to Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9 - 1) in Music (1MU0). Further changes may be required 
and no assurance can be given at this time that the proposed qualiﬁ  cation will be made available in its current form, or 
that it will be accredited in time for ﬁ  rst teaching in September 2016 and ﬁ  rst award in 2018.
Speciﬁ  cation
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9 - 1) in Religious Studies A (1RA0)
First teaching from September 2016
First certiﬁ  cation from 2018 Issue 2
GCSE (9-1)
Religious 
Studies A
Faith and Practice in 
the 21st Century
 
 
About Pearson 
Pearson is the world's leading learning company operating in countries around the world. We 
provide content, assessment and digital services to learners, educational institutions, 
employers, governments and other partners globally. We are committed to helping equip 
learners with the skills they need to enhance their employability prospects and to succeed in 
the changing world of work. We believe that wherever learning flourishes, so do people.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This specification is Issue 2. Key changes are summarised on the next page. We will inform 
centres of any changes to this issue. The latest issue can be found on our website. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References to third party material made in this specification are made in good faith. Pearson 
does not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may 
be subject to change, or any opinions expressed therein. (Material may include textbooks, 
journals, magazines and other publications and websites.) 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
ISBN 978 1 446 92782 3
 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2024 
 
Summary of changes to GCSE Religious Studies A 
specification Issue 2 
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this issue 1 Page 
numbers 
Information about the content and assessment has been updated to improve 
clarity. 
4–6 
Topic references (e.g. 1A, 1B, etc) and the names of the Sections (e.g. Beliefs 
and Teachings) have been added throughout the taught content at the top of 
each page. 
8–61 
Minor amendments have been made to correct errors and also improve 
consistency (e.g. capitalisation, spelling and punctuation). More detail on 
these updates is available separately. 
8–61 
Changes have been made to the Malpractice information to reflect procedural 
changes since 2016 
66 
The definition of ‘evaluate’ in the taxonomy has been updated to make it 
clearer and also to align better with the updated mark schemes 
74 
 
If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, please contact us via 
our website at: qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/contact-us.html. 
 
 
 
Contents 
1 Introduction 2 
Why choose Edexcel GCSE Religious Studies A? 2 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this qualification 3 
Qualification at a glance 4 
2 Subject content 7 
Area of Study 1: Study of Religion 8 
Area of Study 2: Study of Second Religion 24 
Area of Study 3: Philosophy and Ethics 46 
Area of Study 4: Textual Studies 56 
Assessment Objectives 63 
3 Administration and general information 64 
Entries 64 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special consideration and 
malpractice 64 
Student recruitment and progression 66 
Appendix 1: The context for the development of this 
qualification 71 
Appendix 2: Transferable skills 73 
Appendix 3: Command Words 74 
Appendix 4: Codes 75 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
2 
 
1 Introduction 
Why choose Edexcel GCSE Religious Studies A? 
We have listened to feedback from all parts of the religious education community, including 
higher education. We have used this opportunity of curriculum change to redesign 
qualifications so that students can use a wide range of concepts to confidently interpret, 
contextualise and analyse the expressions of religions and world views they encounter. This 
is one of two GCSE Religious Studies qualifications offered. 
A specification to suit everyone – With our suite of two full course GCSE Religious Studies 
specifications, you can pick the one that meets the needs of all your students. 
A familiar approach – We have retained the aspects of our current specification and 
assessments that you like, while adding new and exciting content.  
Focus on chosen religion – We have structured the course to allow you to focus in depth 
on the study of one religion (Catholic Christianity, Christianity or Islam). 
Choice of religions and routes – Our qualification offers a choice of three primary religions 
and seven ‘second’ religions, as well as a choice between a philosophy and ethics paper or a 
textual study. 
Helps develop a holistic understanding of religion – The new specification explores 
religion and practice in the 21st century and encourages students to reflect on and engage 
with fundamental questions.  
Develops transferable skills for progression – Students will develop analytical and 
critical thinking skills to enable them to present a wide range of well-informed and 
reasonable arguments, aiding in progression to AS and A level study. 
Accessible assessment – Our exam papers have been designed with a straightforward 
structure and consistent use of command words in questions. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A  
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 3 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this 
qualification 
Planning  
● Our Getting Started guide gives you an overview of the new GCSE qualification to help 
you to get to grips with the changes to content and assessment and to help you 
understand what these changes mean for you and your students. 
● We will give you an editable course planner and scheme of work that you can adapt to 
suit your department.  
● Our mapping documents highlight key differences between the new and current 
qualifications. 
Teaching and learning  
There will be lots of free teaching and learning support to help you deliver the new 
qualification, including: 
● guidance documents 
● exemplars 
● a student guide 
● materials for your options evenings. 
Preparing for exams 
We will also provide a range of resources to help you prepare your students for the 
assessments, including marked exemplars of student work with examiner commentaries.  
ResultsPlus 
ResultsPlus provides the most detailed analysis available of your students’ exam 
performance. It can help you identify the topics and skills where further learning would 
benefit your students.  
Get help and support 
Our support line, Ask the Expert and our online community will ensure you receive help and 
guidance from us and that you can share ideas and information with other teachers. You can 
sign up to receive e-newsletters from the subject advisor service to keep up to date with 
qualification updates and product and service news. 
The Religious Studies Team can be contacted by email: 
TeachingReligiousStudies@pearson.com  
Learn more at qualifications.pearson.com 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
4 
Qualification at a glance 
Content and assessment overview 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Religious Studies A consists of three 
externally-examined papers.  
All students must complete: 
● Paper 1: Area of Study 1 – Study of Religion 
● Paper 2: Area of Study 2 – Study of Second Religion 
Students must then complete one assessment from either: 
● Paper 3: Area of Study 3 – Philosophy and Ethics 
or 
● Paper 4: Area of Study 4 – Textual Studies 
Students must complete all assessments in May/June in any single year. 
 
Paper 1: Area of Study 1 – Study of Religion (*Paper code: 1RA0/1A–1C)  
Written examination: 1 hour and 45 minutes 
50% of the qualification 
102 marks 
Content overview 
One religion must be studied from a choice of three: 
1A Catholic Christianity 
1B Christianity 
1C Islam. 
Students must study all four sections for their chosen religion: 
● Beliefs and Teachings 
● Practices 
● Sources of Wisdom and Authority 
● Forms of Expression and Ways of Life. 
Assessment overview 
● Students must answer all questions for the chosen religion. 
● The assessment consists of four questions. Each question is numbered (a) to (d). 
● The paper includes short open, open response and extended writing questions. 
● 5% of the marks will be for spelling, punctuation and grammar and use of specialist 
terminology (SPaG). 
*See Appendix 4: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to this 
qualification. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A  
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 5 
 
Paper 2: Area of Study 2 – Study of Second Religion (*Paper code: 1RA0/2A–2G)  
Written examination: 50 minutes 
25% of the qualification 
51 marks 
Content overview 
One religion must be studied from a choice of seven: 
2A Catholic Christianity 
2B Christianity 
2C Islam 
2D Buddhism 
2E Hinduism 
2F Judaism 
2G Sikhism. 
This must be a different religion than that selected for Paper 1: Study of Religion. 
Students who have studied Catholic Christianity or Christianity for Paper 1 cannot take either 
of these papers for their chosen second religion. 
Students must study both sections for their chosen religion: 
● Beliefs and Teachings 
● Practices. 
Assessment overview 
● Students must answer all questions for the chosen religion. 
● The assessment consists of two questions. Each question is numbered (a) to (d).  
● The paper includes short open, open response and extended writing questions. 
● 5% of the marks will be for spelling, punctuation and grammar and use of specialist 
terminology (SPaG). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
6 
 
Paper 3: Area of Study 3 – Philosophy and Ethics (*Paper code: 1RA0/3A–3C)  
Written examination: 50 minutes 
25% of the qualification 
51 marks 
Content overview 
One religion must be studied from a choice of three: 
3A Catholic Christianity 
3B Christianity  
3C Islam. 
The chosen religion should be the same as that selected for Paper 1. 
Students must study both sections for their chosen religion: 
● Arguments for the Existence of God 
● Religious Teachings on Relationships and Families in the 21st century. 
Assessment overview 
● Students must answer all questions for the chosen religion. 
● The assessment consists of two questions. Each question is numbered (a) to (d). 
● The paper includes short open, open response and extended writing questions. 
● 5% of the marks will be for spelling, punctuation and grammar and use of specialist 
terminology (SPaG). 
 
 
Paper 4: Area of Study 4 – Textual Studies (*Paper code: 1RA0/4A–4B)  
Written examination: 50 minutes 
25% of the qualification 
51 marks 
Content overview 
One textual study must be studied from a choice of two (Mark’s Gospel or the Qu’ran). 
Students must study both sections for their textual study. 
4A Mark’s Gospel  
● Who is Jesus? 
● The Nature of Discipleship 
4B The Qur’an 
● Beliefs and Teachings of Islam 
● Lives of the Prophets and others 
Assessment overview 
● Students must answer all questions for the chosen textual study. 
● The assessment consists of two questions. Each question is numbered (a) to (d). 
● The paper may include short open, open response and extended writing questions. 
● 5% of the marks will be for spelling, punctuation and grammar and use of specialist 
terminology (SPaG). 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A  
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 7 
2 Subject content 
Qualification aims and objectives 
The aims and objectives of this qualification are to enable students to:  
● develop their knowledge and understanding of religions and non-religious beliefs, such as 
atheism and humanism 
● develop their knowledge and understanding of religious beliefs, teachings, and sources of 
wisdom and authority, including through their reading of key religious texts, other texts, 
and scriptures of the religions they are studying 
● develop their ability to construct well-argued, well-informed, balanced and structured 
written arguments, demonstrating their depth and breadth of understanding of the subject 
● engage with questions of belief, value, meaning, purpose, truth, and their influence on 
human life 
● reflect on and develop their own values, beliefs and attitudes in the light of what they 
have learnt and will contribute to their preparation for adult life in a pluralistic society and 
global community 
● demonstrate knowledge and understanding of two religions 
● demonstrate knowledge and understanding of key sources of wisdom and authority 
including scripture and/or sacred texts, where appropriate, which support contemporary 
religious faith 
● understand the influence of religion on individuals, communities and societies  
● understand significant common and divergent views between and/or within religions and 
beliefs 
● apply knowledge and understanding in order to analyse questions related to religious 
beliefs and values 
● construct well-informed and balanced arguments on matters concerned with religious 
beliefs and values. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
8 
Area of Study 1: Study of Religion 
Area of Study 1A – Catholic Christianity 
Overview 
This area of study comprises a study in depth of Catholic Christianity as a lived religion in the 
United Kingdom and throughout the world. 
There are four sections: Beliefs and Teachings; Practices; Sources of Wisdom and Authority; 
Forms of Expression and Ways of Life. 
Students will be expected to study Catholic Christianity within the context of the wider British 
society, the religious traditions of which are, in the main, Christian. Students should compare 
and contrast the areas of belief and practice within Catholic Christianity with wider Christian 
perspectives as outlined in the content below. 
● Beliefs about the afterlife and their significance (1.8)* 
● The practice and significance of worship (2.2)*. 
Students should recognise that Catholic Christianity is one of the many religious traditions in 
Great Britain which include Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism and Sikhism. This 
knowledge may be applied throughout the assessment of the specified content.  
Students should also recognise that within Catholic Christianity there may be more than one 
perspective in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed. Common and 
divergent views within the wider Christian tradition in the way beliefs and teachings are 
understood and expressed should be included throughout, including reference to Orthodox, 
Protestant and other Christian traditions.  
The significance and importance of the various beliefs and practices to Catholics today, 
should be explored throughout the four sections. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A  
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 9 
1A Catholic Christianity 
Section 1: Beliefs and Teachings 
Students should have an understanding of: 
1.1 The Trinity: the nature and significance of the Trinity as expressed in the Nicene 
Creed; the nature and significance of the oneness of God; the nature and 
significance of each of the Persons individually: God as the Father, Son and Holy 
Spirit; how this is reflected in worship and belief in the life of a Catholic today. 
1.2 Biblical understandings of God as a Trinity of Persons: the nature and significance 
of God as a Trinity of Persons, including reference to the baptism of Jesus 
(Matthew 3:13–17); the historical development of the doctrine of the Trinity, 
including reference to the First Council of Nicaea and the First Council of 
Constantinople. 
1.3 Creation: the nature and significance of the biblical account of Creation, including 
Genesis 1–3; and how it may be understood in divergent ways in Christianity, 
including reference to literal and metaphorical interpretations; the significance of 
the Creation account for Catholics in understanding the nature and characteristics 
of God, especially as Creator, benevolent, omnipotent and eternal. 
1.4 The significance of the Creation account in understanding the nature of humanity: 
the nature and significance of the nature of humanity being created in the image 
of God, including reference to Genesis 1–3 and divergent understandings of 
humanity’s relationship with Creation (dominion and stewardship); the 
implications of these beliefs for Catholics today. 
1.5 The Incarnation: Jesus as incarnate Son, the divine Word, both fully God and fully 
human; the scriptural origins of this belief, including John 1:1–18 and its 
importance for Catholics today. 
1.6 The events in the Paschal Mystery: Catholic teachings about the life, death, 
resurrection and ascension of Jesus, including reference to Luke 24; the 
redemptive efficacy of these events and their significance for Catholics today. 
1.7 The significance of the life, death, resurrection and ascension of Jesus for Catholic 
beliefs about salvation and grace, including John 3:10–21 and Acts 4:8–12; the 
implications and significance of these events for Catholic practice today.  
1.8* Catholic beliefs about eschatology: life after death; the nature of resurrection, 
judgment, heaven, hell and purgatory, including reference to John 11:17–27 and  
2 Corinthians 5:1–10; divergent Christian beliefs about life after death, with 
reference to purgatory and the nature of resurrection; why belief in life after 
death is important for Catholics today. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
10 
1A Catholic Christianity 
Section 2: Practices 
Students should have an understanding of: 
2.1 The sacramental nature of reality: Catholic teachings about how the whole of 
creation manifests the presence of God; the meaning and effects of each of the 
seven sacraments, including Catechism of the Catholic Church 1210–1211; the 
practice and symbolism of each sacrament; how sacraments communicate the 
grace of God; divergent Christian attitudes to sacraments, including reference to 
Orthodox and Protestant Christianity. 
2.2* Liturgical worship within Catholic Christianity: the nature and significance of the 
Mass for Catholics, including its structure and the Eucharist as the ‘source and 
summit of Christian life’, with reference to Lumen Gentium paragraph 7;  
divergent Christian attitudes towards the practice and meaning of liturgical 
worship, including its significance for Catholics and the less structured worship in 
evangelical Christian denominations. 
2.3 The funeral rite as a liturgical celebration of the Church: practices associated with 
the funeral rite in the home, the church and the cemetery, including reference to 
'Preparing my funeral' by Vincent Nichols, Archbishop of Westminster; the aims of 
the funeral rite, including communion with the deceased; the communion of the 
community and the proclamation of eternal life to the community and its 
significance for Catholics. 
2.4 Prayer as the ‘raising of hearts and minds to God’: the nature and significance of 
different types of prayer; the Lord’s Prayer, including Matthew 6:5–14, set 
(formulaic) prayers and informal (extempore) prayer; when each type might be 
used and why; the importance of prayer and the importance for Catholics of 
having different types of worship. 
2.5 The role and importance of forms of popular piety: the nature and significance of 
the Rosary, Eucharistic adoration and Stations of the Cross; how each of these 
might be used and why; the importance of having different types of worship for 
Catholics, including reference to Catechism of the Catholic Church 1674–1676; 
divergent Christian attitudes to these forms of piety.  
2.6 Pilgrimage: the nature, history and purpose of Catholic pilgrimage; the 
significance of the places people go on pilgrimage; divergent Christian 
understandings about whether pilgrimage is important for Christians today, with 
specific reference to Jerusalem, Lourdes, Rome, Walsingham and the Catechism  
of the Catholic Church 2691–2696. 
2.7 Catholic Social Teaching: how Catholic Social Teaching reflects the teaching to 
show love of neighbour; Catholic teaching on justice, peace and reconciliation, 
Evangelii Gaudium paragraphs 182–237 – The inclusion of the poor in society; 
how these teachings might be reflected in the lives of individual Catholics, 
including reference to Matthew 25:31–46 (the Parable of the Sheep and Goats); 
the work of CAFOD, what it does and why. 
2.8 Catholic mission and evangelism: the history and significance of mission and 
evangelism for Catholics; divergent ways this is put into practice by the Church 
and individual Catholics locally, nationally and globally, and how this fulfils the 
commission of Jesus and teachings of the Church, including Evangelii Gaudium 
Chapter 5. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A  
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 11 
1A Catholic Christianity 
Section 3: Sources of Wisdom and Authority 
Students should have an understanding of: 
3.1 The development and structure of the Bible as the revealed Word of God: the 
origins and different literary forms of the Bible. The Old Testament: law, history, 
prophets, writings. The New Testament: gospels, letters. Divergent Christian 
understandings about which books should be within the Bible with reference to the 
Council of Trent. 
3.2 Interpretation of the Bible: Catholic interpretation of the Bible and understanding 
of the meaning of inspiration; divergent interpretations of the authority of the 
Bible within Christianity: the literal Word of God, the revealed Word of God and as 
source of guidance and teaching, including 2 Timothy 3:16 and Catechism of the 
Catholic Church 105–108; the implications of this for Catholics today. 
3.3 The magisterium of the Church: the meaning, function and importance of the 
magisterium both conciliar and pontifical with reference to Catechism of the 
Catholic Church 100; the magisterium as the living teaching office of the Church 
and authentic interpreter of the affirmations of Scripture and Tradition, and why 
they are important for Catholics today. 
3.4 The Second Vatican Council: the nature, history and importance of the council; the 
nature and significance of the four key documents for the Church and for Catholic 
living: Dei Verbum, Lumen Gentium, Sacrosanctum Concilium and Gaudium et 
Spes. 
3.5 The Church as the Body of Christ and the People of God: the nature and 
significance of the Church as the Body of Christ and the People of God, including 
Romans 12:4–6 and 1 Corinthians 12; why the Church as the Body of Christ and 
the People of God is important for Catholics today; divergent Christian attitudes 
towards these. 
3.6 The meaning of the four marks of the Church: the nature of the Church as one, 
holy, catholic and apostolic, including reference to the Nicene Creed and the First 
Council of Constantinople; how the marks may be understood in divergent ways 
within Christianity; why they are important for Catholics today. 
3.7 Mary as a model of the Church: the significance of Mary as a model of the Church 
– joined with Christ in the work of salvation, as a model of discipleship and as a 
model of faith and charity, including Luke 1:26–39 and Catechism of the Catholic 
Church 963–975; the implications of this teaching for Catholic life today. 
3.8 Sources of personal and ethical decision making: the example and teaching of 
Jesus as the authoritative source for moral teaching; Jesus as fulfilment of the 
Law, including Matthew 5:17–24; divergent understandings of the place and 
authority of natural law; virtue and the primacy of conscience; the divergent 
implications of these sources of authority for Christians today.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
12 
1A Catholic Christianity 
Section 4: Forms of Expression and Ways of Life 
Students should have an understanding of: 
4.1 The common and divergent forms of architecture, design and decoration of Catholic 
churches: how they reflect belief, are used in, and contribute to, worship, including 
reference to the Catechism of the Catholic Church 1179–1181. 
4.2 The different internal features of a Catholic church, including reference to Catechism 
of the Catholic Church 1182–1186: the meaning and significance of the lectern, altar, 
crucifix and tabernacle and how they express the importance of redemption and 
facilitate Catholic worship. 
4.3 The meaning and significance of sacred objects, including sacred vessels, sarcophagi, 
and hunger cloths within Catholicism: the way these are used to express belief, 
including Catechism of the Catholic Church 1161, and the divergent ways in which 
they may be used in church and other settings. 
4.4 The meaning and significance of paintings, fresco and drawings within Catholicism 
with reference to two specific pieces and Catechism of the Catholic Church 2502–
2503: the divergent ways these are used to express belief by the artist and those who 
observe the art, and the divergent ways in which paintings, frescos and drawings may 
be used in church and other settings. 
4.5 The meaning and significance of sculpture and statues with reference to Catechism of 
the Catholic Church 2501: the way these are used to express belief by the artist and 
those who observe the art, the way these are used to express belief, and the 
divergent ways in which how sculptures and statues may be used in church and other 
settings. 
4.6 The purpose and use of symbolism and imagery in religious art: the cross, crucifix, 
fish, ChiRho, dove, including Catechism of the Catholic Church 701, Eagle, Alpha and 
Omega, symbols of the four evangelists; the way this symbolism is used to express 
belief, and the divergent ways in which they may be used in church and other 
settings. 
4.7 The meaning and significance of drama: mystery plays, passion plays; the way drama 
is used to express belief with reference to Catechism of the Catholic Church 2567, and 
the divergent ways in which drama may be used in church and other settings. 
4.8 The nature and use of traditional and contemporary styles of music in worship: 
hymns, plainchant, psalms and worship songs, including reference to Catechism of the 
Catholic Church 2641; the way different music is used to express belief and the 
divergent ways in which it may be used in church (including the Mass) and other 
settings. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A  
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 13 
Area of Study 1B – Christianity 
Overview 
This area of study comprises a study in depth of Christianity as a lived religion in the United 
Kingdom and throughout the world. 
There are four sections: Beliefs and Teachings; Practices; Sources of Wisdom and Authority; 
Forms of Expression and Ways of Life. 
Students will be expected to study Christianity within the context of the wider British society, 
the religious traditions of which are, in the main, Christian.  
Students should recognise that Christianity is one of the many religious traditions in Great 
Britain which include Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism and Sikhism. This knowledge may 
be applied throughout the assessment of the specified content. Students should compare and 
contrast two areas of belief and practice within Christianity with one of these religions 
practiced in Great Britain: 
● Beliefs about the afterlife and their significance (1.6)* 
● The practice and significance of worship (2.1)*. 
Students should also recognise that within Christianity there may be more than one 
perspective in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed. Common and 
divergent views within Christianity in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and 
expressed should be included throughout, including reference to Catholic, Orthodox, 
Protestant and other Christian traditions.  
The significance and importance of the various beliefs and practices to Christians today 
should be explored throughout the four sections. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
14 
1B Christianity 
Section 1: Beliefs and Teachings 
Students should have an understanding of: 
1.1  The Trinity: the nature and significance of the Trinity as expressed in the Nicene 
Creed; the nature and significance of the oneness of God; the nature and 
significance of each of the Persons individually, including reference to  
Matthew 3:13–17; how this is reflected in Christian worship and belief today. 
1.2 The creation of the universe and of humanity: the biblical account of creation and 
divergent ways in which it may be understood by Christians, including as literal and 
metaphorical; the role of the Word and Spirit in creation, including  
John 1:1–18 and Genesis 1–3; the importance of creation for Christians today. 
1.3 The Incarnation: the nature and importance of the person of Jesus Christ as the 
incarnate Son of God; the biblical basis of this teaching, including John 1:1–18 and 
1 Timothy 3:16 and its significance for Christians today. 
1.4 The last days of Jesus’ life: the Last Supper, betrayal, arrest, trial, crucifixion, 
resurrection and ascension of Jesus; the accounts of these within the Bible, including 
Luke 22–24 and the significance of these events to understanding the person of 
Jesus Christ. 
1.5 The nature and significance of salvation and the role of Christ within salvation: law, 
sin, grace and Spirit, the role of Christ in salvation, including John 3:10–21 and  
Acts 4:8–12; the nature and significance of atonement within Christianity and its 
link to salvation. 
1.6* Christian eschatology: divergent Christian teachings about life after death, including 
the nature and significance of resurrection, judgment, heaven, and hell and 
purgatory, with reference to the 39 Articles of Religion and Catholic teachings; how 
beliefs about life after death are shown in the Bible, including reference to  
2 Corinthians 5:1–10 and divergent understandings as to why they are important for 
Christians today. 
1.7 The problem of evil/suffering and a loving and righteous God: the problems it raises 
for Christians about the nature of God, including reference to omnipotence and 
benevolence, including Psalm 103; how the problem may cause believers to 
question their faith or the existence of God; the nature and examples of natural 
suffering, moral suffering. 
1.8 Divergent solutions offered to the problem of evil/suffering and a loving and 
righteous God: biblical, theoretical and practical, including reference to Psalm 119, 
Job, free will, vale of soul-making, prayer, and charity; the success of solutions to 
the problem.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A  
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 15 
1B Christianity 
Section 2: Practices 
Students should have an understanding of:  
2.1* Christian worship: liturgical and non-liturgical forms of worship, including activities 
which are informal and individual, with reference to the Book of Common Prayer; 
when each form might be used and why; divergent Christian attitudes towards the 
practices, meaning and significance of liturgical and non-liturgical forms of worship 
in Christian life today, with reference to denominations which worship with less 
structure such as some Pentecostal churches. 
2.2 The role of the sacraments in Christian life and their practice in two denominations: 
the role of the sacraments/ordinance as a whole; the nature and importance of  
the meaning and celebration of baptism and the Eucharist in at least two 
denominations, including reference to the 39 Articles XXV–XXXVI; divergent 
Christian attitudes towards the use and number of sacraments in Orthodox, Catholic 
and Protestant traditions. 
2.3 The nature and purpose of prayer: the nature of and examples of the different types 
of prayer; set prayers; informal prayer and the Lord’s Prayer, including Matthew 
6:5–14; when each type might be used and why; divergent Christian attitudes 
towards the importance of each type of prayer for Christians today. 
2.4 Pilgrimage: the nature, history and purpose of pilgrimage, including interpretations 
of Luke 2:41–43; the significance of the places people go on pilgrimage; divergent 
Christian teachings about whether pilgrimage is important for Christians today, with 
specific reference to Catholic and Protestant understandings; the activities 
associated with, and significance of, Jerusalem, Iona, Taize and Walsingham. 
2.5 Christian religious celebrations: the nature and history of Christian festivals in the 
church year, including Christmas and Easter; the significance of celebrating Advent 
and Christmas; the significance of celebrating Holy Week and Easter, with reference 
to interpretations of 1 Corinthians 15:12–34.  
2.6 The future of the Christian Church: Church growth, the history and purpose of 
missionary and evangelical work, including reference to Mark 16:9–20; divergent 
ways this is put into practice by the Church locally, nationally and globally; Christian 
attitudes to why evangelical work is important for the Church and for individual 
Christians. 
2.7 The role and importance of the local church in the local community: how and why it 
helps the individual believer and the local area; local parish activities, including 
interpretations of 1 Peter 5:1–4, ecumenism, outreach work, the centre of Christian 
identity and worship through living practices. 
2.8 The role and importance of the Church in the worldwide community: how and  
why it works for reconciliation and the problems faced by the persecuted Church; 
divergent Christian responses to teachings about charity, including 1 Corinthians 13 
and Matthew 25:31–46; the work of Christian Aid, what it does and why. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
16 
1B Christianity 
Section 3: Sources of Wisdom and Authority 
Students should have an understanding of:  
3.1 The development and structure of the Bible and its unity as the Word of God: Old 
Testament: law, history, prophets, writings; and New Testament: gospels, letters; 
divergent interpretations of the authority of the Bible; the Bible as the literal Word 
of God, the inspired Word of God, source of guidance and teaching, including  
2 Timothy 3:16 and Dei Verbum Chapter 3; the implications of these understandings 
for Christians today. 
3.2 Divergent ways in which the Bible is used in the daily life of a Christian: informal 
and formal worship with reference to the Book of Common Prayer, in the home, in 
the Church, as a source of comfort and guidance. 
3.3 Divergent responses to sources of personal and ethical decision making by 
Christians, their significance and their inter-relationship: the use of the Bible, the 
role of the individual, reason and personal conscience, including the Catechism of 
the Catholic Church 1777–1781. 
3.4 Jesus as the Word of God, including John 1 and a role model: beliefs and teachings 
about Jesus as the Word of God; divergent understandings of his role in modelling 
practices, including Mark 8:34–38; the divergent implications of Jesus’ example in 
showing love for others, forgiveness, servanthood, reconciliation and social justice, 
and in establishing the Kingdom of God, the significance of these beliefs for 
Christians today. 
3.5 The Church as the Body of Christ: understandings of the significance of the Church 
as the Body of Christ and the People of God; the nature of the Church as the Body 
of Christ, including Romans 12:4–6 and 1 Corinthians 12; divergent ways in which 
this belief is important for Christians today, including in understanding the nature of 
the growth and diversity of the Church. 
3.6 The growth and development of the Church: the establishment, development and 
growth of the Catholic, Orthodox, Protestant and Pentecostal/Charismatic Churches; 
changes in the Church as the Body of Christ, including interpretations of  
1 Corinthians 12, the Filioque controversy and the Reformation; and divergent 
understandings of the significance of the development of diverse denominations 
within the Church today. 
3.7 Leaders and leadership in the Church: the laity, ministers (priests/vicars/pastors), 
bishops and the pope; the roles and significance of each, including Ephesians  
4:11–12 and Lumen Gentium Chapters 4 and 5; divergent ways in which the leaders 
support and interact with one another in different denominations; divergent 
understandings of the importance of each of these leaders in different Christian 
traditions. 
3.8  The role of women in the Church: divergent understandings of the basis of roles 
within the Bible, including interpretations of 1 Corinthians 14:33–40 and Romans 
16:1–16; the historical development of attitudes towards women as leaders, and the 
different roles of women today in the Church and Christian life; divergent 
approaches to the role of women in different denominations.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A  
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 17 
1B Christianity 
Section 4: Forms of Expression and Ways of Life 
Students should have an understanding of:  
4.1 The meaning and significance of paintings and drawings within Christianity with 
reference to two specific pieces and Catechism of the Catholic Church 2502–2503: 
the way these are used to express belief by the artist and those who observe the art, 
and the divergent ways in which paintings and drawings may be used in church and 
other settings. 
4.2 The divergent meaning, significance and purpose of icons within Christianity: specific 
reference to the use of icons within Orthodox Christianity and in denominations that 
may reject their use; the way icons are used to express belief and as a focus for 
devotion, and the divergent ways in which they may be used in church and other 
settings. 
4.3 The meaning and significance of sculpture for Christians: the way these are used to 
express belief by the artist and those who observe the art, the way these are used to 
express belief with reference to Catechism of the Catholic Church 2501; the 
divergent ways in which sculptures and statues may be used in church and other 
settings, for example in Roman Catholic and Anglican churches. 
4.4 The purpose and use of symbolism and imagery in religious art: the Cross, including 
reference to Ephesians 2:10–19, fish, and symbols of the four evangelists; the way 
this symbolism is used to express belief, and the divergent ways in which they may 
be used in church and other settings. 
4.5 The meaning and significance of drama: mystery plays, passion plays. The way 
drama is used to express belief and events, including, for example Matthew 26–28, 
and the divergent ways in which drama may be used in church and other settings. 
4.6 The purpose of literature in Christian life: fiction, non-fiction and poetry, including 
examples from the writings of CS Lewis such as The Lion, the Witch and the 
Wardrobe and The Great Divorce; the way different types of literature are used to 
express belief, and the divergent ways in which they may be used in church and 
other settings. 
4.7 The nature and use of traditional styles of music in worship: hymns, psalms and 
worship songs; the way traditional styles of music are used to express belief, 
including examples such as Gregorian Chant and reference to Musicum Sacrum; the 
divergent ways in which they may be used in church and other settings, when each 
might be used and why. 
4.8 The nature and use of contemporary music in worship: hymns and worship songs; 
the way contemporary music is used to express belief, including examples such as 
the work of Graham Kendrick and the Casting Crowns, the divergent ways in which it 
may be used in Church and other settings, when it might be used and why. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
18 
Area of Study 1C – Islam 
Overview 
This area of study comprises a study in depth of Islam as a lived religion in the United 
Kingdom and throughout the world. 
There are four sections: Beliefs and Teaching; Practices; Sources of Wisdom and Authority; 
Forms of Expression and Ways of Life. 
Students will be expected to study Islam within the context of the wider British society, the 
religious traditions of which are, in the main, Christian.  
Students should compare and contrast two areas of belief and practice within Christianity 
and Islam: 
● Beliefs about the afterlife and their significance (1.8)* 
● The practice and significance of worship (2.3)*. 
Students should recognise that Islam is one of the many religious traditions in Great Britain, 
which include Buddhism, Hinduism, Judaism and Sikhism. This knowledge may be applied 
throughout the assessment of the specified content. Students should also recognise that 
within Islam there may be more than one perspective in the way beliefs and teachings are 
understood and expressed. Common and divergent views within Islam in the way beliefs and 
teachings are understood and expressed should be included throughout, including reference 
to Sunni and Shi’a traditions.  
The significance and importance of the various beliefs and practices to Muslims today should 
be explored throughout the four sections. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A  
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 19 
1C Islam 
Section 1: Beliefs and Teachings 
Students should have an understanding of: 
1.1 The Six Beliefs of Islam: their nature, history and purpose, including Kitab  
al-iman 1:4; how they are understood and expressed in Sunni and Shi’a Muslim 
communities today; the importance of these principles for Muslims. 
1.2 The Five Roots of ‘Usul ad-Din in Shi’a Islam: Tawhid (oneness of Allah); 'Adl 
(Divine Justice); Nubuwwah (Prophethood); Imamah (Successors to Muhammad) 
and Mi'ad (The Day of Judgment and the Resurrection); the nature, history and 
purpose of the Five Roots with reference to their Qur’anic basis, including  
Surah 112 (the oneness of Allah); the importance of these principles for different 
Shi’a communities today, including Sevener and Twelver. 
1.3 The nature of Allah: how the characteristics of Allah are shown in the Qur’an and 
why they are important; Tawhid (oneness), including Surah 16:35–36, 
immanence, transcendence, omnipotence, beneficence, mercy, fairness and 
justice, Adalat in Shi’a Islam. 
1.4 Risalah: the nature and importance of prophethood for Muslims, including  
Surah 2:136; what the roles of prophets teach Muslims, exemplified in the lives of 
Adam, Ibrahim, Isma’il, Musa, Dawud, Isa, and Muhammad. 
1.5 Muslim holy books (Kutub) – the nature, history, significance and purpose of 
Muslim holy books with reference to: the Qur’an; the Tawrat (Torah), including  
Surah 5:43–48; the Zabur (Psalms), including Surah 4:163–171; the Injil 
(Gospel), including Surah 57:27; and the Sahifah (Scrolls). Divergent Muslim 
views about the importance of the holy books in their lives today. 
1.6 Malaikah: the nature and importance of angels for Muslims; how angels Jibril, 
Izra’il and Mika’il are shown in the Qur’an, including Surah 32:11 and 2:97–98, 
and their significance for Muslims today. 
1.7 al-Qadr: the nature and importance of Predestination for Muslims; how al-Qadr 
and human freedom relates to the Day of Judgement, including reference to Sahih 
al-Bukhari 78:685; divergent understandings of predestination in Sunni and Shi’a 
Islam; the implications of belief in al-Qadr for Muslims today.  
1.8* Akhirah: Muslim teachings about life after death; the nature of judgement, 
paradise and hell; how they are shown in the Qur’an, including Surah 17:49–72; 
divergent ways in which Muslim teachings about life after death affect the life of a 
Muslim today.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
20 
1C Islam 
Section 2: Practices 
Students should have an understanding of: 
2.1 Ten Obligatory Acts of Shi’a Islam: their nature, history and purpose of the Ten 
Obligatory Acts; the diversity of practice and importance of Ten Obligatory Acts  
for Shi’a Muslims today; their basis in the Qur’an, including reference to Surah 9:71–
73; divergent understandings of these principles within Sunni Islam, including links 
with the Five Pillars. 
2.2 Shahadah as one of the Five Pillars: the nature, role and significance of Shahadah for 
Sunni and Shi’a Muslims, including reference to Surah 3:17–21; why reciting 
Shahadah is important for Muslims, and its place in Muslim practice today. 
2.3* Salah as one of the Five Pillars, including reference to Surah 15:98–99 and 29:45: the 
nature, history, significance and purpose of Salah for Sunni and Shi’a Muslims, 
including different ways of understanding them; how Salah is performed, including 
ablution, times, directions, movements and recitations, in the home and mosque and 
Jummah prayer. 
2.4 Sawm as one of the Five Pillars: the nature, role, significance and purpose of fasting 
during Ramadan, including Surah 2:183–185; those who are excused from fasting 
and why. The significance of the Night of Power: the nature, history and purpose of 
the Night of Power; why Laylat al-Qadr is important for Muslims today. 
2.5 Zakah as one of the Five Pillars and Khums: the nature, role, significance and purpose 
of Zakah and Khums, including Surah 9:58–60 and 8:36–42; why Zakah is important 
for Sunni Muslims; why Khums is important for Shi’a Muslims; the benefits of 
receiving Zakah or Khums. 
2.6 Hajj as one of the Five Pillars: the nature, role, origins and significance of Hajj, 
including Surah 2:124–130 and 22:25–30; how Hajj is performed and why Hajj is 
important for Muslims; benefits and challenges of performing Hajj for Muslims. 
2.7 Jihad: the origins, meaning and significance of Jihad in Islam; divergent 
understandings of Jihad within Islam, including the difference between lesser and 
greater Jihad; the conditions for declaration of lesser Jihad, including reference to 
Surah 2:190–194 and 22:39; the importance of Jihad in the life of Muslims. 
2.8 The nature, origins, activities, meaning and significance of the celebration/ 
commemoration of Id-ul-Adha, with reference to Surah 37:77–111, and Id-ul-Fitr in 
Sunni Islam, with reference to their place within Shi’a Islam; and Id-ul-Ghadeer, with 
reference to Hadith and the interpretation of Surah 5:3, and Ashura in Shi’a Islam, 
with reference to their place within Sunni Islam. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A  
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 21 
1C Islam 
Section 3: Sources of Wisdom and Authority 
Students should have an understanding of: 
3.1 The Qur’an: the revelation and compilation of the Qur’an, including Surah 53:4–18; 
its significance and authority within Islam today; divergent ways in which the Qur’an 
is used in the daily life of a Muslim: informal and formal worship, in the home, in the 
mosque, as a source of teaching and guidance. 
3.2 The Prophet Muhammad: events in the life of the Prophet, including teaching and 
authority; his call, work in Makkah and Madinah, the Hijrah; the significance of these 
events and the Prophet Muhammad for Muslims today, including Surah 48:26–29. 
3.3 The Seal of the Prophets, Surah 33:36–47: Muhammad’s role as 'seal of the 
Prophets'; the final prophet; fulfilling the teachings of all other prophets, and as a 
role model to Muslims today; the significance of Muhammad as seal of the prophets 
and a role model today. 
3.4 The divergent understandings of the significance of the family of the Prophet 
Muhammad: Caliph/Imam Ali (Ahl-ul-Bayt) in Sunni and Shi’a Islam and 
interpretations of Surah 33:32–34; the family of the Prophet in Ismaili Islam; the 
implications for questions of authority and the origins of the split between Sunni and 
Shi’a Islam. 
3.5 The development and structure of the Hadith as a record of the Sunnah of the 
Prophet Muhammad: the structure and compilation of the Hadith, including isnad 
and matn; divergent understandings of their authority and significance within Sunni 
and Shi’a Islam today, including reference to Sahih al-Bukhari, Sahih Muslim, and 
the Four Books. 
3.6 Shari’ah Law: how it is agreed upon and the use of analogy (qiyas) and consensus 
(ijma), including interpretations of Surah 4:115; its divergence of use by the  
main schools of Sunni and Shi'a Islam; specific examples showing links between the 
Qur’an, Hadith, and Shari’ah; divergent understandings of the role and significance 
of judges (qadis) and scholars (the 'ulema) as sources of authority: the 
establishment of judges and scholars; examples of their rulings; the significance of 
authority within Islam today. 
3.7 The Imam in Shi’a Islam, including reference to the Hadith of the pond of Khumm: 
history, major teachings and actions, divergent understandings of their contribution 
to Islam in Sunni and Shi’a thought, the doctrine of Nass, the Hidden Imam; the 
inerrancy and intercession of imams; the significance of the Imam for different forms 
of Shi’a Islam today. 
3.8 The imam in Sunni Islam: the origins, nature, role of the imam in Sunni Islam, 
including Sahih al-Bukhari 73:34–37; divergent understandings of their contribution 
to individual and community life in Sunni and Shi’a thought. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
22 
1C Islam 
Section 4: Forms of Expression and Ways of Life 
Students should have an understanding of: 
4.1 Muslim identity: divergent ways in which Muslim identity is expressed through the 
ummah in the ceremonies to welcome a child; expectations about modesty, including 
divergent interpretations of dress Surah 24:30–31; the origins, categories and 
significance of the laws of halal and haram; how they are applied to laws of food and 
drink, and riba (usury). 
4.2 The mosque: divergent understandings of importance of the mosque, the design  
and different religious features of mosques, and furniture and objects in the  
mosque and their use in the various activities that take place, including reference to 
Sahih al-Bukhari 2:39. 
4.3 The divergent understandings of the use, significance, meaning and purpose of 
calligraphy within Islam, including as a rejection of idolatry with reference to Surah 
21:51–62: the way it is used to express belief, and how it may be used in the 
mosque and other settings. 
4.4 Shi’a obligatory actions: understandings and implications of encouraging others to 
do good (Amr bil Maruf), including Surah 42:23–26; discouraging others from doing 
bad (Nahy Anil Munkar), Tawallah and Tabarra; love for the Prophet Muhammad and 
his family and disdain for their enemies; divergent understandings of their 
importance for Muslims in different traditions of Islam today. 
4.5 The significance of Sufi ways of life: the origins of Sufism, orders, saints, and 
practice today. Sufi practices of fasting, and dhikr (remembrance) with reference to 
Surah 13:28: the nature, history, importance and purpose of fasting and dhikr and 
divergent understandings of their importance for Muslims today. 
4.6 The role and significance of a Sheikh/teacher in Sufism: divergent understandings of 
the importance of a relationship with a teacher, the purpose of the teacher; the 
history, teachings and contributions of teachers: al-Ghazali, such as in his work 
Revival of Religious Sciences, outlining the Qur’anic basis of Sufism, ibn al-‘Arabi and 
Rabi‘a al-‘Adawiyya. 
4.7 The divergent understandings of use, significance, meaning and purpose of dance, 
music and poetry within Islam with specific reference to Sufism: the way these are 
used to express belief, as a devotional act, and how they may be used in other 
settings; divergent interpretations of the use of dance and music in Islam, including 
their rejection by some and interpretations of Sahih al-Bukhari 15:70 and 69:494. 
4.8 The work of one named Muslim charity working for relief of poverty and suffering in 
the United Kingdom, what it does and why, including reference to sadaqah and 
Surah 2:271–274. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A  
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 23 
Assessment information 
Paper 1: Area of Study 1 – Study of Religion 
● First assessment: May/June 2018.  
● The assessment is 1 hour and 45 minutes. 
● The assessment is out of 102 marks. 
● Students must answer all sections and all questions on the chosen religion. 
● The paper may include short open, open response and extended writing questions. 
● The paper will assess spelling, punctuation and grammar (SPaG) and use of specialist 
terminology and these will contribute a minimum of 5% of marks towards the overall 
weighting for this paper. 
Synoptic assessment 
Synoptic assessment requires students to work across different parts of a qualification and to 
show their accumulated knowledge and understanding of a topic or subject area. 
Synoptic assessment enables students to show their ability to combine their skills, knowledge 
and understanding with breadth and depth of the subject.  
Synopticity will be assessed where students are required to bring together their knowledge 
and understanding of religion from across the course of study. 
Sample assessment materials 
Sample papers and mark schemes can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2  
GCSE (9–1) in Religious Studies A Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
24 
Area of Study 2: Study of Second Religion 
Area of Study 2A – Catholic Christianity 
Overview 
This area of study comprises a study in depth of Catholic Christianity as a lived religion in the 
United Kingdom and throughout the world. 
There are two sections: Beliefs and Teachings; Practices. 
Students will be expected to study Catholic Christianity within the context of the wider British 
society, the religious traditions of which are, in the main, Christian. Students should compare 
and contrast the areas of belief and practice within Catholic Christianity with wider Christian 
perspectives as outlined in the content below. 
● Beliefs about the afterlife and their significance (1.8)* 
● The practice and significance of worship (2.2)*. 
Students should recognise that Catholic Christianity is one of the many religious traditions in 
Great Britain, which also include Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism and Sikhism. This 
knowledge may be applied throughout the assessment of the specified content.  
Students should also recognise that within Catholic Christianity there may be more than one 
perspective in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed. Common and 
divergent views within the wider Christian tradition in the way beliefs and teachings are 
understood and expressed should be included throughout, including reference to Orthodox, 
Protestant and other Christian traditions.  
The significance and importance of the various beliefs and practices to Catholics today should 
be explored throughout the two sections. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A  
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 25 
2A Catholic Christianity 
Section 1: Beliefs and Teachings 
Students should have an understanding of: 
1.1 The Trinity: the nature and significance of the Trinity as expressed in the Nicene 
Creed; the nature and significance of the oneness of God; the nature and 
significance of each of the Persons individually: God as the Father, Son and Holy 
Spirit; how this is reflected in worship and belief in the life of a Catholic today. 
1.2 Biblical understandings of God as a Trinity of Persons: the nature and significance 
of God as a Trinity of Persons, including reference to the baptism of Jesus  
(Matthew 3:13–17); the historical development of the doctrine of the Trinity, 
including reference to the First Council of Nicaea and the First Council of 
Constantinople. 
1.3 Creation: the nature and significance of the biblical account of Creation, including 
Genesis 1–3; and how it may be understood in divergent ways in Christianity, 
including reference to literal and metaphorical interpretations; the significance of 
the Creation account for Catholics in understanding the nature and characteristics 
of God, especially as Creator, benevolent, omnipotent and eternal. 
1.4 The significance of the Creation account in understanding the nature of humanity: 
the nature and significance of the nature of humanity being created in the image  
of God, including reference to Genesis 1–3 and divergent understandings of 
humanity’s relationship with Creation (dominion and stewardship); the implications 
of these beliefs for Catholics today. 
1.5 The Incarnation: Jesus as incarnate Son, the divine Word, both fully God and fully 
human; the scriptural origins of this belief, including John 1:1–18 and its 
importance for Catholics today. 
1.6 The events in the Paschal Mystery: Catholic teachings about the life, death, 
resurrection and ascension of Jesus, including reference to Luke 24; the 
redemptive efficacy of these events and their significance for Catholics today. 
1.7 The significance of the life, death, resurrection and ascension of Jesus for Catholic 
beliefs about salvation and grace, including John 3:10–21 and Acts 4:8–12; the 
implications and significance of these events for Catholic practice today.  
1.8* Catholic beliefs about eschatology: life after death; the nature of resurrection, 
judgement, heaven, hell and purgatory, including reference to John 11:17–27  
and 2 Corinthians 5:1–10; divergent Christian beliefs about life after death with 
reference to purgatory and the nature of resurrection; why belief in life after death 
is important for Catholics today. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
26 
2A Catholic Christianity 
Section 2: Practices 
Students should have an understanding of: 
2.1 The sacramental nature of reality: Catholic teachings about how the whole of 
creation manifests the presence of God; the meaning and effects of each of the 
seven sacraments, including Catechism of the Catholic Church 1210–1211; the 
practice and symbolism of each sacrament; how sacraments communicate the 
grace of God; divergent Christian attitudes to sacraments, including reference to 
Orthodox and Protestant Christianity. 
2.2* Liturgical worship within Catholic Christianity: the nature and significance of the 
Mass for Catholics, including its structure and the Eucharist as the ‘source and 
summit of Christian life’, with reference to Lumen Gentium paragraph 7; divergent 
Christian attitudes towards the practice and meaning of liturgical worship, including 
its significance for Catholics and the less-structured worship in evangelical Christian 
denominations. 
2.3 The funeral rite as a liturgical celebration of the Church: practices associated with 
the funeral rite in the home, the church and the cemetery, including reference to 
'Preparing my funeral' by Vincent Nichols, Archbishop of Westminster; the aims of 
the funeral rite, including communion with the deceased; the communion of the 
community and the proclamation of eternal life to the community and its 
significance for Catholics. 
2.4 Prayer as the ‘raising of hearts and minds to God’: the nature and significance of 
different types of prayer; the Lord’s Prayer, including Matthew 6:5–14, set 
(formulaic) prayers and informal (extempore) prayer; when each type might be 
used and why; the importance of prayer and the importance for Catholics of having 
different types of worship. 
2.5 The role and importance of forms of popular piety: the nature and significance of 
the Rosary, Eucharistic adoration and Stations of the Cross; how each of these 
might be used and why; the importance of having different types of worship for 
Catholics, including reference to Catechism of the Catholic Church 1674–1676; 
divergent Christian attitudes to these forms of piety.  
2.6 Pilgrimage: the nature, history and purpose of Catholic pilgrimage; the significance 
of the places people go on pilgrimage; divergent Christian understandings about 
whether pilgrimage is important for Christians today, with specific reference to 
Jerusalem, Lourdes, Rome, Walsingham and the Catechism of the Catholic Church 
2691–2696. 
2.7 Catholic Social Teaching: how Catholic Social Teaching reflects the teaching to 
show love of neighbour; Catholic teaching on justice, peace and reconciliation 
Evangelii Gaudium paragraphs 182–237 – The inclusion of the poor in society; how 
these teachings might be reflected in the lives of individual Catholics, including 
reference to Matthew 25:31–46 (the Parable of the Sheep and Goats; the work of 
CAFOD, what it does and why. 
2.8 Catholic mission and evangelism: the history and significance of mission and 
evangelism for Catholics; divergent ways this is put into practice by the Church and 
individual Catholics locally, nationally and globally, and how this fulfils the 
commission of Jesus and teachings of the Church, including Evangelii Gaudium 
Chapter 5. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A  
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 27 
Area of Study 2B – Christianity 
Overview 
This area of study comprises a study in depth of Christianity as a lived religion within with 
the United Kingdom and throughout the world. 
There are two sections: Beliefs and Teachings; Practices. 
Students will be expected to study Christianity within the context of the wider British society, 
the religious traditions of which are, in the main, Christian.  
Students should recognise that Christianity is one of the many religious traditions in Great 
Britain, which include Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism and Sikhism. This knowledge 
may be applied throughout the assessment of the specified content. Students should 
compare and contrast two areas of belief and practice within Christianity with one of these 
religions practiced in Great Britain: 
● Beliefs about the afterlife and their significance (1.6)* 
● The practice and significance of worship (2.1)*. 
Students should also recognise that within Christianity there may be more than one 
perspective in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed. Common and 
divergent views within Christianity in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and 
expressed should be included throughout, including reference to Catholic, Orthodox, 
Protestant and other Christian traditions.  
The significance and importance of the various beliefs and practices to Christians today 
should be explored throughout the two sections. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
28 
2B Christianity 
Section 1: Beliefs and Teachings 
Students should have an understanding of: 
1.1 The Trinity: the nature and significance of the Trinity as expressed in the Nicene 
Creed; the nature and significance of the oneness of God; the nature and 
significance of each of the Persons individually, including reference to  
Matthew 3:13–17; how this is reflected in Christian worship and belief today. 
1.2 The creation of the universe and of humanity: the biblical account of creation and 
divergent ways in which it may be understood by Christians, including as literal 
and metaphorical; the role of the Word and Spirit in creation, including  
John 1:1–18 and Genesis 1–3; the importance of creation for Christians today. 
1.3 The Incarnation: the nature and importance of the person of Jesus Christ as the 
incarnate Son of God; the biblical basis of this teaching, including John 1:1–18 and 
1 Timothy 3:16 and its significance for Christians today. 
1.4 The last days of Jesus’ life: the Last Supper, betrayal, arrest, trial, crucifixion, 
resurrection and ascension of Jesus; the accounts of these within the Bible, 
including Luke 22–24 and the significance of these events to understanding the 
person of Jesus Christ. 
1.5 The nature and significance of salvation and the role of Christ within salvation: law, 
sin, grace and Spirit, the role of Christ in salvation, including John 3:10–21 and 
Acts 4:8–12; the nature and significance of atonement within Christianity and its 
link to salvation. 
1.6* Christian eschatology: divergent Christian teachings about life after death, 
including the nature and significance of resurrection, judgement, heaven, and hell 
and purgatory, with reference to the 39 Articles of Religion and Catholic teachings; 
how beliefs about life after death are shown in the Bible, including reference to 2 
Corinthians 5:1–10 and divergent understandings as to why they are important for 
Christians today. 
1.7 The problem of evil/suffering and a loving and righteous God: the problems it 
raises for Christians about the nature of God, including reference to omnipotence 
and benevolence, including Psalm 103; how the problem may cause believers to 
question their faith or the existence of God; the nature and examples of natural 
suffering, moral suffering. 
1.8 Divergent solutions offered to the problem of evil/suffering and a loving and 
righteous God: biblical, theoretical and practical, including reference to Psalm 119, 
Job, free will, vale of soul-making, prayer, and charity; the success of solutions to 
the problem.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A  
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 29 
2B Christianity 
Section 2: Practices 
Students should have an understanding of:  
2.1* Christian worship: liturgical and non-liturgical forms of worship, including activities 
which are informal and individual, with reference to the Book of Common Prayer; 
when each form might be used and why; divergent Christian attitudes towards the 
practices, meaning and significance of liturgical and non-liturgical forms of worship 
in Christian life today, with reference to denominations which worship with less 
structure, such as some Pentecostal churches. 
2.2 The role of the sacraments in Christian life and their practice in two denominations: 
the role of the sacraments/ordinance as a whole; the nature and importance of  
the meaning and celebration of baptism and the Eucharist in at least two 
denominations, including reference to the 39 Articles XXV–XXXVI; divergent 
Christian attitudes towards the use and number of sacraments in Orthodox, Catholic 
and Protestant traditions. 
2.3 The nature and purpose of prayer: the nature of and examples of the different 
types of prayer; set prayers; informal prayer and the Lord’s Prayer, including 
Matthew 6:5–14; when each type might be used and why; divergent Christian 
attitudes towards the importance of each type of prayer for Christians today. 
2.4 Pilgrimage: the nature, history and purpose of pilgrimage, including interpretations 
of Luke 2:41–43; the significance of the places people go on pilgrimage; divergent 
Christian teachings about whether pilgrimage is important for Christians today, with 
specific reference to Catholic and Protestant understandings; the activities 
associated with, and significance of, Jerusalem, Iona, Taize and Walsingham. 
2.5 Christian religious celebrations: the nature and history of Christian festivals in  
the church year, including Christmas and Easter; the significance of celebrating 
Advent and Christmas; the significance of celebrating Holy Week and Easter, with 
reference to interpretations of 1 Corinthians 15:12–34. 
2.6 The future of the Christian Church: Church growth, the history and purpose of 
missionary and evangelical work, including reference to Mark 16:9–20 and John 
20:21–22; divergent ways this is put into practice by the Church locally, nationally 
and globally; Christian attitudes to why evangelical work is important for the 
Church and for individual Christians. 
2.7 The role and importance of the local church in the local community: how and why it 
helps the individual believer and the local area; local parish activities, including 
interpretations of 1 Peter 5:1–4, ecumenism, outreach work, the centre of Christian 
identity and worship through living practices. 
2.8 The role and importance of the Church in the worldwide community: how and why it 
works for reconciliation and the problems faced by the persecuted Church; 
divergent Christian responses to teachings about charity, including 1 Corinthians 13 
and Matthew 25:31–46; the work of Christian Aid, what it does and why. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
30 
Area of Study 2C – Islam 
Overview 
This area of study comprises a study in depth of Islam as a lived religion in the United 
Kingdom and throughout the world. 
There are two sections: Beliefs and Teachings; Practices.  
Students will be expected to study Islam within the context of the wider British society, the 
religious traditions of which are, in the main, Christian.  
Students should compare and contrast two areas of belief and practice within Christianity 
and Islam: 
● Beliefs about the afterlife and their significance (1.8)* 
● The practice and significance of worship (2.3)*. 
Students should recognise that Islam is one of the many religious traditions in Great Britain, 
which include Buddhism, Hinduism, Judaism and Sikhism. This knowledge may be applied 
throughout the assessment of the specified content. Students should also recognise that 
within Islam there may be more than one perspective in the way beliefs and teachings are 
understood and expressed. Common and divergent views within Islam in the way beliefs and 
teachings are understood and expressed should be included throughout, including reference 
to Sunni and Shi’a traditions.  
The significance and importance of the various beliefs and practices to Muslims today should 
be explored throughout the two sections. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A  
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 31 
2C Islam 
Section 1: Beliefs and Teachings 
Students should have an understanding of: 
1.1 The Six Beliefs of Islam: their nature, history and purpose, including Kitab  
al-iman 1:4; how they are understood and expressed in Sunni and Shi’a Muslim 
communities today; the importance of these principles for Muslims. 
1.2 The Five Roots of ‘Usul ad-Din in Shi’a Islam: Tawhid (oneness of Allah); 'Adl 
(Divine Justice); Nubuwwah (Prophethood); Imamah (Successors to Muhammad) 
and Mi'ad (The Day of Judgment and the Resurrection); the nature, history and 
purpose of the Five Roots with reference to their Qur’anic basis, including  
Surah 112 (the oneness of Allah); the importance of these principles for different 
Shi’a communities today, including Sevener and Twelver. 
1.3 The nature of Allah: how the characteristics of Allah are shown in the Qur’an and 
why they are important; Tawhid (oneness), including Surah 16:35–36, 
immanence, transcendence, omnipotence, beneficence, mercy, fairness and 
justice, Adalat in Shi’a Islam. 
1.4 Risalah: the nature and importance of prophethood for Muslims, including  
Surah 2:136; what the roles of prophets teach Muslims, exemplified in the lives of 
Adam, Ibrahim, Isma’il, Musa, Dawud, Isa, and Muhammad. 
1.5 Muslim holy books (Kutub) – the nature, history, significance and purpose of 
Muslim holy books with reference to: the Qur’an; the Tawrat (Torah), including  
Surah 5:43–48; the Zabur (Psalms), including Surah 4:163–171; the Injil 
(Gospel), including Surah 57:27; and the Sahifah (Scrolls). Divergent Muslim views 
about the importance of the holy books in their lives today. 
1.6 Malaikah: the nature and importance of angels for Muslims; how angels Jibril, 
Izra’il and Mika’il are shown in the Qur’an, including Surah 32:11 and 2:97–98, and 
their significance for Muslims today. 
1.7 al-Qadr: the nature and importance of Predestination for Muslims; how al-Qadr and 
human freedom relates to the Day of Judgement, including reference to Sahih al-
Bukhari 78:685; divergent understandings of predestination in Sunni and Shi’a 
Islam; the implications of belief in al-Qadr for Muslims today.  
1.8* Akhirah: Muslim teachings about life after death; the nature of judgement, 
paradise and hell; how they are shown in the Qur’an, including Surah 17:49–72; 
divergent ways in which Muslim teachings about life after death affect the life of a 
Muslim today.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
32 
2C Islam 
Section 2: Practices 
Students should have an understanding of: 
2.1 Ten Obligatory Acts of Shi’a Islam: their nature, history and purpose of the Ten 
Obligatory Acts; the diversity of practice and importance of Ten Obligatory Acts  
for Shi’a Muslims today; their basis in the Qur’an, including reference to  
Surah 9:71–73; divergent understandings of these principles within Sunni Islam, 
including links with the Five Pillars. 
2.2 Shahadah as one of the Five Pillars: the nature, role and significance of Shahadah 
for Sunni and Shi’a Muslims, including reference to Surah 3:17–21; why reciting 
Shahadah is important for Muslims, and its place in Muslim practice today. 
2.3* Salah as one of the Five Pillars, including reference to Surah 15:98–99 and 29:45: 
the nature, history, significance and purpose of Salah for Sunni and Shi’a Muslims, 
including different ways of understanding them; how Salah is performed, including 
ablution, times, directions, movements and recitations, in the home and mosque 
and Jummah prayer. 
2.4 Sawm as one of the Five Pillars: the nature, role, significance and purpose of 
fasting during Ramadan, including Surah 2:183–185; those who are excused from 
fasting and why. The significance of the Night of Power: the nature, history and 
purpose of the Night of Power; why Laylat al-Qadr is important for Muslims today. 
2.5 Zakah as one of the Five Pillars and Khums: the nature, role, significance and 
purpose of Zakah and Khums, including Surah 9:58–60 and 8:36–42; why Zakah 
is important for Sunni Muslims; why Khums is important for Shi’a Muslims; the 
benefits of receiving Zakah or Khums. 
2.6 Hajj as one of the Five Pillars: the nature, role, origins and significance of Hajj, 
including Surah 2:124–130 and 22:25–30; how Hajj is performed and why Hajj is 
important for Muslims; benefits and challenges of performing Hajj for Muslims. 
2.7 Jihad: the origins, meaning and significance of Jihad in Islam; divergent 
understandings of Jihad within Islam, including the difference between lesser and 
greater Jihad; the conditions for declaration of lesser Jihad, including reference to 
Surah 2:190–194 and 22:39; the importance of Jihad in the life of Muslims. 
2.8 The nature, origins, activities, meaning and significance of the celebration/ 
commemoration of Id-ul-Adha, with reference to Surah 37:77–111, and Id-ul-Fitr 
in Sunni Islam, with reference to their place within Shi’a Islam; and Id-ul-Ghadeer, 
with reference to Hadith and the interpretation of Surah 5:3, and Ashura in Shi’a 
Islam, with reference to their place within Sunni Islam. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A  
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 33 
Area of Study 2D – Buddhism 
Overview 
This area of study comprises a study in depth of Buddhism as a lived religion within the 
United Kingdom and throughout the world. 
There are two sections: Beliefs and Teachings; Practices. 
Students will be expected to study Buddhism within the context of the wider British society, 
the religious traditions of which are, in the main, Christian.  
Students should compare and contrast two areas of belief and practice within Christianity 
and Buddhism: 
● Beliefs about the afterlife and their significance (1.5)* 
● The practice and significance of worship (2.6)*. 
Students should recognise that Buddhism is one of the many religious traditions in Great 
Britain, which include Hinduism, Islam, Judaism and Sikhism. This knowledge may be applied 
throughout the assessment of the specified content. Students should also recognise that in 
Buddhism there may be more than one perspective in the way beliefs and teachings are 
understood and expressed. Common and divergent views within Buddhism in the way beliefs 
and teachings are understood and expressed should be included throughout, including 
reference to Theravada and Mahayana traditions.  
The significance and importance of the various beliefs and practices to Buddhists today 
should be explored throughout the two sections. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
34 
2D Buddhism 
Section 1: Beliefs and Teachings 
Students should have an understanding of: 
1.1 The life of the Buddha: the nature and history of the events in the life of the Buddha 
and why they are important to Buddhists today, including ancestry, birth, princely  
life, marriage and the Four Sights, with reference to Buddhavamsa XXVI; the 
enlightenment of the Buddha and founding of the Sangha. 
1.2 Dhamma: the nature and different meaning of dhamma (dependent origination 
/conditionality); the nature and importance of paticca-samuppada and the Three 
Marks of Existence, including reference to the Story of Nagasena and the Chariot in 
the Milinda Panha; suffering (dukkha), no fixed self (anicca) and soul or essence 
(anatta); the implications of belief in dhamma for Buddhists today. 
1.3 First Noble Truth, including reference to the Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta: the 
nature of dukkha; Buddhist teachings about suffering; the different types of suffering 
as pain, fabrication and change; the importance of suffering for Buddhists today. 
1.4 Second Noble Truth, including reference to Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta: the 
nature of samudaya (the root of suffering); Buddhist teachings about the causes of 
suffering, including the Sermon at Benares; the Three Poisons and how they are 
represented in the Wheel of Life; divergent understandings of the Wheel of Life, with 
reference to Theravada and Mahayana Buddhism. 
1.5* Third Noble Truth, including reference to the Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta: the 
nature of nirodha and the cessation of tanha; Buddhist teachings about the ending of 
desire; the nature of the cycle of samsara; different understandings of nibbana and 
enlightenment and their importance for Buddhists today. 
1.6 Fourth Noble Truth, including reference to the Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta: the 
nature of the Middle Way (magga); Buddhist teachings about the Eightfold Path 
leading to nibbana. The Threefold Way: the nature, purpose and importance of sila 
(ethics), samadhi (meditation) and panna (wisdom); divergent understandings of the 
importance Eightfold Path and the Threefold Way for Buddhist life today. 
1.7 Human life: divergent Buddhist understandings of the nature and importance of the 
Five Khandas (aggregates), including the Khandha Sutta; divergent Buddhist 
understandings of the nature and importance of sunnata and tathagatagarbha 
(Buddha-nature); divergent Buddhist understandings of the nature and importance of 
Arahant and Bodhisattva Ideals; divergent Buddhist understandings of the nature and 
history of Buddhahood and the Pure Land. 
1.8 Buddhist ethical teachings: divergent Buddhist understandings of the nature, purpose 
and importance of kamma, including Dhammapada 181–187 and the Khuddakapatha, 
merit and rebirth, karuna (compassion), metta (loving kindness), pancha sila (the 
Five Precepts) and the paramitas (Six Perfections); the divergent applications of each 
of these ethical teachings in Buddhist life today. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A  
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 35 
2D Buddhism 
Section 2: Practices 
Students should have an understanding of: 
2.1 Meditation: the nature, purpose and significance of meditation in Buddhism; the 
different types of meditation: samatha (concentration), metta bhavana (loving 
kindness) and vipassana (insight); meditative practices, including mindfulness 
breathing and zazen, divergent understanding of the nature and importance of 
visualisation of the Buddha and Bodhisattvas, including Amitāyus Meditation Sutra; 
how the different practices are used by Mahayana and Theravada Buddhists and the 
benefits from their use. 
2.2 Chanting: the nature, purpose and role of chanting in Buddhism as a devotional 
practice and to gain mental concentration, including Dhammapada 1–2, confidence 
and joy. The divergent understandings of the importance of chanting in Buddhist life 
today: Theravada Buddhism, including Tiratana Buddhism, with reference to 
Dhammapada 190, and Mahayana Buddhism, including Nam Myoho Renge Kyo. 
2.3 Mantra recitation: divergent understandings of the nature, purpose, role and 
importance of mantra recitation with reference to Theravada Buddhism, including 
Namo Buddhaya ("Homage to the Buddha"), and Mahayana Buddhism; the nature 
and purpose of using sacred syllables, devotional articles, offerings and mala beads, 
and why they are used in different schools of Buddhism. 
2.4 Features of Buddhist places of worship: the divergent nature, history and design of 
Buddhist places of worship, including temples, gompas, viharas and shrines in 
Theravada, Mahayana and Triratna Buddhism; how and why the places of worship are 
used, including reference to the shrine room, shrine facing east, and the library, 
showing the importance of learning, with reference to the Kimsila Sutta.  
2.5 How and why objects of devotion are used within different Buddhist places of 
worship, buddharupas, including reference to Vakkali Sutta, shrine, Bodhi tree; 
divergent understandings of why devotional objects are important in Buddhism today. 
2.6* Puja: the nature and purpose of puja in the vihara and the home, including reference 
to Mangala Sutta; examples of the different types; when each type might be used 
and why; the importance of having different types of worship and their use in 
different Buddhist contexts.   
2.7 Death and mourning rituals and ceremonies: the divergent celebration and 
significance of the ceremonies in Buddhist communities and to Buddhists; the distinct 
significance of the rituals associated with death and mourning in Theravada 
communities and in Japan and Tibet, with reference to the Tibetan Book of the Dead. 
2.8 Festivals and retreats: the divergent nature, history, purpose and importance of 
festivals and retreats in Buddhism; divergent understandings of the origins, meaning 
and features of celebration of specific festivals and retreats, including Wesak, 
Vassa/Rain Retreat and Kathina, with reference to the Anapanasati Sutta, and 
Uposatha days in Theravada Buddhism; Hanamatsuri and Obon (Japanese), 
Parinibbana Day in Mahayana Buddhism, and Lama Tsong Khapa Day in Tibet. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
36 
Area of Study 2E – Hinduism 
Overview 
This area of study comprises a study in depth of Hinduism as a lived religion in the United 
Kingdom and throughout the world. 
There are two sections: Beliefs and Teachings; Practices. 
Students will be expected to study Hinduism within the context of the wider British society, 
the religious traditions of which are, in the main, Christian.  
Students should compare and contrast two areas of belief and practice within Christianity 
and Hinduism: 
● Beliefs about the afterlife and their significance (1.5)* 
● The practice and significance of worship (2.4)*. 
Students should recognise that Hinduism is one of the many religious traditions in Great 
Britain, which include Buddhism, Islam, Judaism and Sikhism. This knowledge may be 
applied throughout the assessment of the specified content. Students should also recognise 
that within Hinduism there may be more than one perspective in the way beliefs and 
teachings are understood and expressed. Common and divergent views within Hinduism in 
the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed should be included throughout, 
including reference to Shaivism and Vaishnavism.  
The significance and importance of the various beliefs and practices to Hindus today should 
be explored throughout the two sections. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A  
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 37 
2E Hinduism 
Section 1: Beliefs and Teachings 
 
Students should have an understanding of: 
1.1 The nature of Brahman: the nature of Brahman as spirit, ultimate reality or 
absolute truth; how the characteristics of Brahman are shown in Hindu scriptures, 
including Katha Upanishad 2.2.6–8.   
1.2 The nature and importance of understanding Brahman as Nirguna Brahman and 
Saguna Brahman: how Nirguna Brahman and Saguna Brahman are shown in 
Hindu scripture, for example Nirguna (Taittiriya Upanishad 2.7.1–2) and Saguna 
(Rig Veda 1.154.1–2); the nature and importance of Vaikuntha (spiritual worlds); 
divergent ways in which belief in each may be expressed in the life of Hindus 
today. 
1.3 Three aspects of the divine: Brahman, Antaryami and Bhagavan; the nature and 
significance of the divine as Brahman (everywhere and non-personal), Antaryami 
(within the heart) and Bhagavan (beyond, as a personal loving God); how the 
three aspects are shown in Hindu scriptures, including Mundaka Upanishad 2.1; 
why belief in the three aspects of the divine are important in Hindu life and for 
religious pluralism today. 
1.4 Manifestations of the Divine: the nature and importance of how the deities are 
shown in Hindu scriptures; avatars and murti; the nature and role of male deities: 
divergent understandings of the importance of Vishnu (including Rig Veda 1.22) 
and Shiva; the nature and role of the female force, Shakti, including Parvati and 
Lakshmi. 
1.5* The nature of the individual and life within Hinduism: the nature and importance 
of the atman (eternal self), karma, the cycle of samsara, moksha; divergent 
Hindu understandings of the nature of the individual and life, including 
interpretations of Brihadaranyaka Upanishad 4.4; why beliefs about the atman, 
karma, samsara and moksha are important for Hindus today. 
1.6 The purpose of human life for Hindus: the nature and significance of the four aims 
of life (Purusharthas) – dharma, artha, kama and moksha; the nature and 
significance of anatana dharma (eternal law), including Bhagavad Gita 3.35; the 
nature and significance of varnashrama dharma (duties according to materialistic 
situation in life). 
1.7 Hindu responses to suffering, knowledge and ignorance: Hindu teachings about 
suffering, knowledge and ignorance, such as ahimsa, respect, empathy, mind/ 
sense control, humility, and love, including Mahabharata 5.39; divergent Hindu 
understandings as to why there is suffering, knowledge and ignorance for Hindus 
today. 
1.8 Hindu cosmology: the nature of the Hindu cosmology as shown in Hindu 
scriptures, including Rig Veda 10.129; the nature and importance of the cycle of 
four ages (yugas), including descriptions of the Kali Yuga in the Mahabharata, 
many worlds and their diverse inhabitants; the nature and divergent 
understandings of the importance of the concepts of prakriti (matter/nature),  
tri-guna (three qualities) and maya (illusion). 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
38 
2E Hinduism 
Section 2: Practices 
Students should have an understanding of: 
2.1 The nature and purpose of Hindu yoga: the nature and purpose of different forms 
of yoga: karma yoga (action), jnana yoga (knowledge), astanga/raja yoga 
(meditation) and bhakti yoga (devotion); examples of when each form of yoga 
might be used, how and why; the importance of having different types of yoga; 
reference to Bhagavad Gita 6.44–47. 
2.2 Focuses of worship and representations of the divine: the nature, purpose and 
importance of different ways of worshipping, including worshipping one god 
(personal or non-personal) or many deities, gurus and holy places (land, hills, 
rivers and sacred plants and animals); the scriptural basis for the different focuses 
of worship and representations of the divine in worship, including interpretations of 
Bhagavad Gita 6.20–31. 
2.3 The importance of Hindu places of worship: the nature, features of, use, and 
purpose of worship in different places, including in the temple, in the home, 
outside, shrines and festival celebration and in the space of the heart, with 
reference to interpretations of Bhagavad Gita 9.13–27; the benefits for Hindus of 
having different places to worship in. 
2.4* The nature and purpose of prayer in the temple and the home: the nature, features 
of use and purpose of the different forms of worship, including meditation, puja, 
havan, darshan, arti, bhajan, kirtan and japa, with reference to interpretations of 
Bhagavad Gita 6.44–47; divergent understandings of the benefits for Hindus of 
having different forms of worship. 
2.5 Hindu sacred festivals: the nature, history, purpose and significance of Hindu 
sacred festivals; the origins and meaning of specific festivals, including Diwali, Holi, 
Navratri Dussehra, Ram Navami, Ratha-yatra, Janmashtami, and Raksha Bandhan, 
including interpretations of Brihadaranyaka Upanishad 1.3.28. 
2.6 Hindu pilgrimage: the nature, history and purpose of Hindu pilgrimages; the 
significance of the places Hindus go on pilgrimage; divergent understandings of 
why pilgrimage may, or may not be, important for Hindus today; the nature, 
features, history and importance of pilgrimage to the Ganges, including 
interpretations of Rig Veda 10.75, Vrindavana and Varanasi. 
2.7 Hindu environmental projects: divergent understandings of the nature, purpose and 
significance of environmental care for Hindus; the importance of care for rivers and 
sacred places for Hindus; how Hindus care for the environment, examples of what 
they do and why, including reference to cow protection and  including 
interpretations of Rig Veda 10.87.16–19. 
2.8 Hindu charity work: the nature and purpose of charity for Hindus; Hindu teachings 
about charity; the work of one named Hindu charity working to promote wellbeing, 
social inclusion and women’s rights, what it does and why, including interpretations 
of Bhagavad Gita 3.10–12. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A  
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 39 
Area of Study 2F – Judaism 
Overview 
This area of study comprises a study in depth of Judaism as a lived religion in the United 
Kingdom and throughout the world. 
There are two sections: Beliefs and Teachings; Practices. 
Students will be expected to study Judaism within the context of the wider British society, 
the religious traditions of which are, in the main, Christian.  
Students should compare and contrast two areas of belief and practice within Christianity 
and Judaism: 
● Beliefs about the afterlife and their significance (1.8)* 
● The practice and significance of worship (2.4)*. 
Students should recognise that Judaism is one of the many religious traditions in Great 
Britain, which include Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam and Sikhism. This knowledge may be 
applied throughout the assessment of the specified content. Students should also recognise 
that within Judaism there may be more than one perspective in the way beliefs and 
teachings are understood and expressed. Common and divergent views within Judaism in the 
way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed should be included throughout 
including reference to Orthodox, Reform and Liberal traditions.  
The significance and importance of the various beliefs and practices to Jews today should be 
explored throughout the two sections. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
40 
2F Judaism 
Section 1: Beliefs and Teachings 
Students should have an understanding of: 
1.1 The nature of the Almighty: how the characteristics of the Almighty are shown in the 
Torah, and why they are important in Jewish life today, including One, Creator, Law-
Giver and Judge, including reference to Genesis 2. 
1.2 The nature and importance of Shekhinah: how the divine presence is shown in the 
Torah and why it is important, including interpretations of 2 Chronicles 7:1–3; the 
divergent understandings of Shekhinah found in different forms of Orthodox Judaism 
and the importance of them for Jews today. 
1.3 The nature and purpose of the Messiah: how messiahship is shown in the scriptures, 
including Jeremiah 23:5–8; the nature and significance of the Messianic Age and the 
Jewish responsibility to bring it about; divergent understandings of the Messiah in 
different forms of Orthodox and Reform Judaism and the importance of them for 
Jewish people today. 
1.4 The covenant with Abraham and his descendants: the nature and history of the 
Abrahamic covenant; the role of Abraham in the covenant, including Genesis 17; 
why the Promised Land covenanted to Abraham and his descendants is important for 
Jews today. 
1.5 The Covenant at Sinai: the nature and history of the Covenant at Sinai (the Ten 
Commandments), including Exodus 20; the role and significance of Moses in the 
Covenant at Sinai; divergent understandings of how and why the Decalogue is 
important in Jewish life today. 
1.6 Sanctity of life: why human life is holy for Jewish people; how life is shown as 
special. The nature and importance of Pikuach Nefesh (primacy of life): life takes 
precedence over everything, with reference to Talmud Yoma 83-84; divergent 
understandings of how and why the principle of Pikuach Nefesh is applied by Jews 
today. 
1.7 Moral principles and the Mitzvot: the nature and importance of the Mitzvot, including 
reference to the Mishneh Torah of Maimonides: Sefer Madda; the importance of the 
relationship between keeping the Mitzvot and free will; the Mitzvot between humans 
and the Almighty, and between humans; divergent understandings of the importance 
of the Mitzvot between the Almighty and humans, and between humans, for Jewish 
life today.  
1.8* Jewish beliefs about life after death: divergent Jewish understandings of the nature 
and significance of life after death, including reference to different forms of Orthodox 
and Reform Judaism; Jewish teachings about life after death, including 
interpretations of Ecclesiastes 12; the nature of resurrection and judgement; why 
belief in life after death may be important for Jews today. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A  
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 41 
 
2F Judaism 
Section 2: Practices 
Students should have an understanding of: 
2.1 The nature and purpose of Jewish public acts of worship: the nature, features and 
purpose of Jewish public worship, including interpretations of Psalm 116:12–19; the 
nature, features and importance of synagogue services for the Jewish community 
and the individual.  
2.2 The Tenakh and the Talmud: the nature, features, purpose and significance of the 
Tenakh (the written law) and Talmud (the oral law) for Jews in daily life today, with 
reference to Perkei Avot 2; the nature and purpose of Jewish laws: food laws, 
kashrut, including kosher, and treifah and the separation of dairy and meat, 
including reference to Deuteronomy 14:3–10; the divergent implications of the 
Jewish food laws for Jews today. 
2.3 The nature and purpose of prayer in the home and of private prayer: the nature, 
features and purpose of prayer three times a day; the importance of having 
different forms of prayers, including interpretations of Psalm 55:16–23. 
2.4* The nature and importance of the Shema and the Amidah (the standing prayer); 
when the Shema and the Amidah might be used, how and why, including reference 
to the Mezuzah; the importance of having the Shema and the Amidah for Jews 
today, including reference to Deuteronomy 6:4. 
2.5 The importance of ritual for Jews today: the nature, features and purpose of birth 
rituals (including Brit Milah), Bar and Bat Mitzvahs, and marriage rituals, including 
interpretations of Genesis 21:1–8 and Leviticus 12; the nature, purpose and 
importance of the mourning rituals of funeral, shiva, avelut and yahrzeit for Jews 
today; divergent understandings of the importance of each ritual for different forms 
of Orthodox and Reform Judaism today. 
2.6 The nature, features, history and purpose of celebrating Shabbat: the nature, 
features and purpose of the celebration of Shabbat in the home and in the 
synagogue, including interpretations of Exodus 31:12–18; why the celebration of 
Shabbat is important for the Jewish community and the individual today. 
2.7 Jewish festivals: the nature, history, purpose and significance of Jewish festivals; 
the origins and meaning of specific festivals, including Rosh Hashanah, Yom Kippur, 
Pesach, Shavuot and Sukkot, including interpretations of Leviticus 23 (Rosh 
Hashanah); divergent understandings of why festivals are important to different 
forms of Orthodox and Reform Judaism today. 
2.8 Features of the synagogue: the nature, history and purpose of the different design 
of the synagogues in Liberal, Reform and Orthodox Judaism, including facing 
Jerusalem, layout of seating the Ark and the bimah and with reference to Proverbs 
14:28; how and why the synagogue is used by the different communities, including 
reference to Exodus 27:20–21; how and why objects of devotion are used within 
the synagogues, including a yad, Torah Scroll, ner tamid and menorah. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
42 
Area of Study 2G – Sikhism 
Overview 
This area of study comprises a study in depth of Sikhism as a lived religion in the United 
Kingdom and throughout the world. 
There are two sections: Beliefs and Teachings; Practices. 
Students will be expected to study Sikhism within the context of the wider British society, 
the religious traditions of which are, in the main, Christian.  
Students should compare and contrast two areas of belief and practice within Christianity 
and Sikhism: 
● Beliefs about the afterlife and their significance (1.4)* 
● The practice and significance of worship (2.5)*. 
Students should recognise that Sikhism is one of the many religious traditions in Great 
Britain, which include Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam and Judaism. This knowledge may be 
applied throughout the assessment of the specified content. Students should also recognise 
that within Sikhism there may be more than one perspective in the way beliefs and teachings 
are understood and expressed. Common and divergent views within Sikhism in the way 
beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed should be included throughout, including 
reference to Khalsa and non-Khalsa Sikhs.  
The significance and importance of the various beliefs and practices to Sikhs today should be 
explored throughout the two sections. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A  
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 43 
2G Sikhism 
Section 1: Beliefs and Teachings 
Students should have an understanding of: 
1.1 The nature of God: how the characteristics of God are shown in the Mool Mantar, 
Guru Granth Sahib 1, and why the characteristics are important and why the Mool 
Mantar is significant for Sikhs.  
1.2 God as Creator: the nature and importance of God as Creator (Karta Purakh) for 
Sikhs; Sikh teachings on God as Creator, including Guru Granth Sahib 12 and 94. 
1.3 The nature of human life: the purpose and significance of life as an opportunity to 
unite with God; Sikh understandings of why uniting with God is important; how 
uniting with God will affect their lives, including Guru Granth Sahib 12. 
1.4* Sikh beliefs about life after death: the nature of karma, rebirth and mukti 
(liberation); how they are shown in the Guru Granth Sahib, including reference to 
Guru Granth Sahib 2 and 78; divergent understandings of how and why karma, 
rebirth and mukti are important for Sikh life today.  
1.5 Purpose of life: the nature and importance of being gurmukh (God-centred) not 
manmukh (self-centred) and the elimination of haumai (ego/pride), including 
reference to Guru Granth Sahib 125 and 226; what actions make a gurmukh Sikh; 
divergent understandings of why being gurmukh and eliminating haumai is 
important in Sikh life today. 
1.6 The oneness of humanity: how the equality of all humans is shown in the Guru 
Granth Sahib, including Guru Granth Sahib 349; how equality is shown in stories 
from the lives of the Gurus, including the example of Mai Bhago and the 
appointment of women as teachers; and how equality is shown in Sikh life today; 
how and why complete equality of men and women is important for Sikhs today. 
1.7 Sewa (service to others): the nature of sewa, including tan, man and dhan; the 
origins and purpose of sewa and its importance in the development of Sikhism, 
including Guru Granth Sahib 26; divergent understandings of the practice and 
importance of sewa in Sikh life today in reflecting the priority of service to others.  
1.8 Sangat: the nature and history of the sangat; divergent understandings of why the 
sangat is important for Sikhs, including Guru Granth Sahib 1316; the concept of 
Sat Sangat and divergent understandings of its significance for Sikhs; problems for 
Sikhs living without a sangat. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
44 
2G Sikhism 
Section 2: Practices 
Students should have an understanding of: 
2.1 Features of the gurdwara: the nature, history and purpose of the design of the 
Gurdwara as the ‘Door/Gate of the Guru’, including Rahit Maryada Chapters 4–6; 
how and why objects of devotion are used within the gurdwara: Guru Granth Sahib, 
takht, chanani, chaur, the langar hall, four doors, and the Nishan Sahib; divergent 
understandings of the importance of these features in Sikh life today. 
2.2 The gurdwara: the role and importance of the gurdwara within the Sikh community, 
including reference to Guru Granth Sahib 1391; activities that take place within the 
gurdwara and why; the nature and importance of visiting Sikh historical gurdwaras: 
the Harmandir Sahib in Amritsar (the Golden Temple). 
2.3 Langar: the history of langar, including Guru Granth Sahib 967; the nature and 
purposes of langar; the significance of langar for Sikhs today, especially as an 
expression of sewa. 
2.4 Nam Japna – meditating on the name of God: the nature and significance of Nam 
Japna; diverse ways in which the Nam Japna is used in the gurdwara and in Sikh 
daily life, including Guru Granth Sahib 1142. 
2.5* Prayer, including reference to Guru Granth Sahib 305: the nature, role and purpose 
of prayer in the home; the different types of prayer; when prayer might take place 
and why; the importance of having different prayers. 
2.6 Akhand path (continuous 48-hour reading of the Guru Granth Sahib): the nature, 
history, role and purpose of the akhand path, including reference Rahit Maryada 
Chapter 7; how and why Sikhs might take part in the akhand path: why the akhand 
path is important for the Sikh community and for individual Sikhs. 
2.7 Gurpurbs and commemorations: divergent understandings of the nature, history and 
purpose of gurpurbs and commemorations; why they are important for Sikhs today. 
The origins and meaning of gurpurbs, including Guru Nanak’s birthday, Vaisakhi, 
including reference to the account of the events found in Gurbilas Patshahi 10. 
Divali: the origins and meaning of commemorations, including the martyrdom of 
Guru Arjan and Guru Tagh Bahadur Ji. 
2.8 Birth and naming rituals and ceremonies: the celebration and significance of Naam 
Karan and Hukamnama; the significance of Amrit Sanskar (the initiation ceremony) 
for Sikh families, including reference to the Rahit Maryada Chapters 11 and 13; 
divergent understandings of these ceremonies between khalsa and non-khalsa 
Sikhs; the significance of the names Singh and Kaur in the naming and Amrit 
ceremonies, and for Sikh identity today. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A  
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 45 
Assessment information 
Paper 2: Area of Study 2 – Study of Second Religion 
● First assessment: May/June 2018. 
● The assessment is 50 minutes. 
● The assessment is out of 51 marks. 
● Students must answer all sections and all questions on the chosen religion. 
● The paper may include short open, open response and extended writing questions. 
● The paper will assess spelling, punctuation and grammar (SPaG) and use of specialist 
terminology and these will contribute a minimum of 5% of marks towards the overall 
weighting for this paper. 
Synoptic assessment 
Synoptic assessment requires students to work across different parts of a qualification and to 
show their accumulated knowledge and understanding of a topic or subject area. 
Synoptic assessment enables students to show their ability to combine their skills, knowledge 
and understanding with breadth and depth of the subject.  
Synopticity will be assessed where students are required to bring together their knowledge 
and understanding of religion from across the course of study. 
Sample assessment materials 
Sample papers and mark schemes can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2  
GCSE (9–1) in Religious Studies A Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
46 
Area of Study 3: Philosophy and Ethics 
Area of Study 3A - Catholic Christianity 
Overview 
This area of study comprises a study in depth of aspects of Philosophy and Ethics in the 
context of Catholic Christianity as a lived religion within the United Kingdom and throughout 
the world. 
There are two sections: Arguments for the Existence of God; Religious Teachings on 
Relationships and Families in the 21st Century. 
The significance and importance of the various beliefs, issues and practices to Catholics 
today should be explored throughout the two sections. This should include reference to how 
the Bible informs a Christian’s understanding of the topics and how approaches to the issues 
are underpinned by philosophical arguments and ethical theory as applicable.  
Students will be expected to study Catholic Christianity within the context of the wider British 
society, the religious traditions of which are, in the main, Christian. Students should 
recognise that Catholic Christianity is one of the many religions and world views in Great 
Britain, which include Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism, Sikhism and non-religious views 
such as Humanism and atheism. This knowledge may be applied throughout the assessment 
of the specified content. 
Students should compare and contrast the areas of ethics and/or philosophy within Catholic 
Christianity with wider Christian perspectives and non-religious views as outlined in the 
content below. 
Students should also recognise that within Catholic Christianity there may be more than one 
perspective in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed. Common and 
divergent views within the wider Christian tradition in the way beliefs and teachings are 
understood and expressed should be included throughout, including reference to Orthodox, 
Protestant and other Christian traditions.  
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A  
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 47 
3A Catholic Christianity 
Section 1: Arguments for the Existence of God 
Students should have an understanding of: 
1.1 Revelation as proof of the existence of God: the significance of Jesus Christ as the 
culmination of God’s revelation; what the revelation of Jesus Christ shows about the 
nature of God for Catholics, including reference to Hebrews 1:1–4. 
1.2 Visions as proof of the existence of God: the nature and importance of visions for 
Catholics; biblical and non-biblical examples of visions, including Joan of Arc and 
Genesis 15 and Matthew 17:1–13; reasons why they might lead to belief in God, and 
Catholic responses to non-religious arguments (including atheist and Humanist) 
which maintain that visions are hallucinations and provide no proof that God exists.  
1.3 Miracles as proof of the existence of God: the nature and importance of miracles for 
Catholics; biblical and non-biblical examples of miracles, including those at Lourdes 
and John 4:43–54; reasons why they might lead to belief in God and Catholic 
responses to non-religious arguments (including atheist and Humanist) which 
maintain that miracles can be scientifically explained and provide no proof that God 
exists. 
1.4 Catholic attitudes towards religious experiences and its use as a philosophical 
argument for the existence of God: the nature of religious experience and why not 
all religious experiences are approved by the Church, including reference to 
Catechism of the Catholic Church 66–67; Catholic responses to non-religious 
(including atheist and Humanist) arguments that religious experiences do not 
provide proof that God exists. 
1.5 Design argument: the classical design argument for the existence of God and its use 
by Catholics as a philosophical argument for the existence of God; understandings of 
what the design argument shows about the nature of God for Catholics, including 
Romans 1:18–24; Catholic responses to non-religious (including atheist and 
Humanist) arguments against the design argument as evidence for the existence of 
God. 
1.6 Cosmological argument: the cosmological argument for the existence of God and its 
use by Catholics as a philosophical argument for the existence of God, including 
reference to Thomas Aquinas' First Three Ways of showing God's existence; 
understandings of the nature and importance of what the cosmological argument 
shows about the nature of God for Catholics; Catholic responses to non-religious 
(including atheist and Humanist) arguments against the cosmological argument as 
evidence for the existence of God. 
1.7 Issues raised by the existence of suffering and God as all-loving: the issues it raises 
for Catholics about the nature of God, including Isaiah 45; how the problem and its 
basis as a philosophical argument may lead some to examine and others to reject 
their belief in God. 
1.8 The solutions offered to the problem of suffering and a loving and righteous God 
within Catholicism: biblical, theoretical and practical responses – Psalms, including 
reference to Psalm 119, Job, free will (St Augustine), as a way for humans to 
develop (St Irenaeus), prayer, and charity; divergent understandings within 
Christianity of their success in solving the problem. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
48 
3A Catholic Christianity 
Section 2: Religious Teachings on Relationships and Families in the 
21st Century 
Students should have an understanding of: 
2.1 The importance and purpose of marriage for Catholics: the significance of marriage 
in Catholic life; Catholic teachings about marriage, including Not Just Good, But 
Beautiful by Pope Francis; divergent Christian, non-religious (including atheist and 
Humanist) attitudes to the importance of marriage in society, including the sanctity 
of marriage, a lack of importance, cohabitation and the Catholic responses to these 
attitudes. 
2.2 Catholic teaching about the importance of sexual relationships: Catholic teaching 
about sexual relationships as marital, unitive and procreative, including Catechism of 
the Catholic Church 2360–2365; Catholic teaching on sexual relationships outside of 
marriage and same-sex sexual relationships; divergent Christian, non-religious 
(including atheist and Humanist) attitudes to sexual relationships, including the 
acceptance of sexual relationships outside marriage and same-sex sexual 
relationships and Catholic responses to them. 
2.3 Catholic teaching about the purpose and importance of families: procreation; 
security and education of children; Catholic responses to the different types of family 
within 21st-century society (nuclear, single parent, same-sex parents, extended and 
blended families), including Familiaris Consortio 36–85. 
2.4 Support for the family in the local Catholic parish: how and why the local parish tries 
to support families, including through family worship, the sacraments, classes for 
parents, groups for children and counselling, with reference to the Family Group 
Movement and Catechism of the Catholic Church 2226; the importance of the 
support of the local parish for Catholic families today. 
2.5 Catholic teaching on family planning and the regulation of births: Catholic teaching 
about artificial contraception and natural family planning, including reference to 
Humanae Vitae; divergent Christian, non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) 
attitudes to family planning, including acceptance of artificial methods of 
contraception by some Protestant Churches and the application of ethical theories, 
such as situation ethics, and Catholic responses to them. 
2.6 Catholic teaching about divorce, annulment and remarriage: Catholic teaching on 
divorce, annulment and remarriage, including Catechism of the Catholic Church 
2382–2386; divergent Christian, non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) 
attitudes to divorce, annulment and remarriage, including the application of ethical 
theories, such as situation ethics, and Catholic responses to them. 
2.7 Catholic teaching about the equality of men and women in the family: Catholic 
teaching about the role of men and women in the family with reference to Catechism 
of the Catholic Church 2207, including the dignity of work within the home; 
divergent Christian teachings and attitudes about the equality and roles of men and 
women in the family and Catholic responses to them. 
2.8 Catholic teachings about gender prejudice and discrimination: Catholic opposition to 
gender prejudice and discrimination, including theology of the body; examples of 
Catholic opposition to gender prejudice and discrimination, including Catechism of 
the Catholic Church 1938; divergent Christian attitudes to gender differences, 
including the role of women in the Church, prejudice and discrimination and Catholic 
responses to them. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A  
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 49 
Area of Study 3B – Christianity 
Overview 
This area of study comprises a study in depth of aspects of Philosophy and Ethics in the 
context of Christianity as a lived religion within the United Kingdom and throughout the 
world. 
There are two sections: Arguments for the Existence of God; Religious Teachings on 
Relationships and Families in the 21st Century. 
The significance and importance of the various beliefs, issues and practices to Christians 
today should be explored throughout the two sections. This should include reference to how 
the Bible informs a Christian’s understanding of the topics and how approaches to the issues 
are underpinned by philosophical arguments and ethical theory as applicable.  
Students will be expected to study Christianity within the context of the wider British society, 
the religious traditions of which are, in the main, Christian. Students should recognise that 
Christianity is one of the many religions and world views in Great Britain, which include 
Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism, Sikhism and non-religious views such as Humanism 
and atheism. This knowledge may be applied throughout the assessment of the specified 
content. 
Students should compare and contrast the areas of ethics and/or philosophy within 
Christianity with non-religious views as outlined in the content below. 
Students should also recognise that within Christianity there may be more than one 
perspective in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed. Common and 
divergent views within Christianity in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and 
expressed should be included throughout, including reference to Catholic, Orthodox, 
Protestant and other Christian traditions.  
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
50 
3B Christianity 
Section 1: Arguments for the Existence of God 
Students should have an understanding of: 
1.1 Revelation as proof of the existence of God; revelation as shown in the Bible, 
including in the covenants with Noah and Abraham, and through Jesus, including 
Hebrews 1:1–4; divergent understandings of what revelation shows about the 
nature of God for Christians. 
1.2 Visions as proof of the existence of God: the nature and importance of visions for 
Christians; biblical and non-biblical examples of visions, including Genesis 15 and 
Matthew 17:1–13; reasons why they might lead to belief in the existence of God 
and Christian responses to non-religious arguments (including atheist and 
Humanist) which maintain that visions are hallucinations and provide no proof that 
God exists; divergent understandings of what visions show about the nature of 
God for Christians. 
1.3 Miracles as proof of the existence of God: the nature and importance of miracles 
for Christians; biblical examples of miracles, including John 4:43–54; reasons why 
they might lead to belief in the existence of God and Christian responses to non-
religious arguments (including atheist and Humanist) which maintain that miracles 
can be scientifically explained and provide no proof that God exists; divergent 
understandings of what miracles show about the nature of God for Christians. 
1.4 Christian attitudes towards religious experiences and their use as a philosophical 
argument for the existence of God: the nature of a religious experience and why it 
might be regarded as revelation, including reference to Exodus 3; Christian 
responses to non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) arguments that 
religious experiences do not provide proof that God exists. 
1.5 Christian teaching about prayers: Christian teachings about the nature and 
importance of prayers; Christian teachings about reasons prayers that are 
answered in the way the person expects might lead to belief in God, including  
1 John 5:13–17. 
1.6 Design argument: the classical design argument for the existence of God and  
its use by Christians as a philosophical argument for the existence of God; 
divergent understandings about what the design argument may show about the 
nature of God for Christians, including Romans 1:18–24; Christian responses to 
non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) arguments against the design 
argument as evidence for the existence of God. 
1.7 Cosmological argument: the cosmological argument for the existence of God and 
its use by Christians as a philosophical argument for the existence of God; 
divergent understandings about what the cosmological argument shows about the 
nature of God for Christians, including Thomas Aquinas' First Three Ways of 
showing God's existence; Christian responses to non-religious (including atheist 
and Humanist) arguments against the cosmological argument as evidence for the 
existence of God. 
1.8 Religious upbringing: Christian teachings about raising children to believe in God, 
including reference to Proverbs 22:6; features of a Christian upbringing and why 
they may lead to belief in God; Christian responses to non-religious (including 
atheist and Humanist) arguments about why a religious upbringing may result in a 
rejection of God’s existence. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A  
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 51 
3B Christianity 
Section 2: Religious Teachings on Relationships and Families in the 
21st Century 
Students should have an understanding of: 
2.1 The importance and purpose of marriage for Christians: Christian teachings about 
the significance of marriage in Christian life; the purpose of marriage for Christians, 
including Mark 10:6–9; divergent Christian and non-religious (including atheist and 
Humanist) attitudes to the importance of marriage in society, including the sanctity 
of marriage, a lack of importance, cohabitation and Christian responses to these 
attitudes. 
2.2 Christian teachings about the nature and importance of sexual relationships: 
divergent Christian teachings about sexual relationships; Christian attitudes towards 
sexual relationships outside of marriage and same-sex sexual relationships, 
including interpretations of 1 Corinthians 6:7–20; divergent Christian and non-
religious (including atheist and Humanist) attitudes to sexual relationships, including 
the acceptance of sexual relationships outside marriage and same-sex sexual 
relationships and Christian responses to them. 
2.3 Christian teachings about the purpose and importance of the family: procreation, 
security and education of children, with reference to Ephesians 6:1–4; divergent 
Christian responses to different types of family within 21st-century society (nuclear, 
single parent, same-sex parents, extended and blended families). 
2.4 Support for the family in the local parish: how and why the local church community 
tries to support families, through family worship (including Matthew 19:13–14), rites 
of passage, classes for parents, counselling and groups for children (including 
Sunday schools); the importance of the support of the local parish for Christians 
today. 
2.5 Christian teaching about family planning and regulation of births: divergent Christian 
attitudes about contraception and family planning, including teachings about the 
artificial methods of contraception by some Protestant Churches and the Catholic 
Church, with reference to Humanae Vitae; different non-religious (including atheist 
and Humanist) attitudes to family planning and the application of ethical theories, 
such as situation ethics, and Christian responses to them.  
2.6 Christian teachings and attitudes towards divorce and remarriage: Christian 
teachings about divorce and remarriage, including Matthew 19:1–12; divergent 
Christian, non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) attitudes to divorce and 
remarriage, including the application of ethical theories, such as situation ethics, and 
Christian responses to them.  
2.7 Christian teaching about the equality of men and women in the family: Christian 
teachings and attitudes about the role of men and women in the family, including 
reference to Genesis 1–3 and Ephesians 5:21–30; divergent Christian attitudes 
about the equality and role of men and women in the family and Christian responses 
to them. 
2.8 Christian teachings about gender prejudice and discrimination: Christian opposition 
to gender prejudice and discrimination, including Galatians 3:23–29; examples of 
Christian opposition to gender prejudice and discrimination; divergent Christian 
attitudes to gender differences, including the role of women in the Church, prejudice 
and discrimination and Christian responses to them. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
52 
Area of Study 3C – Islam 
Overview 
This area of study comprises a study in depth of aspects of Philosophy and Ethics in the 
context of Islam as a lived religion within the United Kingdom and throughout the world. 
There are two sections: Arguments for the Existence of Allah; Religious Teachings on 
Relationships and Families in the 21st Century. 
The significance and importance of the various beliefs, issues and practices to Muslims today 
should be explored throughout the two sections. This should include reference to how the 
Qur’an informs a Muslim’s understanding of the topics and how approaches to the issues are 
underpinned by philosophical arguments and ethical theory as applicable.  
Students will be expected to study Islam within the context of the wider British society, the 
religious traditions of which are, in the main, Christian. Students should recognise that Islam 
is one of the many religions and world views in Great Britain, which include Buddhism, 
Hinduism, Judaism, Sikhism and non-religious views such as Humanism and atheism. This 
knowledge may be applied throughout the assessment of the specified content. 
Students should compare and contrast the areas of ethics and/or philosophy within Islam 
with non-religious views as outlined in the content below. 
Students should also recognise that within Islam there may be more than one perspective in 
the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed. Common and divergent views 
within Islam in the way beliefs and teachings are understood and expressed should be 
included throughout, including reference to Sunni and Shi’a traditions.  
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A  
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 53 
3C Islam 
Section 1: Arguments for the Existence of Allah 
Students should have an understanding of: 
1.1 Revelation as proof of the existence of Allah; the Qur’an as revelation; revelation as 
shown in the Qur’an as direct (Surah 34:46–50) or through a messenger; divergent 
understandings of what revelation shows about the nature of Allah for Muslims. 
1.2 Visions as proof of the existence of Allah: the nature and importance of visions in 
Islam; Qur’anic examples of visions, including Surah 19:16–22; reasons why they 
might lead to belief in the existence of Allah, and Muslim responses to non-religious 
arguments (including atheist and Humanist) which maintain that visions are 
hallucinations and provide no proof that Allah exists; divergent understandings of 
what visions show about the nature of Allah for Muslims, with reference to Sunni, 
Shi’a and Sufi Islam. 
1.3 Miracles as proof of the existence of Allah: the nature and importance of miracles in 
Islam; the Qur’an as a miracle, including Surah 17:84–89; examples of miracles; 
reasons why they might lead to belief in the existence of Allah; Muslim responses to 
non-religious arguments (including atheist and Humanist) which maintain that 
miracles can be scientifically explained and provide no proof that Allah exists; 
divergent understandings of what miracles show about the nature of Allah for 
Muslims. 
1.4 Muslim attitudes towards religious experiences and their use as philosophical 
arguments for the existence of Allah: the nature of a religious experience;  
Surah 2:118; divergent understandings of the nature and importance of religious 
experiences in Islam, with reference to Sunni, Shi’a and Sufi Islam; Muslim responses 
to non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) arguments that religious 
experiences do not provide proof that Allah exists. 
1.5 Design argument: the design argument and its use in Islam as a philosophical 
argument for the existence of Allah and what it shows about the nature of Allah; 
divergent understandings of the nature and importance of the design argument for 
the existence of Allah in Islam, including reference to Surah 2:164; Muslim responses 
to non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) arguments against the design 
argument as evidence for the existence of Allah.  
1.6 Cosmological argument: the cosmological argument and its use in Islam as a 
philosophical argument for the existence of Allah, including reference to kalam in the 
writings of al-Ghazali, including Kitab al-lqtisad fil’ltiqad; what the cosmological 
argument shows about the nature of Allah; divergent understandings of the strengths 
and challenges of the cosmological argument in Islam; Muslim responses to non-
religious (including atheist and Humanist) arguments against the cosmological 
argument as evidence for the existence of Allah. 
1.7 Issues raised by existence of suffering and Allah as compassionate, including Surah 1: 
the problems the existence of suffering may raise for Muslims about the nature of 
Allah; how the problem and its basis as a philosophical argument may lead some 
people to reject belief in Allah or cause believers to question their belief. 
1.8 The different practical and philosophical solutions offered to the problem of suffering 
and Allah as compassionate within Islam: Qur’anic, including Surah 2:151–177; 
theoretical and practical responses, including life as a test, prayer and charity; 
divergent understandings within Islam of their success in solving the problem. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
54 
3C Islam 
Section 2: Religious Teachings on Relationships and Families in the 
21st Century 
Students should have an understanding of: 
2.1 The importance and purpose of marriage in Islam: the significance of marriage in 
Muslim life; Muslim teachings about marriage, including Surah 4; non-religious 
(including atheist and Humanist) attitudes to the importance of marriage in society, 
including a lack of importance, cohabitation and Muslim responses to these 
attitudes.  
2.2 Muslim teaching about the importance of sexual relationships: divergent Muslim 
teaching about sexual relationships as fulfilling physical, emotional and spiritual 
needs; Muslim teachings on sexual relationships outside of marriage, including 
Surah 23:5–11 and same-sex sexual relationships; non-religious (including atheist 
and Humanist) attitudes to sexual relationships, including the acceptance of sexual 
relationships outside marriage and same-sex sexual relationships and Muslim 
responses to them. 
2.3 Muslim teaching about the purpose and importance of the family: Muslim teaching 
about the purpose of families, including Surah 46:15–18: procreation and the 
strengthening of the ummah; divergent Muslim responses to the different types of 
family within 21st-century society (nuclear, single parent, same-sex parents, 
extended and blended families). 
2.4 Support for the family in the ummah: how and why the community tries to support 
families, including through worship, rites of passage, classes for parents, groups for 
children and counselling; divergent understandings of the importance of this support 
for Muslims today and how it might strengthen the ummah, with reference to Surah 
3:102–105. 
2.5 Muslim teaching on contraception: divergent Muslim teachings and attitudes  
about contraception and family planning, including reference to Sahih al-Bukhari 
34:432, and 62:136; different non-religious (including atheist and Humanist) 
attitudes to family planning and the application of ethical theories, such as situation 
ethics, and Muslim responses to them. 
2.6 Muslim teaching about divorce: divergent Muslim beliefs, teachings and attitudes 
towards divorce and remarriage, including Surah 2:226–241 and the different rules 
for performing a divorce in Shi’a and Sunni Islam; different non-religious (including 
atheist and Humanist) attitudes to divorce and remarriage, including the application 
of ethical theories, such as situation ethics, and Muslim responses to them. 
2.7 Muslim teaching about the equality of men and women in the family: divergent 
Muslim beliefs, teachings and attitudes about the role of men and women in the 
family with reference to the Qur’an, including Surah 4 and the time of Muhammad. 
2.8 Muslim teachings about gender prejudice and discrimination: Muslim attitudes to 
gender prejudice and discrimination, including Surah 33:35; examples of gender 
equality in action in Islam. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A  
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 55 
Assessment information 
Paper 3: Area of Study 3 – Philosophy and Ethics 
● First assessment: May/June 2018.  
● The assessment is 50 minutes. 
● The assessment is out of 51 marks. 
● Students must answer all sections and all questions on the chosen religion. 
● The paper may include short open, open response and extended writing questions. 
● The paper will assess spelling, punctuation and grammar (SPaG) and use of specialist 
terminology and these will contribute a minimum of 5% of marks towards the overall 
weighting for this paper. 
Synoptic assessment 
Synoptic assessment requires students to work across different parts of a qualification and to 
show their accumulated knowledge and understanding of a topic or subject area. 
Synoptic assessment enables students to show their ability to combine their skills, knowledge 
and understanding with breadth and depth of the subject.  
Synopticity will be assessed where students are required to bring together their knowledge 
and understanding of religion from across the course of study. 
Sample assessment materials 
Sample papers and mark schemes can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2  
GCSE (9–1) in Religious Studies A Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
56 
Area of Study 4: Textual Studies 
Area of Study 4A – Mark’s Gospel 
Overview 
The textual studies section for Christianity refers specifically to the Gospel of Mark. 
There are two sections: Who is Jesus?; The Nature of Discipleship. 
The themes and teachings of this Gospel are explored in depth; the references within the 
specification should be used as a starting point in a student’s textual studies and students 
may use other texts from the Bible to help contextualise, understand and compare the 
teachings found below.  
Students will be expected to study Christianity and Mark’s Gospel within the context of the 
wider British society, the religious traditions of which are, in the main, Christian. Students 
should recognise that Christianity is one of the many religions and world views in Great 
Britain, which include Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism, Sikhism and non-religious views 
such as Humanism and atheism. This knowledge may be applied throughout the assessment 
of the specified content. 
Students should compare and contrast the areas of belief and practice within Christianity 
with non-religious views. 
The significance and importance of the various beliefs, issues and practices to Christians 
today should be explored throughout the two sections. They should understand how varied 
interpretations of the meaning of passages from Mark’s Gospel may give rise to diversity 
within Christian traditions and consider how far Christian and non-religious communities give 
authority to Mark’s Gospel, especially in relation to other sources of contemporary authority. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A  
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 57 
4A Mark’s Gospel 
Section 1: Who is Jesus? 
Students should have an understanding of:  
1.1 The Messiah and the Son of Man: the expectations of the Messiah at the time of 
Jesus based on the Old Testament; (Isaiah 53) what the use of these titles shows 
about Jesus; the title ‘Son of Man’; the meaning of the title, including reference to 
Daniel 7:13, its use in Mark’s Gospel and what it shows about Jesus; the significance 
of Jesus as Messiah and Son of Man for different Christians today. 
1.2 The baptism of Jesus (Mark 1:2–11): the events of the baptism; divergent 
understandings of its significance, including marking the beginning of the ministry of 
Jesus, what it shows about him, and its significance for Christians today. 
1.3 Nature miracles in Mark’s Gospel: what they show about Jesus, including the calming 
of the storm (Mark 4:35–41); the feeding of the five thousand (Mark 6:32–44) and 
the walking on the water (Mark 6:45–52) and divergent understandings of their 
significance for different Christians today; Christian responses to non-religious 
arguments (including atheist and Humanist) which maintain that miracles can be 
scientifically explained and provide no proof of Jesus as divine. 
1.4 The healing miracles in Mark’s Gospel: what they show about Jesus, including the 
healing of Legion (Mark 5:1–20); the raising of Jairus’ daughter (Mark 5:21–43) and 
divergent understandings of their significance for Christians today. 
1.5 Peter’s confession at Caesarea Philippi (Mark 8:27–33): what this shows about Jesus 
and his purpose; ideas about the Messianic secret in Mark’s Gospel.  
1.6 The transfiguration (Mark 9:1–10): what this event shows about Jesus; the reasons 
and importance of the appearance of Moses and Elias in relation to Moses’ role as 
lawgiver and the Old Testament prophecy of Elias; divergent understandings of its 
significance for Christians today; Christian responses to non-religious arguments 
(including atheist and Humanist) which maintain that visions, such as the 
transfiguration, provide no proof that Jesus is the Messiah. 
1.7 The conflicts of Jesus in Mark’s Gospel: the healing of the paralysed man  
(Mark 2:1–12); disagreements about the Sabbath (Mark 2:23–3:6) and their link 
with Old Testament understandings of the Sabbath; and the cleansing of the Temple 
(Mark 11:15–18), what these show about Jesus and why they might be important in 
the narrative of Mark’s Gospel. 
1.8 The last days of Jesus’ life: reasons for his arrest; the Last Supper (Mark 14:12–31); 
the prayers in Gethsemane (Mark 14:32–42); the betrayal and arrest  
(Mark 14:43–52); the trial before the High Priest (Mark 14:53–65); the trial before 
Pilate (Mark 15:1–15); the Passion (Mark 15:21–39; 16:1–8), what these events 
show about the purpose of Jesus’ life, and how they may differ from other Gospel 
accounts, what these events show about Jesus; divergent understandings of the 
significance of these events for different Christians today. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
58 
4A Mark’s Gospel 
Section 2: The Nature of Discipleship 
Students should have an understanding of: 
2.1 The call of the first disciples (Mark 1:14–20, 2:13–17): how this shows the nature of 
discipleship in showing the willingness to immediately follow Jesus regardless of 
consequence and how this might affect a Christian today; the sending out of the 
Twelve (Mark 6:7–13), how this shows the nature of discipleship, including the 
command to take nothing for the journey and the responsibility to preach and serve; 
divergent ways in which it affects ideas about Christian living today. 
2.2 Parables: the Parable of the Tenants (Mark 12:1–12): how this story shows the 
potential cost of discipleship in and its relationship to Christians today; the Parable of 
the Sower (Mark 4:1–20), how each group shows different types of Christians; the 
nature of discipleship as shown in each group and in the role of the sower; its 
significance for Christians today; the importance of these parables with reference to 
the Kingdom of God and divergent ways in which that is variously understood as 
realised and in the future. 
2.3 The story of the rich man (Mark 10:17–31): how this shows the nature of 
discipleship in the command to sell all things and how it will affect Christian 
discipleship today in different ways; its significance for Christians today with 
reference to the Kingdom of God and divergent ways in which that is variously 
understood as realised and in the future. 
2.4 The spirit cast out of the boy (Mark 9:14–29): the problems of discipleship as shown 
in the efforts to cure the boy, and its significance for Christians today. 
2.5 Jesus’ teachings on service (Mark 10:41–45): the purpose of discipleship as shown 
in the command to serve; its implications and significance for Christians today. 
2.6 Peter’s denial (Mark 14:66–72): the challenges that the denial brings and what it 
teaches about the problems of discipleship, and its significance for Christians today 
as an example and warning; Christian responses to non-religious arguments 
(including atheist and Humanist) which suggest that religious observance, such as 
discipleship, can be seen to be unnecessary. 
2.7 Women in the ministry of Jesus as shown in Mark’s Gospel: the discipleship and 
importance of women, including the Greek woman (Mark 7:25–30); the anointing at 
Bethany (Mark 14:3–9); the crucifixion, burial and resurrection (Mark 15:40–47, 
16:1–11); divergent understandings of its significance for Christians today. 
2.8 Discipleship in the 21st century: divergent understandings of how discipleship is 
shown in the lives of individual Christians today; specific examples should show how 
a person’s life reflects on the demands of discipleship outlined in Mark’s Gospel, 
including Mark 8:34 and the examples of either Dietrich Bonhoeffer, Oscar Romero 
or Mother Teresa. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A  
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 59 
Area of Study 4B – The Qur’an 
Overview 
The textual studies section for Islam refers specifically to the Qur’an. 
There are two sections: Beliefs and Teachings of Islam; Lives of the Prophets and Others. 
The themes and teachings of the Qur’an are explored in depth; the references within the 
specification should be used as a starting point in a student’s textual studies and students 
may use other texts from the Qur’an, Hadith and other holy books within Islam to help 
contextualise, understand and compare the teachings and examples found below. The 
exploration of the lives of the prophets, and others, should recognise that these stories teach 
spiritual truths in addition to being stories. 
Students will be expected to study Islam and the Qur’an within the context of wider British 
society, the religious traditions of which are, in the main, Christian. Students should 
recognise that Islam is one of the many religions and world views in Great Britain, which 
include Buddhism, Hinduism, Judaism, Sikhism and non-religious views such as Humanism 
and atheism. This knowledge may be applied throughout the assessment of the specified 
content. 
Students should compare and contrast the areas of belief and practice within Islam with non-
religious views. 
The significance and importance of the various beliefs, issues and practices of Muslims today 
should be explored throughout the two sections. They should understand how varied 
interpretations of the meaning of passages from the Qur’an may give rise to diversity within 
Muslim traditions and consider how far Muslim and non-religious communities give authority 
to the Qur’an, especially in relation to other sources of contemporary authority. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
60 
4B The Qur’an 
Section 1: Beliefs and Teachings of Islam 
Students should have an understanding of: 
1.1 The importance of Allah in Surah al-Fatiha (1): the way Allah is described; the 
importance of submission to his will and the significance of this to Muslims living 
today. 
1.2 The oneness of Allah in Surah al-Anaam (6:13–24): what this means to an 
understanding of Allah, how this reflected in worship; its significance for Muslims 
today. 
1.3 The 99 beautiful names of Allah found in the Qur’an and what they teach Muslims 
about Allah: Ar-Rahman (the All-Merciful), including Surah 55:1; Ar-Rahim (the All-
Merciful), including Surah 3:31; As-Salam (the Source of Peace), including Surah 
59:23; Al-Khaliq (the Creator), including Surah 6:102; Al-Ghaffar (the All-Forgiving), 
including Surah 2:173; Ar-Razzaq (the Sustainer), including Surah 51:58; their 
importance and how they are used to illustrate understanding Allah and his 
relationship to humanity; and their importance for Muslims living and worshipping 
today. 
1.4 The nature of believers in Surah al-Baqarah (2): how believers are described; the 
blessings that come through belief; how non-believers are described; understandings 
of the significance of these passages for different Muslims today. 
1.5 Creation (Surah 45:3–5; 21:30; 41:11; 21:33; 51:47; 7:54; 50:38; 57:4;  
71:13–17; 24:45): the events of creation; the role of Allah and humanity in the 
narrative; the role of humanity as vicegerent/khalifah (Surah 2:30–39); as being 
above the angels; the significance of these beliefs for Muslims today. 
1.6 Justice (Surah An-Nisa 4:105–135): the nature and importance of justice as outlined 
in the Qur’an; its application in the Qur’an, in examples from the life of Muhammad 
in the Hadith, and divergent ways it is applied by Muslims today. 
1.7 Shirk: teachings about shirk in the Qur’an and their significance; the ascribing of 
partners to Allah; the worship of idols, including Surah 7:148–150; divergent ways 
in which this belief will affect a Muslim today and their relationship to other religions. 
1.8 Shari’ah law: how the Qur’an is used as the basis for Shari’ah law (Surah 4:59–60 
and 33:21–36) with examples expressed in the life of Muslims today; and how 
Shari’ah law might be understood in divergent ways in different traditions of Islam; 
Muslim responses to non-religious arguments (including atheist and Humanist) which 
suggest that religious observance, such as following Shari’ah, can be seen to be 
unnecessary. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A  
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 61 
4B The Qur’an 
Section 2: Lives of the Prophets and Others 
Students should have an understanding of: 
2.1 The Prophet Nuh: the events of his life and teachings in the Qur’an, including Surah 
71; his importance as one of the first messengers of Allah; his preaching; his 
thankfulness (Surah 17:3); his challenges; the Ark and the destruction of his people; 
the significance of his example for Muslims today.  
2.2 The Prophet Ibrahim: the events of his life and teachings in the Qur’an; his 
importance as a messenger of Allah; his example of living in submission to the will of 
Allah; Ibrahim's characteristics (including Surah 37:109–111); his preaching; his 
development of the Ka’ba (Surah 2:127–129); his relationships with Hajra and 
Ismail; his opposition to the worship of idols (including 21:57–58); the command to 
sacrifice his son (including possible debate about which son) and comparison of this 
story with the Tawrat; the significance of his example for Muslims today. 
2.3 The Prophet Ismail: the events of his life and teachings in the Qur’an, including 
Surah 21:5–86; his importance as a messenger of Allah; his building of the Ka’ba 
(Surah 2:127–129); his relationship with his parents; and the command of Allah for 
him to be sacrificed and comparison of this story with the Tawrat; the significance of 
his example for Muslims today. 
2.4 The Prophet Yusuf: the events of his life and teachings in the Qur’an, including Surah 
12 (Yusuf); his importance as a messenger of Allah; his dreams; his betrayal; his life 
in Egypt and reunion with his family; the significance of his example for Muslims 
today. 
2.5 The Prophet Dawud: the events of his life and teachings in the Qur’an; his 
importance as a messenger of Allah; Dawud’s place in the armies of Saul; his 
encounter with Goliath (Surah 2:249–251); his armour making; his devotion to 
Allah; his writing of the Zabur (Psalms), including Surah 17:55; the significance of 
his example for Muslims today. 
2.6 Maryam: the events of her life in the Qur’an and in the Hadith, including Surah 19 
(Maryam); her importance as one who submits her will to Allah; her birth; 
childhood; the annunciation of her pregnancy; and the birth of Isa; the significance 
of her example for Muslims today; Muslim responses to non-religious arguments 
(including atheist and Humanist) which maintain that visions, such as the visitation 
of Jibril to Maryam, are not real and provide no proof that Allah exists. 
2.7 The Prophet Isa: the events of his life and teachings in the Qur’an; his birth; his 
mission; his life, including preaching, miracles, knowledge and disciples; his 
ascension, including views of his death (Surah 4:157–158); his foretelling of 
Muhammad (Surah 61:6); his importance as a messenger of Allah especially in the 
Injil; the significance of his example for Muslims today.  
2.8 Beliefs and teachings about Muhammad and his preaching of Islam in response to 
the command of Allah (Surah 26:213–217) and its significance for Muslims today: 
the divergent ways in which Muslims might interpret the command to invite others to 
submission to Allah; Muslim responses to non-religious arguments (including atheist 
and Humanist) which suggest that trying to convert other people in today’s society is 
wrong. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
62 
Assessment information 
Paper 4: Area of Study 4 – Textual Studies 
● First assessment: May/June 2018.  
● The assessment is 50 minutes. 
● The assessment is out of 51 marks. 
● Students must answer all sections and all questions on the chosen textual study. 
● The paper may include short open, open response and extended writing questions. 
● The paper will assess spelling, punctuation and grammar (SPaG) and use of specialist 
terminology and these will contribute a minimum of 5% of marks towards the overall 
weighting for this paper. 
Synoptic assessment 
Synoptic assessment requires students to work across different parts of a qualification and to 
show their accumulated knowledge and understanding of a topic or subject area. 
Synoptic assessment enables students to show their ability to combine their skills, knowledge 
and understanding with breadth and depth of the subject.  
Synopticity will be assessed where students are required to bring together their knowledge 
and understanding of religion from across the course of study. 
Sample assessment materials 
Sample papers and mark schemes can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2  
GCSE (9–1) in Religious Studies A Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A  
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 63 
Assessment Objectives 
 
Students must: % in 
GCSE 
AO1 Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of religion and belief, 
including:  
● beliefs, practices and sources of authority  
● influence on individuals, communities and societies  
● similarities and differences within and/or between religions and 
beliefs. 
50 
AO2 Analyse and evaluate aspects of religion and belief, including their 
significance and influence. 
50 
Total 100% 
 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
Paper Assessment Objectives Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives AO1 % AO2 % 
Paper 1: Area of Study 1 – 
Study of Religion 
25 25 50% 
Paper 2: Area of Study 2 – 
Study of Second Religion 
12.5 12.5 25% 
Paper 3: Area of Study 3 – 
Philosophy and Ethics* 
12.5 12.5 25% 
Paper 4: Area of Study 4 – 
Textual Study* 
12.5 12.5 25% 
Total for GCSE 50% 50% 100% 
 
NB: Totals have been rounded either up or down. 
*Students are required to complete papers 1 and 2 and one paper from a choice of papers 3 
and 4. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
64 
3 Administration and general information 
Entries 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for this qualification can be found in 
our UK Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations officers and is 
available on our website: qualifications.pearson.com 
Discount code and performance tables 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more than one GCSE, or other Level 2 
qualifications with the same discount code, will have only the grade for their 'first entry' 
counted for the purpose of the school and college performance tables (please see 
Appendix 4: Codes). For further information about what constitutes 'first entry' and full 
details of how this policy is applied, please refer to the DfE website: 
www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-education 
Students should be advised that if they take two GCSEs with the same discount code, 
schools and colleges they wish to progress to are likely to take the view that this 
achievement is equivalent to only one GCSE. The same view may be taken if students take 
two GCSEs or other Level 2 qualifications that have different discount codes but have 
significant overlap of content. Students or their advisers who have any doubts about their 
subject combinations should check with the institution they wish to progress to before 
embarking on their programmes.  
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, 
special consideration and malpractice 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality policy requires all students to 
have equal opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our qualifications 
to be awarded in a way that is fair to every student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the Equality Act 2010) are not, 
when they are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in comparison to 
students who do not share that characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification and that 
this achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their peers. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be available in English. All student work must be in 
English. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A  
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 65 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with special 
educational needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to:  
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the assessment.  
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an individual 
student with a disability, without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding bodies comply with the duty under the 
Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students will 
then know what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for assessment.  
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable adjustments 
where a person with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in undertaking an 
assessment. The awarding organisation is required to take reasonable steps to overcome 
that disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be unique to that individual and 
therefore might not be in the list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of factors, 
including: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding 
organisation, timeframes or affects the security or integrity of the assessment. This is 
because the adjustment is not ‘reasonable’. 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student's mark or grade to 
reflect temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the examination/ 
assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a material effect on a 
candidate’s ability to take an assessment or demonstrate their level of attainment in  
an assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to apply for access arrangements 
and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special 
consideration, please refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
66 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that compromises or seeks to 
compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in examinations must be reported to Pearson using a JCQ Form M1 
(available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form should be emailed to 
candidatemalpractice@pearson.com. Please provide as much information and supporting 
documentation as possible. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies 
with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice constitutes staff or centre malpractice. 
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and maladministration of 
our qualifications. As with candidate malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is any act that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the 
integrity of the qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported 
immediately, before any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson on  
a JCQ Form M2(a) (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form, 
supporting documentation and as much information as possible should be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions 
lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More-detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the document 
General and Vocational Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice. 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to comply with the requirements of 
Ofqual's General Conditions of Recognition. 
This GCSE qualification will be graded and certificated on a nine-grade scale from 9 to 1 
using the total subject mark where 9 is the highest grade. Individual papers are not graded.  
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum judged by Pearson to be of 
sufficient standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U result. 
The first certification opportunity for this qualification will be 2018. 
Student recruitment and progression 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A  
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 67 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this qualification. 
Progression 
Students can progress from this qualification to:  
● AS and A Levels in Religious Studies and other subjects.  
● vocational qualifications, such as BTEC Nationals. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
68 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A  
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 69 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: The context for the development of this qualification 71 
Appendix 2: Transferable skills 73 
Appendix 3: Command Words 74 
Appendix 4: Codes 75 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
70 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A  
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 71 
Appendix 1: The context for the 
development of this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] and our 
ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by:  
● reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with those 
taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
● consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including learned bodies, 
subject associations, higher-education academics and teachers to ensure this qualification 
is suitable for a UK context 
● reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in their 
documents GCSE (9 to 1) Qualification Level Conditions and Requirements and GCSE Subject 
Level Conditions and Requirements for Religious Studies published in June 2014.  
 
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification Principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
● demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning and 
measuring higher-order skills 
● rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and valid 
assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in end users of the knowledge, skills 
and competencies of certified students 
● inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students develop at 
different rates and have different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
● empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills, see Appendix 2. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
72 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
 
“ The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important change to the 
education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications will assist them in 
helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an ‘Expert 
Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or because of 
our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the world as diverse as 
Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification development 
process that has included: 
● extensive international comparability of subject content against the highest-performing 
jurisdictions in the world 
● benchmarking assessments against UK and overseas providers to ensure that they are at 
the right level of demand 
● establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-specific 
expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
● subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future oriented. The 
design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, meaning learner outcomes 
have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a learner’s 
success in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident that we have 
supported the development of qualifications that are outstanding for their coherence, 
thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as representing world-class best 
practice. ”    
 
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Lee Sing Kong 
Director, National Institute of Education, 
Singapore 
  
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
  
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A  
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 73 
Appendix 2: Transferable skills 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently flagged the 
need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable them to respond with 
confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines skills, or 
competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that can be learned and 
that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform an activity or task and can be 
built upon and extended through learning.’ [1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected and 
evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this process, we 
identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the most evidence-based and 
robust skills framework. We adapted the framework slightly to include the Program for 
International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT Literacy and Collaborative Problem Solving 
(CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves: [2]  
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve general 
cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and communicate. [3]  
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, oral communication, written communication, assertive 
communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, service 
orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared understanding, 
taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team organisation. 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work stress, 
adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, and physical 
adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual teams, 
work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and able to acquire 
new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher education, 
as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the teaching and learning of 
this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning materials, developed with 
stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
 
[1]  OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012) 
[2]  Koenig J A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop (National 
Academies Press, 2011) 
[3]  PISA – The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy (2011) 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A 
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
74 
Appendix 3: Command Words 
The following command words will be used in the assessment of students across all papers. 
 
Command 
word 
Meaning Number 
of marks 
Assessment 
objectives 
State Provide knowledge of religion and belief by 
recalling factual information 3 AO1 
Outline Provide knowledge of religion and belief by 
recalling factual information 3 AO1 
Describe Provide an understanding of religion and belief 
and contrast with that of another. 4 AO1 
Explain There are two ways this command word will 
be used: 
1. (4 marks) Provide understanding of an 
aspect of religion and belief and developing 
this beyond a habitual response.  
2. (5 marks) Provide understanding of an 
aspect of religion and belief and developing 
this beyond a habitual response. In 
addition, students will be required to 
reference one source of wisdom or 
authority in support of their explanation. 
4 or 5 
 
 
AO1 
 
 
*Evaluate Analyse the statement provided, considering 
different points of view and creating logical 
chains of reasoning that are underpinned by 
understanding of religion and belief. Reasoned 
judgements should be made, supported by 
the appraisal of arguments and leading to a 
justified conclusion. 
12 AO2 
 
* All GCSEs must provide opportunities for students to write responses which are of sufficient 
length to allow students to demonstrate the ability to construct and develop a sustained line 
of reasoning which is coherent, relevant, substantiated and logically structured. In this 
GCSE, these abilities are rewarded in the mark schemes of questions that are assessed using 
the command word ‘Evaluate’.  
Additional instructions are provided to students for all ‘Evaluate’ questions. These 
instructions reflect the additional requirements of the question. Please refer to the Sample 
Assessment Materials for further details. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Religious Studies A  
Specification – Issue 2 – January 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 75 
 
Appendix 4: Codes 
 
Type of code Use of code Code 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for performance 
tables is assigned a discount code 
indicating the subject area to which it 
belongs. 
Discount codes are published by DfE.  
DD1 
 
 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an 
Ofqual Regulated Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) code. 
The RQF code is known as a Qualification 
Number (QN). This is the code that 
features in the DfE Section 96 and on the 
LARA as being eligible for 16–18 and 19+ 
funding, and is to be used for all 
qualification funding purposes. The QN will 
appear on students’ final certification 
documentation. 
The QN for this 
qualification is: 
603/0079/6 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to 
enter students for a qualification.  
1RA0 
 
Paper codes These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be 
entered for individual papers. 
Paper 1: 1RA0/1A–1C 
Paper 2: 1RA0/2A–2G 
Paper 3: 1RA0/3A–3C 
Paper 4: 1RA0/4A–4B 
 
 
DB040124 9781446927823_GCSE2016_L12_RELIGSTD_A_ISS2.DOC.1–80/0 
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office:  80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121