GCSE (9-1)
Citizenship Studies
Specification
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9 - 1) in Citizenship Studies (1CS0)
First teaching from September 2016
First certification from 2018 Issue 2
Summary of changes to Pearson Edexcel Level 1/ Level 2 GCSE 
(9 - 1) in Citizenship Studies  specification Issue 2 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this issue Page 
num
ber 
Updates to information about support available 3 
Theme B, topic 2: removal of bullet point about the electoral system for the European 
Parliament 
10 
Theme B, topic 6, bullet point 2: addition of ‘former’ before ‘membership of the EU’ 11 
Theme C, topic 1, bullet point 2: addition of 'to achieve justice' before 'to change 
behaviour' 
12 
Theme C, topic 2, bullet point 3: removal of reference to EU as a source of law 12 
Theme D, topic 6: bullet point 1 amended to ‘the different roles of’ in relation to EU 
and Council of Europe 
1 5 
Theme D, topic 6: bullet point 2 amended to ‘How the UK’s relationship with the EU 
has changed post Brexit as a result of decisions taken about migration, fishing, travel 
and trade’ 
15 
Theme D, topic 6: bullet point 3 removed 1 5 
Updates to procedures for dealing with malpractice updated 23 
Updates to information about codes and frameworks in Appendix 4 31 
I
f you need further information on these changes or what they mean, please contact us via our 
website at: qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/contact-us.html. 
 
 
Contents 
1 Introduction 2 
Why choose Edexcel GCSE Citizenship Studies? 2 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this qualification 3 
Qualification at a glance 4 
2 Subject content 5 
Content themes 7 
3 Assessment information 18 
4 Administration and general information 21 
Entries 21 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special consideration and 
malpractice 21 
Student recruitment and progression 24 
Appendix 1: Taking Citizenship Action form 27 
Appendix 2: The context for the development of this qualification 28 
Appendix 3: Transferable skills 30 
Appendix 4: Codes 31 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Citizenship Studies 
Specification – Issue 2 – September 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
2 
1 Introduction 
Why choose Edexcel GCSE Citizenship Studies? 
We’ve listened to feedback from all parts of the citizenship subject community, including 
teachers, subject associations and higher education. We’ve used this opportunity of 
curriculum change to redesign a qualification that equips students to take responsible 
citizenship actions and play a positive role in public and democratic life as informed and 
active citizens – a qualification that enables your students to apply themselves and gives 
them the skills to succeed in their chosen pathway. 
● A new specification with a familiar approach: we have worked hard to build on our 
current course with new and engaging content while providing continuity through our topic 
areas and source-based approach to assessment to cater for the full ability range and 
teacher and student needs. 
● Clear and coherent structure: our specification has a straightforward structure with five 
engaging topics, assessed through two externally examined papers. Comprehensive 
coverage of each topic and citizenship action provides clarity of the new teaching and 
learning requirements. 
● Supports continuous progression: our ‘local to global approach’ means students build 
on Key Stage 3 study and are introduced to core concepts and how citizenship impacts on 
their lives before building on this with the introduction of theory and the ‘bigger picture’ as 
they progress through the course. 
● Developing active citizens: students and centres have free choice of citizenship action, 
so students can engage with topics close to their hearts while they develop skills in 
research and investigation, problem solving, advocacy and campaigning. 
● Reflects current issues, questions and debates: students develop knowledge and 
understanding of the role of citizenship in relation to current issues that impact on modern 
society, engaging them with what it means to be an active citizen and preparing them for 
their next steps in today’s global world. 
● Accessible assessment for students of all abilities: exams that are easy to navigate, 
with clear and simple instructional text and engaging source material so all students are 
motivated to succeed. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Citizenship Studies –  
Specification – Issue 2 – September 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
3 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this 
qualification 
Planning  
● Our Getting Started guide gives you an overview of the new GCSE qualifications to help 
you to get to grips with the changes to content and assessment and to help you 
understand what these changes mean for you and your students. 
● We will give you an editable course planner and scheme of work that you can adapt 
to suit your department.  
● Our mapping documents highlight key differences between the new and 2009 
qualifications.  
Teaching and learning  
Free teaching and learning support is available on the website, including: 
● course planners 
● getting started guide 
● schemes of work. 
Preparing for exams  
We also provide a range of resources to help you prepare your students for the assessments, 
including: 
● additional assessment materials to support formative assessments and mock exams  
● marked exemplars of student work with examiner commentaries.  
ResultsPlus 
ResultsPlus provides the most detailed analysis available of your students’ exam 
performance. It can help you identify the topics and skills where further learning would 
benefit your students.  
Get help and support 
Our subject advisor service will ensure you receive help and guidance from us. You can sign 
up to receive e-newsletters to keep up to date with qualification updates and product and 
service news. 
The Citizenship Team can be contacted by email: TeachingCitizenship@pearson.com and by 
telephone on 0844 463 2823.  
Learn more at qualifications.pearson.com 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Citizenship Studies 
Specification – Issue 2 – September 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
4 
Qualification at a glance 
Content and assessment overview 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Citizenship Studies consists of two 
externally examined papers. 
Students must complete all assessment in May/June in any single year.  
Paper 1 (*Paper code: 1CS0/01) 
Written examination: 1 hour and 45 minutes 
50% of the qualification 
80 marks 
Assessment overview 
Section A  
Questions are focused on specification Theme A: Living together in the UK. 
Section B 
Questions are focused on specification Theme B: Democracy at work in the UK. 
Section C 
Questions are focused on specification Theme C: Law and justice. 
Section D 
Extended-response questions related to two or more of specification Themes A–C. 
 
Paper 2 (*Paper code: 1CS0/02) 
Written examination: 1 hour and 45 minutes 
50% of the qualification 
80 marks 
Assessment overview 
Section A  
Questions relate to the students’ own citizenship action, as specified in specification 
Theme E: Taking citizenship action. 
Section B 
Questions require students to comment on others’ actions and relate to specification 
Theme D: Power and influence.  
Section C 
Questions are focused on specification Theme D: Power and influence. One question will 
also link to content in one of Themes A–C.  
*See Appendix 4: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to this 
qualification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Citizenship Studies –  
Specification – Issue 2 – September 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
5 
2 Subject content  
Citizenship Studies is about how people take an active part in democratic politics and work 
together for a better society, locally, nationally and globally.  
Students will learn about power, democracy, the operation of government and the legal 
system, and the role of the UK in the wider world. They will explore and learn about different 
controversial and topical issues with political, social, ethical, economic and environmental 
dimensions in local to global contexts. They will experience taking citizenship action and 
learn from trying to make a difference themselves. 
Qualification aims and objectives 
The aims and objectives of this qualification are to enable students to:  
● know and understand what democracy is, how parliamentary democracy operates within 
the constituent parts of the UK, how government works and how democratic and non-
democratic systems of government are different beyond the UK 
● know and understand the relationship between the state and citizens, the rights, 
responsibilities and duties of citizens living and working in the UK and how people 
participate in democracy 
● know and understand the role of the law in society, how laws are shaped and enforced 
and how the justice system works in England and Wales 
● know and understand how taxes are raised and spent by governments, and how national 
economic and financial policies and decisions relate to individuals 
● use and apply knowledge and understanding of key citizenship ideas and concepts, 
including democracy, government, justice, equality, rights, responsibilities, participation, 
community, identity and diversity, to think deeply and critically about a wide range of 
political, social, economic and ethical issues and questions facing society in local to global 
contexts 
● use and apply knowledge and understanding as they formulate citizenship enquiries, 
explore and research citizenship issues and actions, analyse and evaluate information and 
interpret sources of evidence 
● use and apply citizenship knowledge and understanding to contribute to debates, show 
understanding of different viewpoints, make persuasive and reasoned arguments, and 
justify and substantiate their conclusions 
● use and apply citizenship knowledge, understanding and skills in order to participate in 
responsible actions to address citizenship issues aimed at improving society and positively 
contributing to democracy and public life, as individuals and in collaboration with others 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Citizenship Studies 
Specification – Issue 2 – September 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
6 
Citizenship skills, processes and methods 
This qualification will require students to demonstrate the ability to: 
● form their own hypotheses, create sustained and reasoned arguments and reach 
substantiated conclusions when appropriate 
● understand the range of methods and approaches that can be used by governments, 
organisations, groups and individuals to address citizenship issues in society, including 
practical citizenship actions 
● formulate citizenship enquiries, identifying and sequencing research questions to analyse 
citizenship ideas, issues and debates 
● select and organise their knowledge and understanding in responses and analysis, when 
creating and communicating their own arguments, explaining hypotheses, ideas and 
different viewpoints and perspectives, countering viewpoints they do not support, giving 
reasons and justifying conclusions drawn 
● present their own and other viewpoints and represent the views of others, in relation to 
citizenship issues, causes, situations and concepts 
● plan practical citizenship actions aimed at delivering a benefit or change for others in 
society 
● critically evaluate the effectiveness of citizenship actions to assess progress towards the 
intended aims and impact for the individuals, groups and communities affected 
● show knowledge and understanding of the relationships between the different citizenship 
aspects studied, using the concepts to make connections, identify and compare similarities 
and differences in a range of situations from local to global. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Citizenship Studies –  
Specification – Issue 2 – September 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
7 
Content themes 
Overview 
The course content is divided into five themes: 
● A: Living together in the UK 
● B: Democracy at work in the UK  
● C: Law and justice 
● D: Power and influence 
● E: Taking citizenship action 
Themes are sequenced in a logical order, but there is no requirement for teachers to follow 
this order. Teachers will need to consider the needs, interests and motivations of their 
students when planning their teaching. The content addressed in each theme is introduced 
and opportunities for developing citizenship skills and taking action are indicated as 
examples. Theme D: Power and influence builds on and deepens student knowledge and 
understanding of some of the citizenship concepts addressed in Themes A to C.  
Theme E: Taking citizenship action can be addressed at any point in the course and students 
should be clear about how the action they take relates to the citizenship concepts and issues 
they are studying. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Citizenship Studies 
Specification – Issue 2 – September 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
8 
Theme A: Living together in the UK 
Introduction 
Students are introduced to the idea that the UK is a diverse society of many different 
communities and groups who live together. They explore the nature of identity and multiple 
identities as well as how and why communities are changing. They consider the democratic 
rights, freedoms and values that we share, including human rights and the challenge of 
balancing competing rights.  
Opportunities for developing citizenship skills include: to debate and explore identities, 
rights, values and democracy, and to gain a practical understanding of being an active 
citizen through contributing to local democracy and taking citizenship action to resolve 
problems, tackle inequality and improve justice. 
Key questions explored: 
● How have communities developed in the UK? 
● What is identity? 
● What are democratic values and where do they come from? 
● How does local democracy work? 
How have communities developed in the UK? 
1 The changing UK 
population 
● The changing composition of the UK population in terms of age, 
ethnicity, religion and disability.  
2 Migration and its 
impact 
● The social, economic and other effects of immigration to the UK, 
including why it has been seen as a benefit and a challenge. 
Types of migrants coming to the UK (economic migrants, 
refugees, asylum seeker) and the reasons why people migrate.  
● Sources of migration from 1945 to the present, including 
Commonwealth countries and Europe.  
3 Respect and 
understanding 
● What mutual respect means in practice and why it is necessary 
in a diverse society: the effects of inequality and discrimination 
on individuals, groups and communities, and the role of the 
Equality Act 2010 in preventing discrimination. 
● How mutual understanding is encouraged in schools and the 
wider community; the concepts of diversity, integration and 
community cohesion that underpin democratic society. 
What is identity? 
4 Identity ● That people’s identities can be defined in various ways (e.g. 
ethnic, religious, gender, age, social, cultural, national, local, 
regional); the concept of multiple identities. 
● The impact on identity debates of the UK being comprised of 
England, Northern Ireland, Wales and Scotland.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Citizenship Studies –  
Specification – Issue 2 – September 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
9 
 
What are democratic values and where do they come from? 
5 Rights, duties 
and values that 
underpin 
democracy 
● Human, moral, legal and political rights and freedoms in the UK, 
including: to equality and representation; to freedom of speech, 
opinion and association; to tolerance and respect; and to 
privacy. 
● The duties of citizens to respect the rights and freedoms of 
others, and to obey the law.  
● That rights of different people or groups (nationally and locally) 
can come into conflict and need to be balanced in different 
situations in life and work where there is inequality or 
unfairness. 
● Why the rule of law is necessary in a democracy. The checks 
and balances needed in relation to rights and freedoms, 
including debates about freedom of speech, privacy and the 
threat from terrorism.  
6 Development of 
human rights  
● Magna Carta as a first step against arbitrary rule and a 
guarantee of justice.  
● The rights and freedoms protected by the:  
o UN Universal Declaration on Human Rights 
o European Convention on Human Rights 
o United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child 
o Human Rights Act 1998.  
How does local democracy work? 
7 Citizens and 
local 
government  
● The distinction between councillors and officers. The role of local 
councils in representing the community and the services that 
they typically provide. 
8 Paying for local 
services 
● How councils are funded through council tax, business rates, 
government grants and income from charges. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Citizenship Studies 
Specification – Issue 2 – September 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
10 
Theme B: Democracy at work in the UK 
Introduction 
Students explore the idea of representative, parliamentary democracy in the UK including 
the voting and electoral system, the roles and responsibilities of MPs and how government 
is organised and kept in check. They will also consider the role of parliament in making 
and shaping law; the government’s role in managing public money; and how power is 
organised across the constituent parts of the UK.  
Opportunities for developing citizenship skills and taking action include: participation in 
decision making forums and ‘mock’ or real school elections, researching and debating the 
effectiveness of democracy in the UK, the extension of voting rights to 16 and 17 year olds 
or further devolution of power versus independence for Scotland, Northern Ireland and 
Wales. 
Key questions explored: 
● Who runs the country? 
● How does Parliament work? 
● How is power shared between Westminster and the devolved administrations? 
● How does government manage public money? 
Who runs the country? 
1 Parties and 
candidates 
● The key philosophical differences between the major political 
parties standing in UK general elections. 
● How candidates are selected to stand for a constituency. 
2 Elections and 
voting systems  
● The concept of democracy; representative democracy 
(democracy via elections) and direct democracy (democracy 
via referendums) and the strengths and weaknesses of each. 
● How the Westminster-first-past-the-post system operates; 
who can and cannot vote in general elections and why; 
debates about extending the franchise. The frequency of 
general elections. 
● The strengths and weaknesses of the first-past-the-post voting 
system compared with proportional representation. 
3 Forming and 
organising the 
work of 
government 
● The process of forming a government, including the role of the 
monarch in appointing a government. What happens when no 
single party can form a government and a coalition 
government is formed. 
● The organisation of government administration into 
departments, ministries and agencies staffed by civil servants. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Citizenship Studies –  
Specification – Issue 2 – September 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
11 
 
How does Parliament work? 
4 The 
Westminster 
Parliament 
● The distinction between executive, legislature, judiciary and 
monarchy. 
● The roles of the Houses of Commons and Lords and the 
relationship between them; the process of parliamentary 
debate and deliberation of public issues as part of the process 
of making and shaping policy and legislation. 
● The roles of prime minister, cabinet and ministers, the 
opposition, speaker, whips, front bench and backbench MPs 
and the ceremonial role of Black Rod; the role of an MP in 
representing constituents’ interests.  
5 Making and 
shaping law  
● How a bill becomes law: debate in the House of Commons and 
the House of Lords; scrutiny by committees; royal assent. 
6 The Constitution  ● The institutions of the British constitution: the power of 
government, the prime minister and cabinet; the roles of the 
legislature, the Opposition, political parties, the monarch, 
citizens, the judiciary, the police and the civil service. 
● That the UK has an uncodified constitution and examples of 
how this is changing, including as a result of devolution and 
former membership of the EU. 
● The concept of parliamentary sovereignty; checks and 
balances, including the role of judicial review; how Parliament 
holds government to account through oversight and scrutiny. 
How is power shared between Westminster and the devolved 
administrations? 
7 Government in 
constituent 
parts of the UK  
● The powers of devolved bodies in Scotland, Wales and 
Northern Ireland. 
● How relations are changing between England, Scotland, Wales 
and Northern Ireland, including views on devolution and 
independence. 
How does government manage public money? 
8 Taxation and 
government 
spending 
● How direct and indirect taxes are raised by central 
government. 
● The role of the Chancellor of the Exchequer in budgeting for 
income, expenditure and debts, managing risks and making 
decisions about the allocation of public funding. 
● Different views and debates about how governments and other 
service providers make provision for welfare, health, the care 
of the elderly and education. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Citizenship Studies 
Specification – Issue 2 – September 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
12 
Theme C: Law and justice 
Introduction 
Students explore why we need laws and how law affects us in our everyday lives. They 
consider how the justice system in England and Wales works in practice including the roles 
and power of the police and the courts. They also learn about the distinctive features of the 
criminal, civil and youth justice systems and some of the different approaches to settling 
disputes, addressing inequality, changing behaviour and tackling crime in society.  
Opportunities for developing citizenship skills and taking action include: investigating 
different legal cases, participation in ‘mock’ trials and sentencing decision-making activities, 
debating whether it is ever right to break the law or whether the justice system treats 
everyone fairly. Students could undertake citizenship action or campaigns to address 
inequality or an injustice. 
Key questions explored: 
● What is the law for and how does it affect us? 
● How does the justice system work? 
● Is crime increasing in society? 
What is the law for and how does it affect us? 
1 The role of law 
in everyday life 
in dealing with 
complex 
problems 
● What law is and how the law affects our everyday lives. 
● Why we need laws in society: to protect the public, to settle 
disputes, to ensure that people are treated fairly (including 
preventing discrimination), 
to achieve justice, to change 
behaviour, and to respond to new situations in society (including 
scientific and technological developments and changing values). 
● The age we become legally responsible for our actions (drive, 
marry, vote, work, join the armed forces) and the age of 
criminal responsibility and how legal age limits are designed to 
protect young people. 
2 Principles and 
sources of law  
● Fundamental principles of law to uphold rights and freedoms: 
the rule of law; the presumption of innocence; equality before 
the law; access to justice. 
● That England and Wales have a different legal system from 
Northern Ireland and Scotland. 
● The main sources of law: common law (case law or precedent) 
and legislation. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Citizenship Studies –  
Specification – Issue 2 – September 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
13 
 
How does the justice system work? 
3 Civil and 
criminal law 
● The purposes of criminal law: used to protect the public from 
harm such as in cases where crimes are committed against a 
person or property. 
● The purposes of civil law: to settle civil disputes, such as debt, 
personal injury, and family matters. 
4 The justice 
system in 
England and 
Wales 
● The roles and powers of the police, judges and magistrates, and 
legal representatives. 
● The responsibilities and roles of citizens in the legal system 
including as jurors, magistrates, special constables, members of 
a tribunal hearing. 
● Fundamental principles of the law in practice: the rights of 
citizens on arrest to know the reason for arrest, inform someone 
of their arrest and to see a solicitor. 
5 Courts and 
tribunals 
● Types of criminal courts, key differences between how they 
operate and the types of case they are used for:  
o magistrates court 
o crown court 
● Types of civil courts and what they are used for: 
o county court 
o high court.  
● The use of tribunals and other means of civil dispute resolution, 
such as mediation, to settle disputes. 
6 Youth justice  ● The operation of the youth justice system and how and why 
youth courts differ to other courts. 
Is crime increasing in society? 
7 Crime and 
society  
● Factors affecting crime rates in society, including issues around 
the recording of crime and reasons for re-offending. 
● Strategies to reduce crime, including through prevention, 
protection and punishment. 
8 Sentences and 
punishment 
● Types of sentence and punishment, including prison, community 
payback and restorative justice; how these are determined for 
different offences; debates about the purpose and impact of 
different types of punishment. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Citizenship Studies 
Specification – Issue 2 – September 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
14 
Theme D: Power and influence 
Introduction 
In this section students revisit key ideas about democracy, rights and responsibilities in 
Themes A–C as they explore ideas about power. In particular they consider power in 
relation to the ways in which citizens, governments and the media exercise power and 
influence in a range of local to global situations. They contrast representative democracy in 
the UK with a non-democratic political system and the limits this places on the rights and 
freedoms of citizens. 
Opportunities to develop citizenship skills include: examining ways in which citizens  
co-operate to try and improve society and democracy through different kinds of political and 
citizen actions; practical experiences of taking citizenship action themselves to address 
issues; debating the relationship of the UK with Europe; and investigating global issues and 
problems facing society from the environment to humanitarian and conflict situations. 
Key questions explored: 
● What power and influence can citizens have? 
● What role and influence should the media have? 
● Does the UK have power and influence in the wider world? 
What power and influence can citizens have? 
1 Citizen 
participation in 
politics and 
society 
● The opportunities, and barriers to citizen participation in 
democracy and politics in the UK. 
● Ways in which citizens can contribute through direct and indirect 
action to democracy and hold those in power to account and 
contribute to wider public life, including by voting, joining an 
interest group or political party, standing for election, 
campaigning, advocacy, lobbying, petitions, joining a 
demonstration and volunteering. 
● How digital democracy, social media and other measures are 
being developed as a means to improve voter engagement and 
political participation. 
● Key differences in how citizens can and cannot participate in 
politics in political systems outside the UK: one democratic and 
one non-democratic. 
2 The role of 
groups and 
organisations in 
democratic 
society 
● The role different organisations play in providing a voice and 
support for different groups in society including public 
institutions, public services, interest and pressure groups, trade 
unions, charities and voluntary groups. 
● Two different examples of how citizens working together or 
through groups attempt to change or improve their communities 
through actions to address public policy, challenge injustice or 
resolve a local community issue. 
● The role, and origins of, trade unions as associations of workers 
with the aim of maintaining or improving the conditions of 
employment through collective action. 
● Rights of people in the workplace and ways people at work are 
protected and supported, including trade unions, staff 
associations and tribunals. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Citizenship Studies –  
Specification – Issue 2 – September 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
15 
 
What role and influence should the media have? 
3 The role of the 
media and a free 
press 
● Why a free press is important in a democracy and the role of the 
media in: influencing and informing the public; reporting news 
accurately; investigating issues and exposing problems in the 
public interest; and scrutinising the government and others in 
power and holding them to account for their actions.  
4 Rights and 
responsibilities 
of the media 
● The right of the media to investigate and report on issues of 
public interest, subject to the need for accuracy and respect for 
people’s privacy and dignity. 
● The role of the press regulator in the UK; reasons why press 
censorship may occur. 
5 The use of the 
media for 
influence 
● How groups or individuals and those in power use the media try 
to influence public opinion. 
Does the UK have power and influence in the wider world? 
6 The UK’s role 
and relations 
with Europe  
● The different roles of the European Union and the Council of 
Europe. 
● How the UK’s relationship with the EU has changed post-Brexit 
as 
a result of decisions taken about migration, fishing, travel 
and trade. 
7 The UK’s role in 
the rest of the 
world 
● The role of the United Nations and its agencies, NATO, the 
Commonwealth, and the World Trade Organisation; the UK’s 
relations with these organisations in terms of the benefits and 
commitments arising from membership. 
8 Rights and 
responsibilities 
in challenging 
global situations 
● Global issues and human rights: balancing rights and 
responsibilities in conflict situations. 
● The role of international law in conflict situations to limit the 
effects of armed conflict on civilians and how international 
humanitarian law establishes the rules of war. 
● The role of non-governmental organisations (NGOs) in different 
situations, including examples of NGOs providing relief to 
protect people at risk and in supporting development. 
● An example where the UK has played a role in an international 
disagreement or conflict and the methods used: mediation, 
sanctions or force. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Citizenship Studies 
Specification – Issue 2 – September 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
16 
Theme E: Taking citizenship action 
Introduction 
Citizenship action may be defined as a planned course of informed action to address a 
citizenship issue or question of concern and aimed at delivering a benefit or change for a 
particular community or wider society. Taking citizenship action in a real out-of-classroom 
context allows students to apply citizenship knowledge, understanding and skills, and to 
gain different citizenship insights and appreciate different perspectives on how we live 
together and make decisions in society. It requires them to practise a range of citizenship 
skills including: research and enquiry, interpretation of evidence, including primary and 
secondary sources, planning, collaboration, problem solving, advocacy, campaigning and 
evaluation. 
Taking citizenship action – course requirements  
Students must carry out an in-depth, critical investigation leading to citizenship action as 
described above. The investigation and action can be based on any aspect or issue arising 
from the course content and should be designed to have an impact locally, nationally or 
globally. There are many types of investigation and action that students can take that use 
different methods and citizenship skills. The choice of action will depend on the issue or 
challenge they are addressing and what they intend their action to achieve.  
In considering the focus of their citizenship activity, students will need to be realistic about 
the likelihood of their aims being wholly or partially met. However, students will not be 
penalised where an action did not go as planned. 
Students will be assessed on the investigation and action they have undertaken through a 
series of examination questions in Paper 2 that comprise 15% of the total marks. In the 
examination, students will also be required to provide, in no more than 20 words, the title of 
their citizenship action. 
Authentication of the citizenship action 
Centres must provide written confirmation that students entered for the qualification have 
completed their own in-depth investigation and citizenship action. A form is available for this 
purpose – see Appendix 1.  
Pearson will publish the final deadline date for submission of this form through our website 
each year. Failure to submit this form in accordance with published deadlines will be treated 
as malpractice (see page 23). 
Stages of the citizenship action 
Students must follow the stages below. 
Stage Related tasks 
1 Identify an 
issue, form a 
team and carry 
out initial 
research 
● Identify an issue, problem, cause of social need that relates to 
citizenship concepts and issues studied as part of the course. 
● Understand the range of methods and approaches relevant to 
citizenship actions that can be used by governments, 
organisations, groups and individuals to address citizenship 
issues in society. 
● Form a team[1] and start to research possible elements of the 
activity. 
● Carry out secondary research[2] to investigate a citizenship issue 
and prepare for carrying out primary research. 
 
[1]   A team comprises at least two people. 
[2] This may include one or more of the following: published sources of data; findings and official reports 
from public bodies; reports in the news and media; NGOs, groups and other organisations; opinion 
polls, statistics, videos and other sources relevant to their study. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Citizenship Studies –  
Specification – Issue 2 – September 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
17 
 
Stage Related tasks 
2 Undertake 
primary 
research 
● Identify and sequence research questions relating to the issue, 
problem, cause or social need. 
● Carry out primary research[1] to answer research questions. 
● Analyse answers to research questions to identify evidence 
which assists the team in deciding the activity they wish to 
undertake. 
3 Represent their 
own and 
different points 
of view 
● Show understanding of the issue including their own opinions 
and the views and perspectives of different people. 
● Review the evidence and research undertaken and the different 
viewpoints expressed, and consider why some evidence or 
viewpoints may be more compelling or persuasive than others. 
● Consider the different viewpoints and make the case for what 
the team think should happen. 
4 Plan the action ● Identify who the action will target, setting goals for the 
proposed activity and identify criteria for judging success. 
● Consider possible methods and approaches to use during the 
activity to form a clear plan of action (including key steps, 
sequence and priorities), taking account of the time and 
resources available. 
● Allocate roles and tasks to each team member, anticipating any 
possible difficulties and how to overcome them; establish a 
simple system for recording decision-making and progress. 
5 Apply skills of 
collaboration, 
negotiation and 
influence as 
they deliver the 
activity 
● Demonstrate team work and role-awareness in delivering their 
activity, showing the importance of collaboration, negotiation 
and influence in carrying out the action. 
And either 
● Organise and deliver an event, meeting or campaign to advocate 
for the selected issue, problem, cause or social need and that 
aims to argue the case, raising awareness and commitment by 
informing, influencing and persuading the target audience. 
Or 
● Organise and deliver a social action project, social enterprise or 
undertake another form of community action that aims to raise 
awareness and commitment and create a social benefit 
(resources, support, advice or service) to benefit others. 
6 Critically 
evaluate their 
learning and the 
impact of the 
action 
● Consider how and why their action did, or didn’t, achieve its 
intended effect, assessing the success of the activity in relation 
to their goals. 
● Assess how well the method they selected worked in practice 
and what they might do differently in a future course of 
citizenship action. 
● Consider the impact the action had on their own citizenship 
learning, including learning from any mistakes. 
 
 
[1]  This may include one or more of the following: data and findings from observations; discussions with 
members of the community; qualitative and quantitative interview data; recordings, results of polls, 
votes and surveys. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Citizenship Studies 
Specification – Issue 2 – September 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
18 
3 Assessment information  
Paper 1 (Paper code: 1CS0/01) 
● First assessment: May/June 2018.  
● The assessment lasts 1 hour and 45 minutes. 
● The assessment is out of 80 marks. 
● It comprises four sections: A, B, C and D and will include a separate source booklet 
relating to section D. 
Section A: Living together in the UK 
● This part is worth 10% of the total qualification. 
● It is marked out of 16.  
● It comprises two questions divided into a number of separate parts. These tasks will 
include multiple choice and short responses, and will end with a 6-mark task. 
● One source will be included in the question paper with a task that relates to the source 
context (AO2)*; others will target knowledge and understanding that does not draw on 
information in the source (AO1)*. 
● The assessment and source context relate to Theme A of the specification content, but 
tasks may draw upon knowledge and understanding from other themes. 
Section B: Democracy at work in the UK 
The assessment approach is identical to that for Section A, except that it relates to 
Theme B of the specification and is marked out of 17. 
Section C: Law and justice 
The assessment approach is identical to that for Section A, except that it relates to  
Theme C of the specification. 
Section D: Citizenship issues and debates 
● This part is worth approximately 21% of the total qualification. 
● It is marked out of 31. 
● Students answer two questions (Q7 and Q8), targeting AO3. 
● Question 7 is marked out of 16: it is divided into a number of parts and requires 
students to analyse and evaluate views contained in a source (in the source booklet); 
the last part will be worth 12 marks. 
● Question 8 is marked out of 15 and will link two of Themes A–C. 
* For information about the assessment objectives, see page 20. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Citizenship Studies –  
Specification – Issue 2 – September 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
19 
 
Paper 2 (Paper code: 1CS0/02) 
● First assessment: May/June 2018.  
● The assessment lasts 1 hour and 45 minutes. 
● The assessment is out of 80 marks. 
● It comprises three sections: A, B and C and will include a separate source booklet. 
Section A: Own citizenship action 
● This part is worth 15% of the total qualification. 
● It is marked out of 24.  
● It comprises one question divided into a number of separate parts. Tasks will require 
short- and medium-responses (targeting AO2), and will end with a 12-mark task 
targeting AO2 and AO3.  
● Students must base all of their answers on the knowledge and understanding that they 
have gained while carrying out their own citizenship action (see Theme E of the 
specification content). 
Section B: Power and influence: others’ actions  
● This part is worth approximately 9% of the total qualification. 
● It is marked out of 14.  
● It comprises one question (Question 2) split into a number of parts. These may include 
multiple choice and short responses, and will end with a 6-mark task. 
● The tasks will relate directly to a source which focuses on citizenship actions carried out 
by other people, requiring student to understand, comment on, and suggest actions 
(AO2 and AO3). 
● The assessment will relate to Theme D of the specification content (in terms of actions 
that people can take), but the source contexts in which the actions are situated may 
relate to any situation where citizenship action may be relevant. 
Section C: Power and influence 
● This part is worth approximately 26% of the total qualification. 
● It is marked out of 42. 
● It starts with a number of questions that target AO1.  
● The final two questions target AO3 and are worth 10 and 15 marks, respectively; the 
last of these will link content from Theme D with one of Themes A–C. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Citizenship Studies 
Specification – Issue 2 – September 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
20 
Assessment Objectives 
Students must: 
% in 
GCSE 
AO1 Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of citizenship concepts, 
terms and issues.  
30 
AO2 Apply knowledge and understanding of citizenship concepts, terms 
and issues to contexts and actions.  
30 
AO3 Analyse and evaluate a range of evidence relating to citizenship 
issues, debates and actions, including different viewpoints, to develop 
reasoned, coherent arguments and make substantiated judgements.  
40 
Total 100% 
 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
Paper 
Assessment Objectives* Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives AO1 % AO2 % AO3 % 
Paper 1 19 11 19 50 
Paper 2 11 19 21 50 
Total for GCSE 30% 30% 40% 100% 
* Totals have been rounded either up or down. 
Synoptic assessment 
All GCSEs must require students to demonstrate their ability to draw together different areas 
of knowledge, skills and/or understanding from across a full course of study for that 
qualification. In this qualification, questions that cross themes meet this requirement: this is 
evident in the last question in Paper 1 and Paper 2.  
Sample assessment materials 
Sample papers and mark schemes can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 
GCSE (9–1) in Citizenship Studies Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Citizenship Studies –  
Specification – Issue 2 – September 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
21 
4 Administration and general information 
Entries 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for this qualification can be found in 
our UK Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations officers and is 
available on our website: qualifications.pearson.com 
Discount code and performance tables 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more than one GCSE, or other Level 2 
qualifications with the same discount code, will have only the grade for their 'first entry' 
counted for the purpose of the School and College Performance Tables (please see 
Appendix 4: Codes). For further information about what constitutes 'first entry' and full 
details of how this policy is applied, please refer to the DfE website: 
www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-education 
Students should be advised that, if they take two GCSEs with the same discount code, 
schools and colleges to which they wish to progress are very likely to take the view that they 
have achieved only one of the two GCSEs. The same view may be taken if students take two 
GCSE or other Level 2 qualifications that have different discount codes but which have 
significant overlap of content. Before embarking on their programmes, students or their 
advisers who have any doubts about their subject combinations should check with the 
institution to which they wish to progress 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, 
special consideration and malpractice 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality policy requires all students to 
have equal opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our qualifications 
to be awarded in a way that is fair to every student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the Equality Act 2010) are not, 
when they are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in comparison to 
students who do not share that characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification and that 
this achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their peers. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be available in English. All student work must be in 
English.  
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with special 
educational needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to:  
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the assessment.  
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Citizenship Studies 
Specification – Issue 2 – September 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
22 
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an individual 
student with a disability, without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding bodies comply with the duty under the 
Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students will 
then know what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for assessment.  
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable adjustments 
where a person with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in undertaking an 
assessment. The awarding organisation is required to take reasonable steps to overcome 
that disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be unique to that individual and 
therefore might not be in the list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of factors, 
which will include: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding 
organisation, timeframes or affects the security or integrity of the assessment. This is 
because the adjustment is not ‘reasonable’. 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student's mark or grade to 
reflect temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the examination/ 
assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a material effect on a 
candidate’s ability to take an assessment or demonstrate their level of attainment in  
an assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to apply for access arrangements 
and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special 
consideration, please refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Citizenship Studies –  
Specification – Issue 2 – September 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
23 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that compromises or seeks to 
compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in examinations must be reported to Pearson using a JCQ M1 Form 
(available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form should be emailed to 
candidatemalpractice@pearson.com. Please provide as much information and supporting 
documentation as possible. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies 
with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice constitutes staff or centre malpractice. 
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and maladministration of 
our qualifications. As with candidate malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is any act that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the 
integrity of the qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported 
immediately, before any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson on  
a JCQ M2(a) Form (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form, 
supporting documentation and as much information as possible should be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com. 
Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the document 
JCQ General and Vocational Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice. 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to comply with the requirements of 
Ofqual's General Conditions of Recognition. 
This GCSE qualification will be graded and certificated on a nine-grade scale from 9 to 1 
using the total subject mark where 9 is the highest grade. Individual papers are not graded.  
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum judged by Pearson to be of 
sufficient standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U result. 
The first certification opportunity for this qualification will be 2018. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Citizenship Studies 
Specification – Issue 2 – September 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
24 
Student recruitment and progression 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this qualification. 
Progression 
Students can progress from this qualification to AS and A Levels in other subjects. This 
includes subjects that build upon aspects of content studied, particularly Government and 
Politics; but the skills students acquire in GCSE Citizenship are transferable to other AS and 
A Levels and Level 3 vocational qualifications, such as BTEC Nationals. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Citizenship Studies –  
Specification – Issue 2 – September 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
25 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Taking Citizenship Action form 27 
Appendix 2: The context for the development of this qualification 28 
Appendix 3: Transferable skills 30 
Appendix 4: Codes 31 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Citizenship Studies 
Specification – Issue 2 – September 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
26 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Citizenship Studies –  
Specification – Issue 2 – September 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
27 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 1: Taking Citizenship Action form 
To comply with paragraph 9 of the Department for Education’s GCSE subject content for 
Citizenship Studies, centres must confirm that each student has conducted an in-depth, 
critical investigation leading to citizenship action. This citizenship action must fulfil the DfE’s 
definition set out below. 
‘Citize n ship action is a planned course of informed action to address a citizenship issue or 
question of concern and aimed at delivering a benefit or change for a particular 
community or wider society. Taking citizenship action in a real out-of-classroom context 
allows students to apply citizenship knowledge, understanding and skills, and to gain 
different citizenship insights and appreciate different perspectives on how we live together 
and make decisions in society. It requires them to practise a range of citizenship skills 
including: research and enquiry, interpretation of evidence, including primary and 
secondary sources, planning, collaboration, problem solving, advocacy, campaigning and 
evaluati on.’  
 
Tea
cher[1] declaration 
I declare that each student listed below is entered for the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 
GCSE (9-1) in Citizenship Studies and has carried out an in-depth, critical investigation 
leading to citizenship action, as defined above.  
 
Centre name:  
Centre number:  
Teacher name:  
Teacher signature:  Date:  
 
The candidates entered for the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Citizenship 
Studies are as follows: 
Candidate name (surname, first name) Candidate number 
  
  
  
  
(Add more rows as necessary)  
 
[1] ‘Teacher’ here refers to the teacher with the primary responsibility for teaching the course.  

Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Citizenship Studies 
Specification – Issue 2 – September 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
28 
Appendix 2: The context for the 
development of this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] and our 
ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
● reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with those 
taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
● consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including the Association for 
Citizenship Teaching, higher-education academics and teachers to ensure this qualification 
is suitable for a UK context 
● reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in their 
documents GCSE (9 to 1) Qualification Level Conditions and Requirements and GCSE Subject 
Level Conditions and Requirements for Citizenship Studies. 
 
 
 
 
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification Principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
● demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning and 
measuring higher-order skills 
● rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and valid 
assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in end users of the knowledge, skills 
and competencies of certified students 
● inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students develop at 
different rates and have different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
● empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills, see Appendix 3. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Citizenship Studies –  
Specification – Issue 2 – September 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
 
“ The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important change to the 
education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications will assist them in 
helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an ‘Expert 
Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or because of 
our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the world as diverse as 
Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification development 
process that has included: 
● Extensive international comparability of subject content against the highest-performing 
jurisdictions in the world 
● Benchmarking assessments against UK and overseas providers to ensure that they are at 
the right level of demand 
● Establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-specific 
expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
● Subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future oriented. The 
design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, meaning learner outcomes 
have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a learner’s 
success in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident that we have 
supported the development of qualifications that are outstanding for their coherence, 
thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as representing world-class best 
practice. ”    
  
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Sing Kong Lee 
Director, National Institute of Education, 
Singapore 
  
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
  
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Citizenship Studies 
Specification – Issue 2 – September 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
30 
Appendix 3: Transferable skills 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently flagged the 
need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable them to respond with 
confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines skills, or 
competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that can be learned and 
that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform an activity or task and can be 
built upon and extended through learning.’ [1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected and 
evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this process, we 
identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the most evidence-based and 
robust skills framework. We adapted the framework slightly to include the Program for 
International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT Literacy and Collaborative Problem Solving 
(CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves: [2]  
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve general 
cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and communicate. [3]  
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, oral communication, written communication, assertive 
communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, service 
orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared understanding, 
taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team organisation. 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work stress, 
adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, and physical 
adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual teams, 
work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and able to acquire 
new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher education, 
as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the teaching and learning of 
this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning materials, developed with 
stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
 
[1]  OECD (2012), Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (2012):  
http://skills.oecd.org/documents/OECDSkillsStrategyFINALENG.pdf 
[2] Koenig, J. A. (2011) Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop, National Research Council 
[3] PISA (2011) The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy, PISA 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Citizenship Studies –  
Specification – Issue 2 – September 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
31 
Appendix 4: Codes 
 
Type of code Use of code Code 
Discount codes Every qualification is assigned to a 
discount code indicating the subject area 
to which it belongs. Discount codes are 
published by DfE in the RAISEonline 
library (www.raiseonline.org). 
EE31 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an 
Ofqual Regulated Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) code. 
The RQF code is known as a Qualification 
Number (QN). This is the code that 
features in the DfE Section 96 and on the 
LARA as being eligible for 16–18 and 19+ 
funding, and is to be used for all 
qualification funding purposes. The QN will 
appear on students’ final certification 
documentation. 
The QN for this 
qualification is: 
601/8244/1 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to 
enter students for a qualification. Centres 
will need to use the entry codes only when 
claiming students’ qualifications. 
1CS0 
Paper codes These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be 
entered for individual papers. 
Paper 1: 1CS0/01 
Paper 2: 1CS0/02 
 
 
 
DB150922 9781446927861_GCSE2016_L12_CITIZENSHIP_ISS2.DOC.1–36/0 

 
 
About Pearson 
We are the world’s leading learning company operating in countries all around the world. We 
provide content, assessment and digital services to schools, colleges and universities, as well 
as professional and vocational education to learners to help increase their skills and lifelong 
employability prospects. We believe that wherever learning flourishes so do people.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References to third party materials made in this specification are made in good faith. Pearson 
does not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may 
be subject to change, or any opinions expressed therein. (Materials may include textbooks, 
journals, magazines and other publications and websites.) 
 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
 
ISBN 978 1 446 92786 1 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2022 
 
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office:  80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121