 
 
Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in 
German (2024) 
Specification 
First teaching September 2024 
First certification from 2026 
Issue 2 

 
 
About Pearson 
We are the world’s leading learning company operating in countries all around the world. 
We provide content, assessment and digital services to learners, educational institutions, 
employers, governments and other partners globally. We are committed to helping equip 
learners with the skills they need to enhance their employability prospects and to 
succeed in the changing world of work. We believe that wherever learning flourishes so 
do people. 
 
References to third party materials made in this specification are made in good faith. Pearson 
does not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may be 
subject to change, or any opinions expressed therein. (Materials may include textbooks, 
journals, magazines and other publications and websites.) 
 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
Original image by Neo Geometric /  www.shutterstock.com 
 
Publication code: GQ000025 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2025 
 
 
Summary of Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in 
German (2024) Specification Issue 2 changes 
 
Issue 2 changes  
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this 
current issue  
 
Page 
number  
Appendix 1: Vocabulary 
In response to changes made to the Department for Education’s subject 
content, a paragraph has been added to explain that a vocabulary item is 
no longer required to be listed as multiple entries for different parts of 
speech where the English meaning is the same. For example, ‘schwimmen’ 
and (verb) ‘Schwimmen’ (noun), are not both required to be listed; it is 
listed once and can be used as either part of speech. 
 
Minor amendments have been made to the vocabulary list to reflect the 
way vocabulary items are now counted. Duplicate entries of words that 
exist as multiple parts of speech have been removed and replaced with 
new words. 
 
A small number of words have been moved from Higher tier to Foundation 
tier to comply with changes made to the grammar requirements in the 
subject content. 
 
Additional translations have been added to a small number of words in the 
vocabulary list. 
 
The word Transgender- has been moved from the adjectives to the nouns 
section. 
 
The spelling of euere has been changed to eure. 
 
46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
54, 85, 
103, 104, 
112 
 
 
53-54, 64-
65 
 
 
79, 122 
 
 
80, 106 
 
 
81 
Appendix 2: Grammar 
Amendments made to the grammar requirements to reflect changes to the 
Department for Education’s subject content. 
• Movement from Higher tier to Foundation tier of requirements 
around formation of dative plural nouns and around infinitive 
constructions using prepositions ohne/statt … zu; um … zu; verbs 
with zu. 
• Clarification of requirements around adjectival phrases. 
• Clarification of how we will use derivational morphology rules in our 
papers. 
 
Addition of sp- to the list of sound-symbol correspondences. 
 
 
 
147-148, 
157 
 
 
155 
158 
 
 
161 
Appendix 3: Names of people used in assessments 
Correction of error: France changed to Germany. 
 
163 
 
If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, contact us via our 
website at: https://qualifications.pearson.com/en/subjects/languages.html. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Contents 
1 Introduction 1 
Why choose Pearson Edexcel GCSE German? 1 
Qualification at a glance 2 
Our qualification approach 7 
2 Subject content and assessment information 13 
Subject aims 13 
Paper 1: Speaking in German 14 
Paper 2: Listening and understanding in German 25 
Paper 3: Reading and understanding in German 28 
Paper 4: Writing in German 31 
Assessment Objectives 35 
3 Administration and general information 36 
Entries 36 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special consideration and 
malpractice 36 
Student recruitment and progression 40 
4 Appendices 42 
Appendix 1: Vocabulary 43 
Reading assessments 44 
Speaking and writing assessments 44 
Organisation of the vocabulary 45 
Basic vocabulary 47 
Cultural and geographical words 52 
Short phrases 53 
Articles and pronouns 55 
Conjunctions 61 
Prepositions 63 
Adverbs 66 
 
 
Adjectives 73 
Nouns 86 
Verbs 118 
Irregular inflected verb forms: Higher and Foundation 134 
Irregular inflected verb forms: Higher ONLY 142 
Appendix 2: Grammar 147 
Nouns, pronouns and determiners 147 
Verbs and tenses 151 
Adjectives 155 
Adverbs 156 
Prepositions 157 
Derivational morphology 158 
Sound-symbol correspondences (SSCs) 160 
Appendix 3: Names of people used in assessments 163 
Appendix 4: Transferable skills 165 
The need for transferable skills 165 
Appendix 5: Codes 167 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
1 
1 Introduction 
Why choose Pearson Edexcel GCSE German?  
We have listened to feedback from all parts of the language community, including 
hundreds of teachers and students. We know that when you are teaching a language, 
you want your students’ eyes to be opened to other cultures and for them to learn how 
to communicate about subjects that interest them. Like you, we are passionate about 
growing a love of languages. Our GCSE German qualification is focused on the 
important ways that languages foster communication, broaden perspectives, introduce 
new cultures and develop students into global citizens. 
More than words – our qualification promotes culture, communication and 
connection. From the design of our speaking tasks, where communication is privileged, 
through to the use of images to provide cultural context, we want students to 
understand that words are a springboard to discovering much more. 
Language learning for today’s world – we have carefully selected our vocabulary and 
assessment content to reflect and represent diverse student experiences, so that all 
students feel included and will be able to speak and write about the things that interest 
them most. 
Compassionate assessments in a clear and familiar structure – our assessments 
are accessible and transparent, rooted in testing what students know and ensuring they 
can attempt the whole assessment confidently, with no surprises. We are committed to 
maintaining a sense of continuity with the separate assessment of the four skills, and a 
consistent assessment structure. 
Preparing for the future – we know how much you value additional assessment 
material, and we are committed to providing additional content, including secure mock 
material. We will provide digital solutions to ease the administrative burden, and 
opportunities to be involved in innovative pilots for onscreen assessment pathways. 
Reliable and extensive support from switch to delivery – our Switch Consultants 
will provide one to one support to make switching to our new qualification pain free. 
Once you are with us, our dedicated Subject Advisor is here to help with any of your 
queries and we will provide regular training opportunities for all our teachers. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
2 
Qualification at a glance 
The qualification consists of: 
• three externally-examined papers assessing separately listening, reading and writing 
• one speaking assessment set by Pearson and conducted by a teacher.  
All assessments are marked by Pearson. 
All papers will sample the vocabulary and grammatical structures included in Appendix 1: 
Vocabulary and Appendix 2: Grammar. The focus for the content of questions and tasks 
will be drawn from the listed thematic contexts (see Thematic contexts section on 
pages 7–9).  
Each paper is available at Foundation or Higher tier. Students must be entered for a 
single tier across all papers.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
3 
Paper 1: Speaking in German (*Paper code: 1GN1/1F and 1H)  
Internally conducted and externally assessed:  
Foundation tier: 7-9 minutes plus 15 minutes’ preparation time; 50 marks 
Higher tier: 10-12 minutes plus 15 minutes’ preparation time; 50 marks 
25% of the qualification 
Students are assessed on their ability to speak using clear and comprehensible 
language for a range of audiences and purposes, in different contexts, which are 
relevant to their current and future needs and interests. There are three consecutive 
tasks: 
Task 1: Read aloud (12 marks) 
Read aloud a short text and undertake a short, unprepared interaction relating to the 
text. In the read aloud task itself students will be assessed on their pronunciation and in 
the short interaction that follows students will be assessed on their communication. The 
task card will be allocated by Pearson. 
Task 2: Role play (10 marks) 
Undertake a transactional role play, in a setting taken from the defined list on  
pages 16–18. The task card will be allocated by Pearson. 
Task 3: Picture task (12 marks) with conversation (16 marks) 
Students select their thematic context for Task 3 in advance of the assessment. 
Students select one option from a choice of two of the six thematic contexts. The two 
options will be randomly generated by Pearson. The task card will be allocated by 
Pearson. 
Describe a picture stimulus, related to the selected thematic context. Students have a 
choice of two pictures on the stimulus card. Answer two compulsory questions related 
to the subject matter of the picture, then move on to a short unprepared conversation 
developed from the same thematic context.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
4 
Paper 2: Listening and understanding in German  
(*Paper code: 1GN1/2F and 2H)  
Written examination:  
Foundation tier: 45 minutes, including 5 minutes’ reading time, 50 marks  
Higher tier: 60 minutes, including 5 minutes’ reading time, 50 marks  
25% of the qualification 
Students are assessed on their understanding of standard spoken German by one or 
more speakers, across a range of formal and informal contexts, and in familiar and 
unfamiliar settings.  
Section A: Listening (40 marks) 
Students respond to multiple-choice, multiple-response and short-answer open 
response questions.  
All questions are set in English and students produce all responses in English. 
Section B: Dictation (10 marks) 
Students are assessed on their ability to transcribe spoken German into written 
German. They will be rewarded for their accuracy of spelling based on their knowledge 
and understanding of the sound symbol correspondences (SSCs) listed in the 
specification in Appendix 2: Grammar.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
5 
Paper 3: Reading and understanding in German  
(*Paper code: 1GN1/3F and 3H)  
Written examination:  
Foundation tier: 45 minutes, 50 marks 
Higher tier: 60 minutes, 50 marks 
25% of the qualification 
Students are assessed on their understanding of written German across a range of 
formal and informal contexts, and in familiar and unfamiliar settings.  
Section A: Reading and Understanding (40 marks) 
Students respond to multiple-choice, multiple-response and short-answer open 
response questions based on these texts. 
All questions are set in English and students produce all responses in English. 
Section B: Translation into English (10 marks) 
Students translate a passage from German into English, with instructions in English.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
6 
Paper 4: Writing in German (*Paper code: 1GN1/4F and 4H)  
Written examination:  
Foundation tier: 1 hour 15 minutes; 50 marks. 
Higher tier: 1 hour 20 minutes; 50 marks. 
25% of the qualification 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate effectively through writing in 
German for different purposes and audiences. Students are required to produce 
responses of varying lengths and types to express ideas and opinions in German. The 
instructions to students are in English.  
Foundation Tier 
• Question 1: picture-based task (8 marks) 
• Question 2: one of two open-response questions, set in formal context (14 marks)  
• Question 3: one of two open-response questions, set in informal context (18 marks) 
• Question 4: translation into German (10 marks) 
Higher Tier 
• Question 1: one of two open-response questions, set in informal context (18 marks) 
• Question 2: one of two open-response questions, set in formal context (22 marks) 
• Question 3: translation into German (10 marks) 
A recommended word count is specified for each open-response question.  
*See Appendix 5: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to this 
qualification. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
7 
Our qualification approach 
Language is more than words. 
Combining clear, concise and straightforward assessments with engaging, meaningful 
and relatable content, our new Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German is 
fit for the future, equipping students for life and careers in a global setting. 
Thematic contexts 
The vocabulary in this qualification enables students to communicate across a range of 
engaging and relatable thematic contexts, which are relevant to their current and future 
needs. 
We asked students and teachers about the subjects that were meaningful and 
interesting to them, and selected the following six broad thematic contexts to provide a 
focus for the teaching and learning of the vocabulary and grammar listed: 
• My personal world 
• Lifestyle and wellbeing 
• My neighbourhood 
• Media and technology 
• Studying and my future 
• Travel and tourism 
All the vocabulary listed in Appendix 1 could be used fluidly across these thematic 
contexts.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
8 
Within our thematic contexts, students could use the specified vocabulary and grammar 
(Appendices 1 and 2) to listen to, read, speak and write about the following subjects:  
 
family friends relationships equality 
physical wellbeing mental wellbeing food and drink sports 
places in town shopping transport  the natural world  
environmental 
issues 
social media and 
gaming  
future 
opportunities 
(e.g. work, travel)  
school 
music TV and film accommodation  tourist attractions 
 
This list of subjects is not exhaustive and is intended to support planning of teaching 
and learning.   
Teachers could explore these subjects throughout the course and across different thematic 
contexts. For example, ‘transport’ could be considered when exploring the thematic context 
of ‘Travel and Tourism’ or ‘My Neighbourhood’; ‘food and drink’ could be considered when 
exploring ‘My personal world’, ‘Lifestyle and wellbeing’ or ‘Travel and tourism’.  
Teachers could also choose to organise their teaching of the vocabulary content into 
alternative thematic contexts or no thematic contexts at all to meet their students’ 
interests flexibly. Providing the full vocabulary and grammar content in Appendices 1 
and 2 is taught at each tier, your students will be able to access all our assessments. 
Thematic contexts in assessments 
Our use of thematic contexts in assessments provides:  
• meaningful and engaging content and scenarios for the question papers 
• reassurance to students on the focus of the texts they will encounter in their 
assessments   
• coverage of a range of vocabulary in assessments to ensure variety within each 
paper, across each paper in an exam series, and over time.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
9 
Paper 1, Speaking in German 
• Each of the six read aloud cards, per tier, will reflect one of the thematic contexts. 
• Each of the six role play cards, per tier, will reflect one of the transactional settings. 
• Each of the eighteen picture cards will reflect one of the thematic contexts. 
• Students will choose the thematic context for their picture task in advance of the 
assessment, from a choice of two, randomly generated by Pearson. The short 
conversation following the picture description will begin within the same pre-
selected thematic context. 
• Students are free to use vocabulary from anywhere across the specified vocabulary 
list in their spoken responses. 
• Students may also use vocabulary from outside the vocabulary list in their spoken 
responses. 
Paper 2, Listening and Understanding in German 
• The contexts of the listening texts will be taken from any of the thematic contexts. 
• Content of the listening texts will sample vocabulary across the qualification content. 
Paper 3, Reading and Understanding in German 
• The contexts of the reading texts will be taken from any of the thematic contexts. 
• Content of the reading texts will sample vocabulary across the qualification content. 
Paper 4, Writing in German 
• Every exam series each of the writing tasks, per tier, will reflect one of the thematic 
contexts.  
• Students are free to use vocabulary from anywhere across the specified vocabulary 
list in their written responses. 
• Students may also use vocabulary from outside the vocabulary list in their written 
responses. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
10 
Cultural Content and Inclusivity 
Built on a foundation of inclusivity, accessibility and transparency we have created a 
student-centred qualification that caters to the needs of all students, regardless of their 
background, ability or reason for studying a language.   
Use of cultural settings  
Language study gives opportunities to broaden students’ cultural awareness and 
introduces them to new experiences. However, sometimes presumptions about shared 
cultural capital can prevent students from accessing the content. 
Paper 1, Speaking assessments will: 
• use relatable contexts that are likely to be within the range of students’ own 
experiences 
• use a finite range of settings for role plays (see Paper 1 Speaking in German, 
Content), so that all students can be equally prepared for these scenarios. 
Paper 2, Listening assessments will:  
• use settings that are both familiar and unfamiliar, for wider cultural engagement 
• provide any necessary information to support students’ understanding of culturally 
unfamiliar settings in English, in rubrics. 
Paper 3, Reading assessments will: 
• use settings that are both familiar and unfamiliar, for wider cultural engagement 
• include contextualising images to support students’ understanding of culturally 
unfamiliar settings 
• provide glossing for the names of towns, cities or countries that are not part of the 
vocabulary list. 
Paper 4, Writing assessments will: 
• set open-response questions in contexts that are realistic and familiar 
• set tasks that draw on students’ own thoughts and experiences to answer set bullet 
points   
• avoid tasks that place a burden on student imagination to create responses 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
11 
• avoid tasks that rely on student knowledge of international travel or settings. 
Use of names in assessments 
Learning about the lives of people from across the target language speaking world is a 
way of bringing languages to life. However, sometimes the names of people can be 
unfamiliar and confusing for students in assessments.  
Our assessments will: 
• include only names from a defined list (see Appendix 3)  
• allow students to become familiar with target language names in advance  
• provide culturally relevant content. 
Our assessments will not:  
• include unfamiliar and potentially confusing names 
• require students to learn names 
• assess students on their knowledge of names. 
Use of gendered language 
Learning a new language allows students to talk about themselves and their lives, as well 
as learning about the lives and experiences of others. However, for trans and non-
binary students, the use of gendered language can present specific challenges.  
Our assessments will: 
• include the vocabulary for ‘trans’ and ‘non-binary’ on our vocabulary list  
(see Appendix 1: Vocabulary) 
• recognise students’ use of non-binary or gender-neutral pronouns when describing 
themselves or others in the speaking and writing papers 
• recognise students’ use of new adjectival endings according to their preferred way of 
identifying, or the use of gender-neutral pronouns with feminine or masculine 
agreement 
• recognise students’ use of gender-neutral nouns, whether indicated by adding 
punctuation, asterisks or using alternative spellings 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
12 
• equally credit students’ use of masculine, feminine or non-binary adjective 
agreements where used correctly and consistently 
• equally credit students’ use of non-binary pronouns where used correctly and 
consistently  
• be marked anonymously, without any examiner awareness of students’ gender.  
Support  
If you would like to find out more about an LGBTQ+ inclusive MFL curriculum, Stonewall 
provides further support in their ‘Creating an LGBTQ+ Inclusive Secondary Curriculum’ 
resource. You can also find more support, along with specific examples of gender 
neutral language use in French, German and Spanish in our ‘Gender, diversity and 
inclusion in languages qualifications’ video.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
13 
2 Subject content and assessment 
information 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German allows students to develop their 
ability to communicate in German in both speech and writing. They will study language 
within a variety of thematic contexts relevant to their age and interests and will develop a 
greater awareness of the culture of German-speaking communities and countries.  
Students will need to develop and use their knowledge and understanding of German 
vocabulary and grammar progressively through their course of study. A list of words that 
students are expected to use and understand is included in Appendix 1: Vocabulary list. 
This list of words is comprehensive and makes no assumptions about vocabulary 
previously taught. Grammar requirements are contained in the grammar list in 
Appendix 2: Grammar list. 
Subject aims 
The aims of this qualification are to:   
• provide a coherent, satisfying and worthwhile course of study. 
• develop confidence in, and a positive attitude towards, German and to recognise the 
importance of languages. 
• provide a strong linguistic and cultural foundation for students who go on to study 
languages at a higher level post-16. 
• develop students’ ability and ambition to communicate independently in speech and 
writing with speakers of the language for authentic purposes. 
• develop students’ ability to communicate independently about subjects that are 
meaningful and interesting to them 
• build students’ confidence and broaden their horizons, enabling them to step 
beyond familiar cultural boundaries, develop new ways of seeing the world, and 
better understand relationships between the foreign language and the English 
language.  
• enable students to become familiar with aspects of the contexts and cultures of the 
countries and communities where the language is spoken.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
14 
Paper 1: Speaking in German 
Content 
Speaking tasks will feature content that is relatable and accessible to all students. 
Students will be assessed on their ability to: 
• speak using clear and comprehensible language, for a range of audiences and 
purposes, and in formal and informal contexts, which are relevant to their current 
and future needs and interests. 
Students will need to: 
• apply the principles by which spelling represents sounds in standard or widely used 
forms of German 
• use clear and comprehensible pronunciation when speaking German, demonstrating 
an understanding of sound symbol correspondences 
• understand and respond to written language in speech by answering questions 
related to what they have read or seen 
• recall and use language in different situations and be able to move between German 
and English    
• convey and elicit information by asking and answering questions 
• use language to describe a visual stimulus, including specific required details 
• give opinions 
• develop conversation and discussion 
• produce extended sequences of speech 
• use a range of vocabulary and grammatical structures (from the prescribed lists) 
accurately, including some more complex forms appropriate to the level of study, 
with reference to past, present and future events. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
15 
Assessment information 
Task 1 – Read aloud (12 marks) 
• Students will: 
• read aloud a short passage (8 marks) and  
• answer two straightforward questions (4 marks) to elicit brief opinions based on 
the overall content of the passage, in a short interaction.  
The read aloud task assesses clear and comprehensible pronunciation 
integrated with an understanding of sound symbol correspondences.   
• The short interaction that follows assesses communication only. 
Each assessment series, Pearson will provide six read aloud stimulus cards. Each card 
will take its focus from one of the six thematic contexts listed in the specification and will 
only use words selected from the full vocabulary list for each tier.  
When responding to the two questions after the read aloud, students can draw upon 
any relevant vocabulary from the full vocabulary list, or beyond the list. The questions 
will be in the present tense at both tiers and will elicit likes / dislikes / opinions. 
Assessment information: 
For each read aloud, there is a student card and a teacher card: 
Student card 
The student card includes: 
• instructions and a scenario in English,  
• followed by a short text in German, which the student will read aloud: 
o Foundation tier: 35-40 words in 5 sentences  
o Higher tier: 50-55 words in 4 sentences  
The two straightforward questions for the short interaction do not appear on the 
student card, as they must be unprepared.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
16 
Teacher card 
The teacher card includes: 
• instructions on how to conduct the task,  
• a copy of the text to be read by the student, and  
• two straightforward questions, which form the short unprepared interaction to 
follow the read aloud of the text.   
Task 2 – Role play (10 marks) 
In the role play, students will be required to give and receive information, 
answering and asking questions. The students’ interactions could include any of the 
following:  
• make transactions (buying tickets, ordering food etc)   
• make plans, appointments or reservations   
• explain or give reasons   
• describe 
• express likes / dislikes / preferences / opinions   
• ask for advice   
• make a complaint or report a problem   
• ask / talk about activities. 
Role plays will be transactional in nature and will always be in one of the following 
settings:  
• Café / restaurant  
• Shop / market / shopping centre  
• Hotel  
• Train station  
• Tourist information office  
• Cinema / theatre / concert hall  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
17 
• Campsite 
• Leisure centre  
• Doctor's surgery / hospital 
• In town 
The role play assesses communication only and has been designed so that 
students can respond to the prompts using vocabulary drawn from the vocabulary list. 
Each assessment series, Pearson will provide six role play stimulus cards, which will use 
six different settings from the above list.  
The role plays are all set in a formal context. Students are not required to use the formal 
register.  
Assessment information: 
• For each role play, there is a student card and teacher card: 
Student card 
The student card includes the role play setting taken from the list above, and 
instructions and prompts in English.  
Foundation tier:  
• The student card includes five bullet points, eliciting five utterances.  
• Students need to ask one question. 
• Students are required to speak only in the present tense or a familiar conditional 
tense where it is more natural to do so, e.g. ‘ich möchte.’ 
Higher tier: 
• The student cards include five bullet points, eliciting five utterances.  
• Students need to ask two questions.  
• Students are required to speak in the present tense or a familiar conditional tense 
where it is more natural to do so, e.g. ‘ich möchte.’ 
• Students respond to one question asked using a future timeframe. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
18 
Teacher card  
The teacher cards contain instructions on how to conduct the role play and the exact 
questions to ask.  
Each role play opens with an introduction from the teacher who then asks the first 
question. 
Task 3 – Picture task (28 marks) 
• Students will be required to: 
• describe one picture from a choice of two (8 marks) 
• answer two unprepared questions related to the selected picture (4 marks) 
• participate in a conversation extending from the broader thematic context  
(16 marks). 
Picture description (12 marks): 
• On the picture task card there will be two colour pictures and students will choose 
one of the colour pictures. They will be required to produce an extended 
description, focussing on the following compulsory details of the picture: 
• people 
• location 
• activity. 
The teacher is provided with prompts to encourage students to address the compulsory 
bullet points. Students are not limited to describing these details and may develop their 
description as far as they are able in the recommended time.  
The picture description has been designed so that students can respond to the stimulus 
using vocabulary drawn from the full vocabulary list.  
Once the student has concluded the description, the teacher will ask two compulsory 
questions relating to the subject matter of the picture. Both questions will be 
about the student’s own experiences / likes / dislikes / opinions.  At Higher tier, the 
second question will be in the past tense. The questions do not appear on the student 
card as they must be unprepared.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
19 
Broader conversation (16 marks): 
The teacher should continue a broader conversation extending from the thematic 
context selected for this task. A compulsory starting subject for the conversation is 
given on the teacher card, along with example questions in the present, past and future 
tenses.  
During the conversation, the teacher should ask a range of questions appropriate to the 
thematic context and the interests and experiences of the student, which enables 
students to: 
• produce extended sequences of speech 
• develop the conversation    
• give and justify own thoughts and opinions 
• refer to past, present and future events 
• demonstrate the full range of their ability. 
Teacher-examiners should endeavour to sustain a free-flowing conversation, in which 
they respond to what the candidate is saying. In the broader conversation, students can 
draw upon any relevant vocabulary from the full vocabulary list, or beyond the list.  
Teacher-examiners should be mindful of the time requirement for the conversation 
element of this task and encourage candidates to produce sufficient responses to fill the 
recommended time. 
Assessment information 
• The description and conversation elements of the picture task assess 
communication and clarity (in response to the picture stimulus or teacher 
questions), and linguistic and grammatical accuracy.  
• The two unprepared questions following the picture description assess 
communication only. 
• Each assessment series, Pearson will provide eighteen different sets of picture task 
stimulus cards for each tier, with each card relating to one of the six thematic 
contexts. There will be two pictures on each stimulus card.  
• Two weeks in advance of the speaking assessment, students will select the thematic 
context for the picture task and conversation. They will select one thematic context 
from a choice of two, randomly generated by Pearson. This will inform the stimulus 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
20 
card they receive for the picture task, and the read aloud and role play task cards will 
be randomly allocated accordingly by Pearson. 
• For each picture task set, there is a student card and teacher card: 
Student card  
The student card includes: 
• two colour pictures from which students must choose one to describe. 
• three compulsory bullet points in English to guide the description: the people, 
the location, the activity.  
• guidance on the task. 
Teacher card 
The teacher card includes: 
• instructions on how to conduct this task.  
• copies of the pictures with bullet point prompts as on the student card. 
• intervention prompts to encourage the student to develop their picture description.  
• two compulsory follow-on questions per picture, related to the subject matter of the 
picture 
o Foundation tier: the questions will both be in the present tense;  
o Higher tier: question 1 will be in present tense and question 2 will be in the past 
tense. 
• guidance for the broader conversation, including a mandated starting subject for the 
conversation, and three suggested questions in different tenses / timeframes. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
21 
General assessment information 
First assessment: May/June 2026.  
• Students complete the three tasks as detailed and in the order set out above.  
• Assessment rubrics and information for students will be in English. The tasks must 
be completed in German. 
• Prior to the assessment, Pearson will provide instructions on the process for 
allocating stimulus cards. The allocation of cards for the read aloud, role play and 
picture task will be generated by the student’s choice of thematic context for the 
picture task. The thematic context will be selected from a choice of two randomly 
generated by Pearson and offered to the student two weeks before the assessment.  
The allocation of cards is designed to ensure that the assessment experienced by 
each student samples a range of vocabulary from the specified vocabulary list in 
Appendix 1: Vocabulary.  
• Assessments are conducted by centres within a five-week assessment period in April 
and May in any single year. Dates for the assessment period will be confirmed in the 
UK Information Manual at the start of each academic year. The assessment period 
will not always be continuous or be the same period each year, for example it will 
need to accommodate the Easter break which changes each year. 
• The assessment materials provided by Pearson for all tasks may be accessed by the 
teacher no more than three working days before the assessment period. This is to 
enable the teacher to prepare for the assessment. The assessment materials in the 
pack must not be removed from the centre premises and should be securely stored 
in order to maintain confidentiality throughout the assessment period.  
• Assessments are conducted by teachers. Complete, unedited recordings of all 
assessments must be submitted to Pearson via the online Learner Work Transfer 
(LWT) portal for external marking. 
• Assessment timings are different for Foundation and Higher tiers to reflect the 
increased demand of the tasks. Students will be assessed on the quality of the 
responses they can produce within the maximum allocated time of 9 minutes for 
foundation and 12 minutes for higher. Teachers are expected to give students the 
opportunity to respond fully to all tasks. 
• All assessments are marked against assessment criteria, which can be found in the 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German Sample Assessment Materials 
(SAMs) document.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
22 
• Centres must have procedures in place to verify and confirm the identity of all 
students at the time of the assessment. Pearson will provide the format for this 
verification, which will be submitted digitally to Pearson. 
Foundation tier assessment time and marks 
The total assessment for the three tasks is 7 to 9 minutes plus 15 minutes’ 
preparation time. 
The assessment is worth 50 marks.   
The assessment consists of three tasks which must be conducted in the following order: 
• Task 1 – one read aloud with short interaction to follow, recommended to last 
between 1.5 to 2 minutes for 12 marks  
• Task 2 – one role play, recommended to last 1 to 1.5 minutes for 10 marks 
• Task 3 – one picture task, recommended to last 4.5 to 5.5 minutes in total   
o the picture description with the two compulsory questions is recommended to 
last 1.5 to 2 minutes for 12 marks, and  
o the broader conversation is recommended to last 3 to 3.5 minutes for 16 
marks.  
o The total number of marks for Task 3 is 28 marks. 
Higher tier assessment time and marks 
The total assessment for the three tasks is 10 to 12 minutes plus 15 minutes’ 
preparation time. 
The assessment is worth 50 marks.   
The assessment consists of three tasks which must be conducted in the following order: 
• Task 1 – one read aloud with short interaction to follow, recommended to last 
between 2 and 2.5 minutes for 12 marks  
• Task 2 – one role play, recommended to last 1 to 1.5 minutes for 10 marks 
• Task 3 – one picture task, recommended to last 7 to 8 minutes in total 
o the picture description with the two compulsory questions is recommended to 
last 2 to 2.5 minutes for 12 marks, 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
23 
o the broader conversation is recommended to last 5 to 5.5 minutes for 16 
marks.  
o The total number of marks for Task 3 is 28 marks. 
Preparation time 
Students are allocated 15 minutes’ preparation time, under supervised conditions, 
immediately prior to the assessment.  
The purpose of the 15 minutes preparation time is to consider the text for the read 
aloud and the allocated stimuli for the role play and picture task.  
The final 1 minute of the preparation time should take place in the 
examination room, where students will be given the opportunity to practise 
the read aloud task out loud. It is not compulsory for the student to read the full task 
out loud during this minute. Students may use this time to practise selected words / 
phrases / sentences or the entire text out loud or undertake any other appropriate 
preparation. The 1-minute preparation will not be assessed but must form part of the 
continuous recording of the assessment submitted to Pearson. The purpose of 
recording the preparation time is to ensure that no guidance or correction is provided 
to the student during this time. 
During the 15 minute preparation time, students are permitted to make notes on an A4 
sheet of paper. In addition, they can directly annotate the text for the read aloud in 
order to aid pronunciation during the task. 
During the assessment, students can refer to notes and annotations. The notes should 
be for reference only. Stimulus material for each task should be handed to the teacher 
at the end of the task (i.e. directly after the read aloud passage, but before the short 
interaction; directly after the roleplay; at the end of the picture description). At the end 
of the examination, students must also return their notes to the teacher.  
Any notes made during the preparation time must be kept securely by the centre until 
the end of October in the year the assessment is completed, after which time they 
should be securely destroyed.  
Students cannot have access to a dictionary, or any other resource, during the 
preparation time. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
24 
Sample assessment materials  
A sample paper and mark scheme for this can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
25 
Paper 2: Listening and understanding in German  
Content 
Students are assessed on their understanding of standard spoken German in formal 
and informal contexts, and familiar and unfamiliar settings.  
Students need to: 
• identify and respond to key points, details and opinions 
• recognise the relationship between past, present and future events 
• undertake a short dictation in the target language, applying the principles by which 
spelling represents sounds in standard or widely used forms of German. 
This paper draws on the specified vocabulary (Appendix 1) and grammar (Appendix 2) and 
the focus of the passages will be taken from the thematic contexts listed in the 
specification (see Thematic Contexts).  
Recordings have been created to reflect the following authentic listening scenarios: 
• newsflashes, newsclips, weather forecasts, public announcements, advertisements, 
monologues, conversations, podcasts, extracts of talks or presentations and short 
reports. 
Students are presented with short and medium-length recorded scenarios involving one 
or more speakers.  
Recordings will be spoken using standard German at no faster than a moderate pace. 
To avoid students confusing unfamiliar names of people with necessary vocabulary, we 
will only use names from the prescribed list in Appendix 3.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
26 
Assessment information 
• First assessment is in May/June 2026.  
• The assessment is out of 50 marks. 
Section A: Listening Comprehension (40 marks) 
All questions in this section are set in English, using the following question types: 
multiple choice, multiple response and short open response questions.  
Students write their responses in English.   
Section B: Dictation (10 marks) 
The instructions for this task are given in English. Students will listen to a passage of 
spoken German and write their responses in German. 
• Students are allocated five minutes to read through the paper before the first extract 
of the recording starts. This gives students an opportunity to familiarise themselves 
with the length and the layout of the paper and to read the questions before hearing 
the first extract.  
• Each extract is played three times, with appropriate pauses between individual 
sentences, after each extract, and before the next question or part question. This will 
allow students sufficient time to process information, write down their responses 
and read the next question or part question.  
• Students must answer all questions.  
• In Section A, there are four crossover questions between the Foundation Tier and 
the Higher Tier papers. 
• Recordings are released as audio files via our Secure Download Service (SDS) prior to 
the examination.  
• Dictionaries may not be used in the examination. 
Foundation tier  
• The duration of the assessment is 45 minutes, including 5 minutes of reading time. 
• The total word count of texts used in the paper ranges between 450 and 500 words.  
• The question paper targets grades 1-5 and contains twelve questions in total. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
27 
Higher tier  
• The duration of the assessment is 60 minutes, including 5 minutes of reading 
time. 
• The total word count of texts used in the paper ranges between 700 and 850 words. 
• The question papers targets grades 4-9 and contains ten questions in total. 
Sample assessment materials  
A sample paper and mark scheme for this can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
28 
Paper 3: Reading and understanding in German 
Content 
Students are assessed on their understanding of written German across a range of 
genres and in both formal and informal contexts.  
Students need to:  
• identify and respond to key points, details and opinions  
• recognise the relationship between past, present and future events  
• infer meanings of two single words per tier (1 mark per word) that are not listed in 
Appendix 1: Vocabulary 
• demonstrate an ability to transfer meaning accurately into English by translating 
from written German into English. 
This paper draws on the specified vocabulary (Appendix 1) and grammar (Appendix 2) and 
the focus of the passages will be taken from the thematic contexts listed in the 
specification (see Thematic Contexts).  
Texts have been created to reflect the following authentic reading scenarios:  
• blogs, internet forums, advertisements, tourist brochures, newspaper or magazine 
articles, emails, extracts from a diary or school project.  
Texts for individual questions within the assessment vary in length, including both short 
and longer written passages.  
Scenarios in the texts are set either at home or, more frequently, in a German-speaking 
country, allowing students to develop appropriate cultural awareness and 
understanding. When specific cultural features are mentioned, we will include an image 
to ensure all students can have equal understanding of the cultural feature. 
To avoid students confusing unfamiliar names of people with necessary vocabulary, we 
will only use names from the prescribed list in Appendix 3. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
29 
Assessment information 
• First assessment: May/June 2026.  
• The assessment is out of 50 marks. 
Section A: Reading comprehension (40 marks) 
All questions in this section are set in English, using the following question types: 
multiple choice, multiple response and short open response questions.  
• Students write their responses in English for any open response questions. 
Section B: Translation (10 marks) 
The instructions for this task are given in English. Students will translate from German 
into English. 
• Students must answer all questions from each of the two sections. 
• In Section A, there are three crossover questions between the Foundation Tier and 
the Higher Tier papers. 
• Dictionaries may not be used in the examination. 
Foundation tier  
• The assessment time is 45 minutes. 
• Section A, Reading Comprehension has nine questions set in English.  
• Section B, Translation contains five sentences to translate from German into 
English.  
• The question paper targets grades 1-5. 
Higher tier  
• The assessment time is 60 minutes. 
• Section A, Reading Comprehension has eight questions set in English 
• Section B, Translation of one passage from German into English. 
• The question paper targets grades 4-9. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
30 
Sample assessment materials  
A sample paper and mark scheme for this can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
31 
Paper 4: Writing in German  
Content 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate effectively and with accuracy 
through writing in German for a variety of purposes, in both formal and informal 
contexts, and for a range of audiences.  
Students need to:  
• write short texts, using language accurately to describe in response to simple and 
familiar stimuli 
• produce clear and coherent texts of extended length to express ideas and opinions 
appropriately for different purposes and in different situations.  
• make accurate use of a variety of vocabulary and grammatical structures (from the 
prescribed lists), including some more complex forms, to describe, narrate and 
explain with reference to past, present and future events 
• move confidently between reading instructions in English and writing in German 
• translate sentences and short texts from English into German to convey key 
messages accurately and to apply grammatical knowledge of language in context. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
32 
Assessment information 
• First assessment: May/June 2026.  
• The assessment is out of 50 marks. 
Foundation tier assessment: 
• The assessment time is 1 hour and 15 minutes.  
The paper consists of four questions: 
• three open-response questions 
• one translation from English into German.  
Students must answer all four questions. Questions 2 and 3 provide a choice of two 
options.  
• Question 1 (8 marks) Picture-based task: 
o Students are asked to write four short sentences to describe a photo. 
o Assesses students on their ability to describe.  
• Question 2 (14 marks) Open-response, formal context: 
o Two options from which students must select one.  
o Assesses students on their ability to give an opinion, present facts and use 
present and future timeframes. 
o Recommended word count: 40-50 words 
• Question 3 (18 marks) Open-response, informal context:  
o Two options from which students must select one.  
o Assesses students on their ability to express and justify opinions, narrate, and 
express future plans, using a combination of present, past and future 
timeframes.  
o Recommended word count: 80-90 words 
o This question is common to the Higher tier Question 1.  
• Question 4 (10 marks) Translation: 
o Students are required to translate five sentences from English to German. 
o The sentences are ordered by increasing level of difficulty. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
33 
Higher tier assessment: 
• The assessment time is 1 hour and 20 minutes.  
• The paper consists of three questions: 
• two open-response questions 
• one translation from English into German. 
Students must answer all three questions. Questions 1 and 2 provide a choice of two 
options. 
• Question 1 (18 marks) Open-response, informal context: 
o Two options from which students must select one.  
o Assesses students on their ability to express and justify opinions, narrate and 
express future plans, using a combination of present, past and future 
timeframes. 
o Recommended word count: 80-90 words. 
o This question is common to the Foundation tier Question 3. 
• Question 2 (22 marks) Open-response, formal context: 
o Two options from which students must select one.  
o Assesses students on their ability to express pros and cons, explain and narrate, 
using a combination of present, past and future timeframes. 
o Recommended word count: 130-150 words. 
• Question 3 (10 marks) Translation: 
o Students are required to translate a short paragraph from English into 
German.  
o The individual sentences are ordered by increasing level of difficulty. 
Each question is linked to one of the thematic contexts listed in the specification. 
Students can draw upon any relevant vocabulary from the full vocabulary list to 
complete their task. 
• The assessment tasks feature general content that is familiar and accessible to a 
wide range of students, allowing students flexibility in their response.  
• Students are required to produce responses of varying lengths and purposes in 
German, in response to prompts in both informal and formal contexts. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
34 
• Recommended word counts are specified for each question, with the exception of 
Question 1 on the Foundation paper, which requires four short sentences, and the 
translation tasks. Students are rewarded for any relevant content and will not be 
penalised for writing more or fewer words than recommended. The length of each 
response required increases across the paper. 
• Students are expected to address each bullet point in the open questions and 
develop their responses. The complexity of language elicited increases across the 
paper, with varied use of timeframes and language expected. 
• Students will be assessed on both Communication and content, and Linguistic 
knowledge and accuracy in the open-response questions and translation, but only 
Communication and content in Question 1 of the Foundation tier paper. 
• All assessments are marked against assessment criteria, set out in the Pearson 
Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) 
document.  
• The instructions to students are all in English.  
• The use of dictionaries is not permitted. 
Sample assessment materials  
A sample paper and mark scheme for this can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
35 
Assessment Objectives 
 
Students must: % in GCSE 
AO1 Understand and respond to spoken language in speaking and 
in writing 
35% 
AO2 Understand and respond to written language in speaking and 
in writing 
45% 
AO3 Demonstrate knowledge and accurate application of the 
grammar and vocabulary prescribed in the specification 
20% 
Total 100% 
 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
Component AO1 % AO2 % AO3 % Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives 
1: Speaking 15% 2% 8% 25% 
2: Listening and understanding 20% 0% 5% 25% 
3: Reading and understanding 0% 25% 0% 25% 
4: Writing 0% 18% 7% 25% 
Total for GCSE 35% 45% 20% 100% 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
36 
3 Administration and general 
information 
Entries 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for this qualification can be found 
in our UK Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations officers and is 
available on our website: qualifications.pearson.com 
Discount code and performance tables 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more than one GCSE, or other 
Level 2 qualifications with the same discount code, will have only the grade for their 'first 
entry' counted for the purpose of the school and college performance tables (please see 
Appendix 5: Codes). For further information about what constitutes 'first entry' and full 
details of how this policy is applied, please refer to the DfE website: 
www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-education 
Students should be advised that if they take two GCSEs with the same discount code, 
the schools and colleges to which they wish to progress are likely to take the view that 
this achievement is equivalent to only one GCSE. The same view may be taken if 
students take two GCSEs or other Level 2 qualifications that have different discount 
codes but which have significant overlap of content. Before embarking on their 
programmes, students or their advisers who have any doubts about their subject 
combinations should check with the institution to which they wish to progress.  
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special 
consideration and malpractice 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality policy requires all students to 
have equal opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our 
qualifications to be awarded in a way that is fair to every student. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
37 
We are committed to making sure that: 
• students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the Equality Act 2010) are not, 
when they are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in comparison to 
students who do not share that characteristic 
• all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification and 
that this achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their peers. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be available in English. All student work must be in 
English except where students are specifically required to speak or write in German as 
part of the speaking and writing assessments.  
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with 
special educational needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to:  
• access the assessment 
• show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the assessment.  
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an 
individual student with a disability, without affecting the integrity of the assessment. 
Access arrangements are the principal way in which awarding bodies comply with the 
duty under the Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students 
will then know what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for 
assessment.  
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable 
adjustments where a person with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in 
undertaking an assessment. The awarding organisation is required to take reasonable 
steps to overcome that disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be unique to that individual and 
therefore might not be in the list of available access arrangements. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
38 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of 
factors, including: 
• the needs of the student with the disability 
• the effectiveness of the adjustment 
• the cost of the adjustment; and 
• the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other 
students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding 
organisation, or affects timeframes or the security or integrity of the assessment. This is 
because the adjustment is not ‘reasonable’. 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student's mark or grade to 
reflect temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the examination/ 
assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a material effect on a 
student’s ability to take an assessment or demonstrate their level of attainment in an 
assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to apply for access 
arrangements and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and 
special consideration, please refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk. 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that compromises or seeks to 
compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
39 
Candidate malpractice in non-examined assessments discovered before the candidate 
has signed the declaration of authentication form does not need to be reported to 
Pearson. 
Candidate malpractice found in non-examined assessments after the declaration of 
authenticity has been signed, and in examinations must be reported to Pearson on a 
JCQ Form M1 (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form should be 
emailed to candidatemalpractice@pearson.com. Please provide as much information 
and supporting documentation as possible. Note that the final decision regarding 
appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report candidate malpractice constitutes staff or centre malpractice.  
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and 
maladministration of our qualifications. As with candidate malpractice, staff and centre 
malpractice is any act that compromises or seeks to compromise the process of 
assessment or undermines the integrity of the qualifications or the validity of 
results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported 
immediately, before any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson on a  
JCQ Form M2(a) (available at  www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form, 
supporting documentation and as much information as possible should be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate 
sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the 
document General and Vocational Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations 
and Assessments Policies and Procedures, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-
office/malpractice. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
40 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to comply with the 
requirements of Ofqual's General Conditions of Recognition. 
This GCSE qualification will be graded and certificated on a nine-grade scale from  
9 to 1 using the total subject mark where 9 is the highest grade. Individual papers are 
not graded. For Foundation tier, grades 1–5 are available and for Higher tier, grades 4–9 
are available, however if the mark achieved is a smaller number of marks below the 4/3 
grade boundary, then a grade 3 may be awarded.  
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum judged by Pearson to be of 
sufficient standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U result. 
The first certification opportunity for this qualification will be 2026. 
Student recruitment and progression 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that: 
• they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard 
• they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression 
• equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this qualification. Because no 
vocabulary is specified for KS2 or KS3, the Vocabulary List proposed for GCSE must be 
comprehensive and should make no assumptions about vocabulary previously taught. 
Progression 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German offers a suitable progression 
route as just as at Key Stages 2 and 3, these qualifications focus on the development of 
all four language skills, listening, speaking, reading and writing. Grammar and the 
mastering of linguistic features are key elements as is continually improving the 
accuracy of pronunciation. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
41 
The grammar and vocabulary lists illustrate the level required for this qualification. The 
broader range of thematic contexts promotes a clear progression in grammar and 
vocabulary from Key Stage 3 and will increase linguistic and cognitive demand.  
Students will understand and respond to spoken and written language from a variety of 
authentic sources and will be able to write at varying length, for different purposes and 
audiences, using the variety of grammatical structures that they have learnt. 
This qualification offers a suitable progression route to GCE AS and GCE A Level in 
German language. The integration of productive and receptive skills across the 
assessment objectives, replicates the approach that is used in the A level qualifications. 
At A level there is an additional assessment objective that focusses on cultural 
knowledge. In our GCSE we actively reference cultural aspects as relevant to the age 
group, allowing progression on to this aspect of the A level qualification. 
In addition, the study of one language at GCSE can facilitate and help promote the 
learning of other languages. The qualification may also add to an individual’s 
employability profile. Students will be able to apply their knowledge, skills and 
understanding to authentic, real-life contexts. They will develop transferable skills that 
support higher education study and the transition to employment, together with an 
understanding and appreciation of German speaking countries and their cultures.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
42 
 
4 Appendices 
Appendix 1: Vocabulary 43 
Appendix 2: Grammar 147 
Appendix 3: Names of people used in assessments 163 
Appendix 4: Transferable skills 165 
Appendix 5: Codes 167 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
43 
 
Appendix 1: Vocabulary  
The following vocabulary list is the full vocabulary content that will be assessed by this 
qualification, in both receptive and productive tasks.  
We have created a vocabulary list in collaboration with teachers and students which 
allows them to engage with subjects that they have told us are meaningful and 
interesting, as well as providing a strong linguistic and cultural foundation. The 
vocabulary list includes many of the basic and familiar words which you will already 
cover across key stage 3, as well as adding new and up-to-date content to reflect the 
diversity of our students and their diverse range of interests such as social equality, 
gaming, social media and the environment.  
The vocabulary list comprises 1200 words to be used at both Foundation and Higher 
tier and an additional 500 words to be used at Higher tier only.  
Our considerations when selecting the 500 words for Higher tier included: 
• linguistic complexity (e.g. Cyberkriminalität, beitragen zu) 
• conceptual complexity (e.g. überzeugen, Einstellung) 
• the grammatical requirements of the course at each tier (e.g. seit is required for 
Higher tier-only grammatical constructions) 
• enrichment of Higher tier students' vocabulary, by providing synonyms or near-
synonyms of words in the Foundation tier list. Where we have done this, we have 
placed at Foundation tier the word most likely to be familiar to students from 
previous study (e.g. Foundation meinen vs Higher behaupten) or that is more similar 
to a common English term (e.g. Foundation beginnen vs Higher anfangen). 
There are also 20 additional cultural or geographical words and 30 short phrases.  
At least 85% of the vocabulary, at each tier, is expected to be taken from the top 2000 
most frequent words according to the corpus published by Routledge0F
1. 
 
 
 
1 Tschirner, E. & Möhring, J. (2019). A frequency dictionary of German: Core vocabulary for learners (2nd 
ed.). London: Routledge 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
44 
Reading assessments 
In our reading assessments, any vocabulary that is not listed below will be glossed and 
this will be no more than 2% of words in any text.  
Additionally, up to 2% of words in any text can be cognates1F
1 which are not included in 
the vocabulary list below.   
Speaking and writing assessments 
In our speaking and writing assessments, we have designed the tasks so that they elicit 
vocabulary from the list below and full marks can be gained if students respond with 
vocabulary taken exclusively from the vocabulary listed. However, teachers and students 
should not feel limited to this vocabulary list and if they wish to supplement the list with 
additional vocabulary during teaching and learning, the use of any additional vocabulary 
in productive tasks will be equally rewarded. 
  
 
 
 
1 Cognates are words in which the substantial majority of letters are the same in English and the assessed 
language; they have the same meaning in both languages and any difference in spelling should not 
impede understanding for students entered for GCSE MFL (French, German, Spanish) qualifications. 
Examples of cognates in German include ‘hockey,’ ‘Biologie’ and ‘komplex’.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
45 
Organisation of the vocabulary 
We have presented the vocabulary list in the way that will be the most useful and 
supportive to teachers to access the content and organise it for teaching needs.   
We also provide the list in an interactive, editable format on our website. 
We begin with a section on the basic vocabulary that you may expect to have already 
covered with students during KS3, if they have studied the language prior to this GCSE 
qualification. This section includes:  
• greetings 
• numbers 
• days of the week 
• months of the year 
• seasons 
• times of the day  
• colours. 
We then list the words we have selected for our allowance of: 
• cultural and geographical words and  
• short phrases.  
The remainder of our vocabulary is then organised by grammatical function:  
• articles and pronouns 
• conjunctions 
• prepositions 
• adverbs 
• adjectives 
• nouns 
• verbs.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
46 
This vocabulary is organised in alphabetical order by English. Note that the 
categorisation of words by part of speech is purely for organisational purposes; if a word 
exists in multiple parts of speech with the same meaning(s), we may use it in any of 
those parts of speech in our exam papers. For example, the word schwimmen is in our 
vocab list and is to be known with the meanings ‘to swim’ and ‘swimming’; we may 
therefore also use Schwimmen as a noun with the meaning ‘swimming’. 
Some words have multiple English meanings listed; in these cases, students are 
required to know all of these meanings. 
There are a small number of words for which more than one spelling is in common use, 
such as Fuβ/Fuss (in Swiss German) or compound words which can be written together 
or separately (kennenlernen/kennen lernen; Fastfood/Fast Food). We have marked these 
words with a ^ in the vocabulary list. Although we have only used one spelling in the 
vocabulary list, we will accept both spelling options for these words in assessments. 
University of York MultiLingProfiler 
During the development of our Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs), we have been grateful to University of York for 
providing us with access to their MultiLingProfiler tool2F
1 to assist us with ensuring all our 
texts comply with the requirement set out in this Appendix 1: Vocabulary and Appendix 2: 
Grammar. 
  
 
 
 
1 Finlayson, N., Marsden, E., & Anthony, L. (2022). MultilingProfiler (Version 3) [Computer software]. University of York. 
https://www.multilingprofiler.net/ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
47 
Basic vocabulary 
Foundation and Higher 
Basic vocabulary: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
hello 
hello 
goodbye 
yes 
no 
OK, alright 
please | I beg your pardon, you’re 
welcome 
thank you, thanks 
excuse me 
--------------------- 
zero 
one 
two 
three 
four 
five 
six 
seven 
eight 
Guten Tag 
hallo 
auf Wiedersehen 
ja 
nein 
OK, okay 
bitte (schön) 
 
danke (schön) 
Entschuldigung 
--------------------- 
null 
eins 
zwei 
drei 
vier 
fünf 
sechs 
sieben 
acht 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
48 
Basic vocabulary: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
nine 
ten 
eleven 
twelve 
thirteen  
sixteen 
seventeen 
twenty 
thirty 
forty 
fifty 
sixty 
seventy 
eighty 
ninety 
hundred 
thousand 
million 
--------------------- 
first 
second 
third 
neun 
zehn 
elf 
zwölf 
dreizehn 
sechzehn 
siebzehn 
zwanzig 
dreißig^ 
vierzig 
fünfzig 
sechzig 
siebzig 
achtzig 
neunzig 
hundert 
tausend 
Million 
--------------------- 
erst 
zweit 
dritt 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
49 
Basic vocabulary: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
last (m, f, nt), (pl) 
--------------------- 
Monday 
Tuesday 
Wednesday 
Thursday 
Friday 
Saturday 
Sunday 
January 
February 
March 
April 
May 
June 
July 
August 
September 
October 
November 
December 
--------------------- 
letzt-(er, e, es), letzte 
--------------------- 
Montag (m) 
Dienstag (m) 
Mittwoch (m) 
Donnerstag (m) 
Freitag (m) 
Samstag (m) 
Sonntag (m) 
Januar (m) 
Februar (m) 
März (m) 
April (m) 
Mai (m) 
Juni (m) 
Juli (m) 
August (m) 
September (m) 
Oktober (m) 
November (m) 
Dezember (m) 
--------------------- 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
50 
Basic vocabulary: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
o’clock, watch, clock 
time 
second 
minute 
hour, lesson, class 
day 
weekend 
week 
month 
year 
spring 
summer 
autumn 
winter 
--------------------- 
morning 
afternoon 
evening 
night 
start, beginning; in the beginning 
end; in the end 
--------------------- 
Uhr (f) 
Zeit (f) 
Sekunde (f) 
Minute (f) 
Stunde (f) 
Tag (m) 
Wochenende (nt) 
Woche (f) 
Monat (m) 
Jahr (nt) 
Frühling (m) 
Sommer (m) 
Herbst (m) 
Winter (m) 
--------------------- 
Morgen (m) 
Nachmittag (m) 
Abend (m) 
Nacht (f) 
Anfang (m); am Anfang 
Ende (nt); am Ende 
--------------------- 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
51 
Basic vocabulary: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
colour, paint 
black 
blue 
brown 
green 
grey 
orange 
pink 
red 
white 
yellow 
Farbe (f) 
schwarz 
blau 
braun 
grün 
grau 
orange 
rosarot 
rot 
weiß^ 
gelb 
 
Higher ONLY 
Basic vocabulary: Higher ONLY 
English German 
yes (in answer to a negative question), 
however, but 
--------------------- 
century 
doch 
 
--------------------- 
Jahrhundert (nt) 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
52 
Cultural and geographical words 
Foundation and Higher 
Cultural and geographical: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
Africa 
America 
Asia 
Europe 
European Union, EU 
Austria  
Germany 
Great Britain  
Switzerland  
Turkey  
Berlin 
Cologne  
Munich  
Vienna  
Danube 
Rhine 
canton (Switzerland) 
Carnival  
New Year's Eve 
Vienna International Film Festival 
Afrika 
Amerika 
Asien 
Europa 
EU (f) 
Österreich 
Deutschland 
Großbritannien^ 
die Schweiz 
die Türkei 
Berlin 
Köln 
München 
Wien 
Donau (f) 
Rhein (m) 
Kanton (m) 
Karneval (m)  
Silvester (m or nt) 
Viennale (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
53 
Short phrases 
Foundation and Higher 
Short phrases: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
all the best 
as…as 
at home; at my/our house 
both … and … 
Enjoy your meal! 
home; to (your) home 
How are you? 
I am …, I feel … 
I am sorry 
I don't mind, I'm not bothered 
in my opinion 
in order to (+ verb) 
instead of (+ verb) 
it hurts 
nearby, near 
not at all 
not really 
now and again 
there is | there are | is there | are there 
alles Gute 
so…wie 
zu Hause 
sowohl … als auch … 
Guten Appetit! 
nach Hause 
Wie geht's? 
Es geht mir … 
Es tut mir leid 
Es ist mir egal 
meiner Meinung nach 
um…zu (+ infinitive) 
statt…zu (+ infinitive) 
es tut weh 
in der Nähe (von) 
gar nicht 
eigentlich nicht 
ab und zu 
es (…) gibt | gibt es 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
54 
Short phrases: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
there was | there were | there used to 
be | was there | were there 
to repeat a year in school 
tomorrow morning 
what kind of…? 
es (…) gab | gab es 
 
sitzen bleiben 
morgen früh 
was für...? 
 
Higher ONLY 
Short phrases: Higher only  
English German 
above all 
by and large, in general 
everything (else) 
in this way 
mental health 
see you soon 
something (nice) 
vor allem 
im Großen und Ganzen 
alles (Andere) 
auf diese Weise 
(die) mentale Gesundheit 
bis bald 
etwas (Nettes) 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
55 
Articles and pronouns 
Foundation and Higher 
Articles and pronouns: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
a few, some 
a lot, much 
a lot, many 
a/an (f) 
a/an (m, nt) 
after it, afterwards 
both 
each, every (m, f, nt) 
everyone, everybody (pl) 
for it, for that 
from it, about it 
he, it (m) (subj) 
him (obj), it (m) (obj) 
himself, herself, itself, oneself, yourself 
(formal), themselves, yourselves (formal) 
(reflex) |each other (recip) 
his, its (f, pl) 
his, its (m, nt) 
how(?) 
I (subj) 
einige 
viel 
viele 
eine 
ein 
danach 
beide 
jed-(er, e, es) 
alle 
dafür 
davon 
er 
ihn 
sich 
 
 
seine 
sein 
wie 
ich 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
56 
Articles and pronouns: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
in addition, with that 
inside 
it (nt) (subj) | it (nt) (obj) 
me (obj) | myself (reflex) 
my (f, pl) 
my (m, nt) 
no-one (obj) 
no-one (subj) 
not a (f), not any, no (f, pl) 
not a, no (m, nt) 
nothing 
on it, to it 
one (obj) 
one, you, people in general (subj) 
our (f, pl) 
our (m, nt) 
ourselves (reflex) | each other (recip) 
she, it (f), they (subj) | her, it (f), them 
(obj) 
someone (obj) 
someone (subj) 
something, some, a little 
dazu 
drinnen 
es 
mich 
meine 
mein 
niemanden 
niemand 
keine 
kein 
nichts 
darauf/drauf 
einen 
man 
unsere 
unser 
uns 
sie 
 
jemanden 
jemand 
etwas 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
57 
Articles and pronouns: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
such 
the (f), the (pl) 
the (m) 
the (nt) 
the same 
these, those (pl) 
this, that (m, f, nt) 
to/for him (indirect obj), to it (m, nt) 
(indirect obj) 
to/for me (indirect obj) 
to/for one (indirect obj) 
to/for you (formal, indirect obj) 
to/for you (indirect obj) 
we (subj) 
what(?), that 
when(?) 
where(?) 
where…from? 
where…to? 
which (m, f, nt), which (pl) 
which, who (f, pl) 
which, who (m) 
solch 
die 
der 
das 
derselbe, dieselbe, dasselbe 
diese 
dies-(er, e, es) 
ihm 
 
mir 
einem 
Ihnen 
dir 
wir 
was 
wann 
wo 
woher 
wohin 
welch-(er, e, es), welche 
die 
der 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
58 
Articles and pronouns: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
which, who, this, these, that (nt) 
who(?)  
with it 
you (formal) (subj) | you (formal) (obj)  
you (obj) | yourself (reflex) 
you (pl informal) (subj) |to her, to it (f) 
(indirect obj) 
you (sing informal) (subj) 
your (f, pl) 
your (m, nt) 
yourselves (reflex) | each other (recip) 
das 
wer 
damit 
Sie 
dich 
ihr 
 
du 
deine 
dein 
euch 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
59 
Higher ONLY 
Articles and pronouns: Higher ONLY 
English German 
above it, about it 
against it, on the other hand 
before (it), in front of it 
behind it 
for what 
from what, about what 
in between, between (them), among 
(them) 
in it, in there, inside 
little, bit 
next to it, beside it 
on it, at it, in the process of it 
on it, onto it, at it, to it 
on what, at what 
on what, onto what, at what, to what 
on what, to what 
out of it, from it 
several, various 
some 
something, anything 
that, those 
darüber, drüber 
dagegen 
davor 
dahinter 
wofür 
wovon 
dazwischen 
 
darin, drin, drinnen 
bisschen 
daneben 
daran, dran 
darauf, drauf 
woran 
wozu 
worauf 
daraus 
mehrere 
manche 
irgendetwas, irgendwas 
jene(r) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
60 
Articles and pronouns: Higher ONLY 
English German 
through it, as a result, as a consequence 
(to/for) them 
(to/for) us (obj) 
(to/for) you (pl informal) (obj) 
under it, underneath 
what about 
what…of, what.. in front of 
whose 
with it, there 
with which 
dadurch 
ihnen 
uns 
euch 
darunter 
worüber 
wovor 
dessen, deren 
dabei 
womit 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
61 
Conjunctions 
Foundation and Higher 
Conjunctions: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
although 
and 
because 
because, for, since 
but, however 
either 
if, whenever, when 
or 
so, thus, in this way, such 
than, when, as 
that 
then 
whether, if 
obwohl 
und 
weil 
denn 
aber 
entweder 
wenn 
oder 
so 
als 
dass 
dann 
ob 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
62 
Higher ONLY 
Conjunctions: Higher ONLY 
English German 
after 
as soon as 
as well as, plus 
before 
during, while, whereas 
in case, if 
neither 
(but) rather 
since, because, there 
so that 
nachdem 
sobald 
sowie 
bevor 
während 
falls 
weder 
sondern 
da 
damit 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
63 
Prepositions 
Foundation and Higher 
Prepositions: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
at (+ time) 
at (the house of) the, with the (m, nt) 
at (the house of), with 
by, per 
for 
from the, of the (m, nt) 
from, of 
in front of, before, ago 
in the (m, nt) (dative) 
in, into 
into the (nt) (accusative) 
on the, at the (m, nt) (dative) 
on, at 
on, onto, at, to 
onto the, at the (nt) (accusative) 
out, out of, from 
through 
to, about 
to the (m, nt), to the (f), about, for 
um 
beim 
bei 
pro 
für 
vom 
von 
vor 
im 
in 
ins 
am 
an 
auf 
ans 
aus 
durch 
zu 
zum, zur 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
64 
Prepositions: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
to, towards, after, according to 
until, till, up to 
with 
without (+ verb) 
nach 
bis 
mit 
ohne | ohne...zu (+ infinitive) 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
65 
Higher ONLY 
Prepositions: Higher ONLY 
English German 
above, over, about, through 
according to 
against 
along 
around 
because of, due to 
behind 
between 
by 
despite, in spite of 
except 
from, as of 
in the process of, during, while 
in the process of, during, while 
in the process of, during, while 
inside of, within 
next to, beside 
opposite 
outside of 
since, for 
under 
über 
laut 
gegen 
entlang 
um 
wegen 
hinter 
zwischen 
durch 
trotz 
außer 
ab 
am 
bei 
beim 
innerhalb 
neben 
gegenüber 
außerhalb 
seit 
unter 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
66 
Adverbs 
Foundation and Higher 
In addition to the adverbs in this list, the ‘Adjectives’ section below includes words with 
identical adjectival and adverbial forms, such as global (‘global, globally’). 
 
Adverbs: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
about, approximately 
about, approximately 
absolutely 
again 
again 
almost, nearly 
alone 
already 
also, too, as well 
always 
at/to the front 
away, vanished 
back   
certainly 
each other, one another 
early 
enough 
etwa 
ungefähr 
unbedingt 
wieder 
nochmal 
fast 
allein 
schon 
auch 
immer 
vorne 
weg 
zurück 
sicherlich 
einander 
früh 
genug 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
67 
Adverbs: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
every day, daily 
everywhere 
finally, at last 
first of all, firstly 
from something, in this direction, here 
further 
gladly, (with a verb) like to 
here 
in all, altogether, in total 
just as 
late 
more 
more gladly, rather 
mostly 
never 
normally 
not 
now 
of course, naturally, natural 
often 
on the way, en route 
on/to the right 
täglich 
überall 
endlich 
zuerst 
her 
weiter 
gern, gerne 
hier 
insgesamt 
genauso 
spät 
mehr 
lieber 
meistens 
nie 
normalerweise 
nicht 
jetzt 
natürlich 
oft 
unterwegs 
rechts 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
68 
Adverbs: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
once, one time 
online 
only 
otherwise, else 
out, beyond 
out, outside 
outside 
particularly 
perhaps 
previously, in former times, in the past 
quite, fairly, pretty 
self 
so, for that reason, therefore 
sometimes 
still 
still, yet, nor, another, ...else 
straight ahead 
then, at that time 
there 
therefore 
therefore, that's why 
to something, in that direction, there 
einmal 
online 
nur 
sonst 
hinaus 
heraus 
draußen^ 
besonders 
vielleicht 
früher 
ziemlich 
selbst, selber 
also 
manchmal 
immer noch 
noch 
geradeaus 
damals 
dort 
deshalb 
deswegen 
hin 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
69 
Adverbs: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
to the left, on the left 
today, nowadays 
together 
tomorrow 
twice 
unfortunately 
very 
why? 
yesterday 
links 
heute 
zusammen 
morgen 
zweimal 
leider 
sehr 
warum 
gestern 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
70 
Higher ONLY 
Adverbs: Higher ONLY 
English German 
above, upstairs 
actual, actually, in fact 
almost, nearly 
already 
at all, generally 
at least 
at least 
at the back 
at the same time 
away, distant  
beforehand, earlier 
below, downstairs 
by the way, what's more 
completely 
different, differently 
even 
extremely 
finally, after all 
however 
huge, great 
immediately, at once 
oben 
eigentlich 
beinahe 
bereits 
überhaupt 
mindestens 
wenigstens 
hinten 
gleichzeitig 
entfernt 
vorher 
unten 
übrigens 
völlig 
anders 
sogar 
äußerst 
schließlich^ 
jedoch 
riesig 
sofort 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
71 
Adverbs: Higher ONLY 
English German 
in the meantime 
including 
just, now 
moreover, besides, in addition 
nevertheless 
now 
off, away 
on the one hand 
on the other hand 
only, not until 
partly 
past, over 
probably 
rare, rarely 
ready 
recently, the other day 
since then, since 
sometime, some day 
somewhere 
soon 
special, certainly, definitely 
straight, just 
inzwischen 
inklusive 
eben 
außerdem^ 
trotzdem 
nun 
ab 
einerseits 
andererseits 
erst 
teilweise 
vorbei 
wahrscheinlich 
selten 
bereit 
neulich 
seitdem 
irgendwann 
irgendwo 
bald 
bestimmt 
gerade 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
72 
Adverbs: Higher ONLY 
English German 
there, to that place 
though, indeed 
until now 
well, happy, probably 
dahin 
allerdings 
bisher 
wohl 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
73 
Adjectives 
This is the complete list of adjectives included in our vocabulary list, in their masculine 
singular forms. Students should be able to agree in gender and number all of the adjectives 
in this list that follow one of the patterns laid out in the ‘Adjectives’ section of Appendix 2: 
Grammar. For any adjectives that do not follow one of those patterns, after the masculine 
singular form we have listed all the other forms students are expected to learn. 
Foundation and Higher 
Adjectives: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
active, actively 
allergic 
angry, angrily, bad 
Austrian 
automatic, automatically 
bad, badly 
(of) Berlin 
better 
big, tall, great 
bigger 
bisexual 
boring 
born 
British 
broad, broadly 
broken 
aktiv 
allergisch 
böse 
österreichisch 
automatisch 
schlecht 
berliner 
besser 
groß^ 
größer^ 
bisexuell 
langweilig 
geboren 
britisch 
breit 
kaputt 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
74 
Adjectives: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
central, centrally 
cheap, cheaply 
cheap, good 
classic, classical, classically 
clean, cleanly 
clear, clearly 
cold 
colder 
colourful 
comfortable, comfortably 
common, mutual 
complicated, complicatedly 
content, pleased 
cultural, culturally 
dangerous, dangerously 
dark 
dear, expensive, expensively 
deep, deeply 
delicious, deliciously, tasty, tastily 
direct, directly, straight 
dirty, dirtily 
double, twice 
zentral 
billig 
günstig 
klassisch 
sauber 
klar 
kalt 
kälter 
bunt 
bequem 
gemeinsam 
kompliziert 
zufrieden 
kulturell 
gefährlich 
dunkel 
teuer 
tief 
lecker 
direkt 
schmutzig 
doppelt 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
75 
Adjectives: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
dry 
easy, easily, simple, simply, single (ticket) 
easy, light 
eco-friendly 
electric, electrically 
empty 
English 
enormous, enormously 
European 
exact, exactly 
exciting, excitingly, thrilling, tense 
famous 
fantastic, fantastically 
far, widely 
fashionable 
few 
firm, firmly, solid 
foggy 
free (of charge) 
free, freely, available, vacant, 
unoccupied 
fresh, freshly 
trocken 
einfach 
leicht 
umweltfreundlich 
elektrisch 
leer 
englisch 
enorm 
europäisch 
genau 
spannend 
berühmt 
fantastisch 
weit 
modisch 
wenige 
fest 
neblig 
kostenlos 
frei 
 
frisch 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
76 
Adjectives: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
friendly, nice, kind, kindly 
full, fully 
funny, enjoyable 
funny, funnily, strange, strangely 
gay 
general, generally 
German 
global, globally 
good 
great, terrific 
half 
happy, happily, fortunate 
hard 
hard, difficult 
hard-working 
healthier 
healthy, healthily 
heavy, difficult 
her, its, their (f, pl) 
her, its, their (m, nt) 
high, tall 
higher, taller 
freundlich 
voll 
lustig 
komisch 
schwul 
allgemein 
deutsch 
global 
gut 
toll 
halb 
glücklich 
hart 
schwierig 
fleißig^ 
gesünder 
gesund 
schwer 
ihre 
ihr 
hoch 
höher 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
77 
Adjectives: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
historical, historically 
hot   
ideal 
ill, sick 
important, importantly 
impossible 
incredible, incredibly 
interesting 
international, internationally 
kind, dear 
left 
lesbian 
light 
little 
local, locally 
long, for a long time 
longer 
loud, loudly, noisy 
lovely, beautiful, beautifully 
modern 
multicultural 
national, nationally 
historisch 
heiß^ 
ideal 
krank 
wichtig 
unmöglich 
unglaublich 
interessant 
international 
lieb 
link- 
lesbisch 
hell 
wenig 
lokal 
lang, lange 
länger 
laut 
schön 
modern 
multikulturell 
national 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
78 
Adjectives: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
near, nearby, close 
nearer 
necessary 
necessary, essential 
negative 
new 
next (m, f, nt), (pl) 
nice, kind, pretty 
non-binary 
normal 
old 
older 
only, single 
open, openly 
other 
own 
perfect, perfectly 
personal, personally 
poor, poorly 
poorer 
popular 
positive, positively 
nah 
näher 
nötig 
notwendig 
negativ 
neu 
nächst-(er, e, es), nächste 
nett 
nicht binär 
normal 
alt 
älter 
einzig 
offen 
ander 
eigen 
perfekt 
persönlich 
arm 
ärmer 
beliebt 
positiv 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
79 
Adjectives: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
possible 
practical, practically 
(in) private, privately 
professional, professionally, vocational, 
vocationally 
proud (of), proudly 
public, municipal 
pure, clean, clear 
quickly, quick, fast 
quiet, quietly, soft, softly 
quiet, quietly, calm, calmly, peaceful, 
peacefully 
real, actual, really 
real, really, genuine, genuinely 
religious 
rich 
right, correct 
right, correct 
round, around 
sad, sadly 
safe, safely, sure, surely, certain, 
certainly 
sharp, sharply, spicy, spicily 
möglich 
praktisch 
privat 
beruflich 
 
stolz (auf) 
öffentlich 
rein 
schnell 
leise 
ruhig 
 
wirklich 
echt 
religiös 
reich 
recht- 
richtig 
rund 
traurig 
sicher 
 
scharf 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
80 
Adjectives: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
short, brief 
single, individual, only 
slow, slowly 
small 
social, socially 
special 
sporty, athletic 
straight 
strange, strangely, foreign 
strange, weird 
stressed 
strong, strongly 
super 
Swiss, Swiss man 
thick, dense 
thick, fat 
thin, thinly 
tired 
total, totally 
traditional, traditionally 
Turkish 
typical, typically 
kurz 
einzel 
langsam 
klein 
sozial 
besonder 
sportlich 
hetero(sexuell) 
fremd 
seltsam 
gestresst 
stark 
super 
schweizer 
dicht 
dick 
dünn 
müde 
total 
traditionell 
türkisch 
typisch 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
81 
Adjectives: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
usual 
virtual 
warm, warmly 
warmer 
weak, weakly 
well-known, famous 
wet 
whole, all the, quite 
wonderful, wonderfully 
wrong, wrongly, untrue 
years (old) 
young 
younger 
your (formal) (f, pl) 
your (formal) (m, nt) 
your (informal, pl) (f, pl) 
your (informal, pl) (m, nt) 
üblich 
virtuell 
warm 
wärmer 
schwach 
bekannt 
nass 
ganz 
wunderbar 
falsch 
...jährig 
jung 
jünger 
Ihre 
Ihr 
eure 
euer 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
82 
Higher ONLY 
Adjectives: Higher ONLY 
English German 
(on) average 
bad, serious 
(the) best (post-noun) 
(the) biggest 
careful, carefully 
certain, certainly 
clear, clearly 
(the) coldest 
conscious, aware 
current, currently 
dead 
different, diverse 
digital 
disabled 
electronic, electronically 
far, distant 
foreign  
former 
frequent, frequently 
general, generally 
happy, glad 
durchschnittlich 
schlimm 
am besten 
der/die/das größte^ 
vorsichtig 
gewiss 
deutlich 
der/die/das kälteste 
bewusst 
aktuell 
tot 
verschieden 
digital 
behindert 
elektronisch 
fern 
ausländisch 
ehemalig 
häufig 
generell 
froh 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
83 
Adjectives: Higher ONLY 
English German 
(the) highest (post-noun) 
honest, honestly 
independent, independently 
(the) longest 
loose (clothing), relaxed 
low 
low, small 
mad, crazy 
meaningful, meaningfully 
mental, psychological 
(the) most (post-noun) 
most rather, most preferred 
narrow 
narrow, narrowly, close, closely, tight 
(clothing) 
numerous, many 
(the) oldest 
physical, physically 
(the) poorest 
ready, finished 
regular, regularly 
renewable 
am höchsten 
ehrlich 
unabhängig 
der/die/das längste 
locker 
niedrig 
gering 
verrückt 
sinnvoll 
geistig 
am meisten 
am liebsten 
schmal 
eng 
 
zahlreich 
der/die/das älteste 
körperlich 
der/die/das ärmste 
fertig 
regelmäßig^ 
erneuerbar 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
84 
Adjectives: Higher ONLY 
English German 
responsible 
responsible, responsibly 
same, right away, just, immediately, equal 
scarce, in short supply 
serious, seriously, earnest, earnestly 
similar 
so-called 
social, socially 
sour 
strict, strictly 
successful, successfully 
sustainable, sustainably 
sweet, sweetly 
the best (pre-noun) 
the highest (pre-noun) 
the most (pre-noun) 
the next, nearest (post-noun) 
the next, nearest (pre-noun) 
tiring 
true  
unknown 
useful 
zuständig 
verantwortlich 
gleich 
knapp 
ernst 
ähnlich 
sogenannt 
gesellschaftlich 
sauer 
streng 
erfolgreich 
nachhaltig 
süß^ 
der/die/das beste 
der/die/das höchste 
der/die/das meiste 
am nächsten 
der/die/das nächste 
ermüdend 
wahr 
unbekannt 
nützlich 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
85 
Adjectives: Higher ONLY 
English German 
variable, different 
weekly, every week 
whole, entire, comprehensive 
worldwide 
yearly, annual 
(the) youngest 
unterschiedlich 
wöchentlich 
gesamt 
weltweit 
jährlich 
der/die/das jüngste 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
86 
Nouns 
Foundation and Higher 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
accident 
achievement, performance 
activity 
adventure 
age 
air 
airport 
alternative 
animal 
answer, reply 
app  
arm 
art 
article 
artist 
aspect 
athletics, track and field 
aunt 
back 
Unfall (m) 
Leistung (f) 
Aktivität (f) 
Abenteuer (nt) 
Alter (nt) 
Luft (f) 
Flughafen (m) 
Alternative (f) 
Tier (nt) 
Antwort (f) 
App (f) 
Arm (m) 
Kunst (f) 
Artikel (m) 
Künstler (m) 
Aspekt (m) 
Leichtathletik (f) 
Tante (f) 
Rücken (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
87 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
background 
bag, pocket 
ball 
band, group 
bank, bench 
bathroom, bath, spa 
beach 
bed 
bedroom 
bicycle, bike 
bill 
birthday 
boat 
bone 
book 
booking, reservation 
border, frontier 
boss, head, leader 
bottle 
boy 
bread, loaf 
break 
Hintergrund (m) 
Tasche (f) 
Ball (m) 
Band (f) 
Bank (f) 
Bad (nt) 
Strand (m) 
Bett (nt) 
Schlafzimmer (nt) 
Fahrrad/Rad (nt) 
Rechnung (f) 
Geburtstag (m) 
Boot (nt) 
Knochen (m) 
Buch (nt) 
Reservierung (f) 
Grenze (f) 
Chef (m) 
Flasche (f) 
Junge (m) 
Brot (nt) 
Pause (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
88 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
breakfast 
bridge 
brother 
brothers 
brothers and sisters, siblings 
bus 
buses 
café 
cake 
campaign, action 
campsite  
car 
car, carriage 
career 
castle 
cat 
celebrity, star 
centre 
chair 
chance  
change 
change, alteration 
Frühstück (nt) 
Brücke (f) 
Bruder (m) 
Brüder (pl) 
Geschwister (pl) 
Bus (m) 
Busse (pl) 
Café (nt) 
Kuchen (m) 
Aktion (f) 
Campingplatz (m) 
Auto (nt) 
Wagen (m) 
Karriere (f) 
Schloss (nt) 
Katze (f) 
Star (m) 
Zentrum (nt) 
Stuhl (m) 
Chance (f) 
Veränderung (f) 
Änderung (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
89 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
character 
charge, load 
checkout, till 
cheese 
child 
chips 
chocolate 
cinema 
class, year (in school) 
clothing 
club 
coach 
coast 
coffee 
colleague 
colleague 
college, university 
comedy 
communication 
computer 
concentration 
concert  
Charakter (m) 
Ladung (f) 
Kasse (f) 
Käse (m) 
Kind (nt) 
Pommes (frites) (pl) 
Schokolade (f) 
Kino (nt) 
Klasse (f) 
Kleidung (f) 
Club/Klub (m) 
Trainer (m) 
Küste (f) 
Kaffee (m) 
Kollege (m) 
Kollegin (f) 
Hochschule (f) 
Komödie (f) 
Kommunikation (f) 
Computer (m) 
Konzentration (f) 
Konzert (nt) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
90 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
conflict 
contact 
conversation 
corner 
corridor, course 
costs 
country, land, state; countryside 
culture 
cycling 
dad 
daily routine, everyday life 
dance 
danger, risk 
data 
daughter 
daughters 
degree (temperature) 
desire 
detail 
detective story, thriller 
difficulty 
dinner, supper, evening meal 
Konflikt (m) 
Kontakt (m) 
Gespräch (nt) 
Ecke (f) 
Gang (m) 
Kosten (pl) 
Land (nt); aufs / auf dem Land 
Kultur (f) 
Radfahren (nt) 
Papa (m) 
Alltag (m) 
Tanz (m) 
Gefahr (f) 
Daten (pl) 
Tochter (f) 
Töchter (pl) 
Grad (m) 
Lust (f) 
Detail (nt) 
Krimi (m) 
Schwierigkeit (f) 
Abendessen (nt) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
91 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
direction 
disability 
discrimination 
discussion 
distance, route 
doctor 
doctor 
doctor 
documentary 
dog 
door 
double room, twin room 
dream 
dress 
drug 
ear 
ears 
earth 
east 
education 
egg 
electricity, stream, current, river 
Richtung (f) 
Behinderung (f) 
Diskriminierung (f) 
Diskussion (f) 
Strecke (f) 
Doktor (m) 
Arzt (m) 
Ärztin (f) 
Dokumentarfilm (m) 
Hund (m) 
Tür (f) 
Doppelzimmer (nt) 
Traum (m) 
Kleid (nt) 
Droge (f) 
Ohr (nt) 
Ohren (pl) 
Erde (f) 
Osten (m) 
Bildung (f) 
Ei (n) 
Strom (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
92 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
energy, power 
environment 
euro 
exam 
example; for example, e.g. 
exchange 
exchange rate, course 
experience 
eye 
face 
factor 
family 
fan, supporter 
fashion 
fast food 
father 
favourite 
fear 
feeling 
fever, high temperature 
field 
figure, number 
Energie (f) 
Umwelt (f) 
Euro (m) 
Prüfung (f) 
Beispiel (nt); zum Beispiel, z.B. 
Austausch (m) 
Kurs (m) 
Erfahrung (f) 
Auge (nt) 
Gesicht (nt) 
Faktor (m) 
Familie (f) 
Fan (m) 
Mode (f) 
Fastfood (nt)^ 
Vater (m) 
Lieblings- (prefix) 
Angst (f) 
Gefühl (nt) 
Fieber (nt) 
Feld (nt) 
Zahl (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
93 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
film 
finger 
fire 
firm, company, business 
firms, companies, businesses 
fish 
flat, apartment 
flight 
floor (e.g. of a hotel), storey 
food, meal, eating 
foot; on foot, walking 
football 
foreground 
foreign countries; abroad 
form, shape; in shape, fit 
(Swiss) franc 
freedom 
free time, leisure, theme (in ‘theme park’) 
friend, ally, boyfriend 
friend, ally, girlfriend 
fruit 
fun 
Film (m) 
Finger (m) 
Feuer (nt) 
Firma (f) 
Firmen (pl) 
Fisch (m) 
Wohnung (f) 
Flug (m) 
Stock (m) 
Essen (nt) 
Fuß (m); zu Fuß^ 
Fußball (m)^ 
Vordergrund (m) 
Ausland (nt); im / ins Ausland 
Form (f); in Form 
Franken (m) 
Freiheit (f) 
Freizeit (f) 
Freund (m) 
Freundin (f) 
Obst (nt) 
Spaß (m)^ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
94 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
future 
game, match 
games console 
gaming 
garden 
generation 
(the) German, (a) German (m) 
(the, a) German (f) 
Germans, (the) Germans 
girl 
goods 
grandfather 
grandmother 
grandparents 
group, gang 
gym 
hair 
half (e.g. brother) 
hand 
handball 
hands 
hat 
Zukunft (f) 
Spiel (nt) 
Spielkonsole (f) 
Gaming (nt) 
Garten (m) 
Generation (f) 
(der) Deutsche, (ein) Deutscher (m) 
(die, eine) Deutsche (f) 
Deutsche, (die) Deutschen (pl) 
Mädchen (nt) 
Ware (f) 
Großvater (m)^ 
Großmutter (f)^ 
Großeltern (pl) 
Gruppe (f) 
Fitnesszentrum (nt) 
Haar (nt) 
Halb- (prefix) 
Hand (f) 
Handball (m) 
Hände (pl) 
Hut (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
95 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
head   
health 
height, hill 
height, size 
help 
history, story 
holiday, vacation 
holidays, vacation 
homework 
horror 
horse 
hospital 
hotel 
house 
hunger 
ice, ice cream 
idea 
income, pay 
industry 
information 
instrument 
interest 
Kopf (m) 
Gesundheit (f) 
Höhe (f) 
Größe (f)^ 
Hilfe (f) 
Geschichte (f) 
Urlaub (m) 
Ferien (pl) 
Hausaufgabe (f) 
Horror (m) 
Pferd (nt) 
Krankenhaus (nt) 
Hotel (nt) 
Haus (nt) 
Hunger (m) 
Eis (nt) 
Idee (f) 
Einkommen (nt) 
Industrie (f) 
Information (f) 
Instrument (nt) 
Interesse (nt) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
96 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
internet 
interview 
island 
jacket 
jar, glass 
job 
job, position 
journey, trip 
journey, trip  
joy  
kilometre 
kitchen, cuisine 
knee 
lake 
lakes 
language 
laptop 
leg 
lesson, teaching, instruction, classes 
letter 
library 
light 
Internet (nt) 
Interview (nt) 
Insel (f) 
Jacke (f) 
Glas (nt) 
Job (m) 
Position (f) 
Reise (f) 
Fahrt (f) 
Freude (f) 
Kilometer (m) 
Küche (f) 
Knie (nt) 
See (m) 
Seen (pl) 
Sprache (f) 
Laptop (m) or (nt) 
Bein (nt) 
Unterricht (m) 
Brief (m) 
Bibliothek (f) 
Licht (nt) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
97 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
line 
list 
love 
lunch 
main 
man, husband 
manager 
map (street) 
market 
maths 
means of transport 
meat 
media 
medicine 
metre 
middle, centre 
mobile phone 
moment; at the moment 
money 
mother 
mountain 
mouth 
Linie (f) 
Liste (f) 
Liebe (f) 
Mittagessen (nt) 
Haupt- (prefix)  
Mann (m) 
Manager (m) 
Straßenplan (m)^ 
Markt (m) 
Mathe(matik) (f) 
Verkehrsmittel (nt) 
Fleisch (nt) 
Medien (pl) 
Medizin (f) 
Meter (m) 
Mitte (f) 
Handy (nt) 
Moment (m); im Moment 
Geld (nt) 
Mutter (f) 
Berg (m) 
Mund (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
98 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
Mr, gentleman 
Mrs, wife, woman 
mum 
muscle 
museum 
museums 
music 
musical 
name 
nature, countryside 
neck, throat 
neighbour 
network 
network 
news, message 
newspaper 
noise 
north 
nose 
novel 
number 
occupation, job, profession 
Herr (m) 
Frau (f) 
Mama (f) 
Muskel (f) 
Museum (nt) 
Museen (pl) 
Musik (f) 
Musical (nt) 
Name (m) 
Natur (f) 
Hals (m) 
Nachbar (m) 
Netz (nt) 
Netzwerk (nt) 
Nachricht (f) 
Zeitung (f) 
Geräusch (nt) 
Norden (m) 
Nase (f) 
Roman (m) 
Nummer (f) 
Beruf (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
99 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
offer 
office 
opinion 
pain 
pains 
pair, couple 
paper 
parents 
park 
part  
partner 
party 
passport 
password 
past 
pen 
people 
percent 
performance, idea, introduction 
person 
person, human being 
pharmacy, chemist's 
Angebot (nt) 
Büro (nt) 
Meinung (f) 
Schmerz (m) 
Schmerzen (pl) 
Paar (nt) 
Papier (nt) 
Eltern (pl) 
Park (m) 
Teil (m) 
Partner (m) 
Party (f) 
Pass (m) 
Passwort (nt) 
Vergangenheit (f) 
Kuli (m) 
Leute (pl) 
Prozent (nt) 
Vorstellung (f) 
Person (f) 
Mensch (m) 
Apotheke (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
100 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
photograph 
picture 
piece, play 
place, location, town 
plan 
plan, project 
plane, aeroplane 
plant 
plastic 
player 
police   
police officer 
pop music 
possibility 
post office 
practice, exercise 
present, gift 
price, prize 
problem, difficulty 
programme 
protection 
public 
Foto (nt) 
Bild (nt) 
Stück (nt) 
Ort (m) 
Plan (m) 
Projekt (nt) 
Flugzeug (nt) 
Pflanze (f) 
Plastik (nt) 
Spieler (m) 
Polizei (f) 
Polizist (m) 
Popmusik (f) 
Möglichkeit (f) 
Post (f) 
Übung (f) 
Geschenk (nt) 
Preis (m) 
Problem (nt) 
Sendung (f) 
Schutz (m) 
Öffentlichkeit (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
101 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
pullover, jumper 
pupil, student (school) 
quality 
quarter 
question 
rabbit 
racism 
railway, rail 
rain 
reason 
recycling 
region 
region, area 
religion 
rest, remainder; leftovers 
restaurant 
return ticket 
right 
risk 
river 
rock 
role 
Pullover/Pulli (m) 
Schüler (m) 
Qualität (f) 
Viertel (nt) 
Frage (f) 
Kaninchen (nt) 
Rassismus (m) 
Bahn (f) 
Regen (m) 
Grund (m) 
Recycling (nt) 
Region (f) 
Gegend (f) 
Religion (f) 
Rest (m); Reste 
Restaurant (nt) 
Rückfahrkarte (f) 
Recht (nt) 
Risiko (nt) 
Fluss (m) 
Rockmusik (f), Rock 
Rolle (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
102 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
room  
room, space 
rule 
sand 
sausage 
sausages 
school 
science 
sea, ocean 
search 
series 
service 
sexism  
ship, boat 
shirt 
shoe 
shop 
shop, business, trade 
shopping centre 
shoulder 
side, page 
silence, peace 
Zimmer (nt) 
Raum (m) 
Regel (f) 
Sand (m) 
Wurst (f) 
Würste (pl) 
Schule (f) 
Wissenschaft (f) 
Meer (nt) 
Suche (f) 
Serie (f) 
Service (m) 
Sexismus (m) 
Schiff (nt) 
Hemd (nt) 
Schuh (m) 
Laden (m) 
Geschäft (nt) 
Einkaufszentrum (nt) 
Schulter (f) 
Seite (f) 
Ruhe (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
103 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
singer 
single room 
sister 
situation 
situation, location 
skateboard 
sky 
smartphone 
snow 
sock 
son 
song 
south 
speaker 
sport 
square, seat, space, place 
stadium 
stage 
stairs, staircase 
start 
station 
step- 
Sänger (m) 
Einzelzimmer (nt) 
Schwester (f) 
Situation (f) 
Lage (f) 
Skateboard (nt) 
Himmel (m) 
Smartphone (nt) 
Schnee (m) 
Socke (f) 
Sohn (m) 
Lied (nt) 
Sϋden (m) 
Sprecher (m) 
Sport (m) 
Platz (m) 
Stadion (nt) 
Bühne (f) 
Treppe (f) 
Start (m) 
Bahnhof (m) 
Stief- (prefix) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
104 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
stomach, belly 
streaming 
street, road 
strength 
strength, power, energy 
student (university) 
studies 
study 
subject 
suitcase 
sun 
supermarket 
swimming pool 
system 
table 
tablet 
tea 
teacher 
team 
team 
(tele)phone; on the phone 
television, TV; on television, on TV 
Bauch (m) 
Streaming (nt) 
Straße (f)^ 
Stärke (f) 
Kraft (f) 
Student (m) 
Studium (nt) 
Studie (f) 
Fach (nt) 
Koffer (m) 
Sonne (f) 
Supermarkt (m) 
Schwimmbad (nt) 
System (nt) 
Tisch (m) 
Tablet (nt) 
Tee (m) 
Lehrer (m) 
Team (nt) 
Mannschaft (f) 
Telefon (nt); am Telefon 
Fernsehen (nt); im Fernsehen 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
105 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
temperature 
tennis 
tent 
test 
text 
theatre, drama 
theme, topic, subject 
themes, topics, subjects 
thing 
thing, issue 
third 
thirst 
ticket 
ticket, card, menu 
tie 
time, occasion 
tooth 
tourist 
tourist information office 
town, city 
towns, cities 
tradition 
Temperatur (f) 
Tennis (m) 
Zelt (nt) 
Test (m) 
Text (m) 
Theater (nt) 
Thema (nt) 
Themen (nt) 
Ding (nt) 
Sache (f) 
Drittel (nt) 
Durst (f) 
Fahrkarte (f) 
Karte (f) 
Krawatte (f) 
Mal (nt) 
Zahn (m) 
Tourist (m) 
Touristeninformation (f) 
Stadt (f) 
Städte (pl) 
Tradition (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
106 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
train 
training, education 
transgender 
tree 
trousers 
truth 
t-shirt 
type, guy 
uncle 
underground 
understanding 
uniform 
union 
university 
vegan 
vegetable, vegetables 
vegetarian 
video 
village 
virus (computer) 
visit 
visitor 
Zug (m) 
Ausbildung (f) 
Transgender- (mf) 
Baum (m) 
Hose (f) 
Wahrheit (f) 
T-Shirt (nt) 
Typ (m) 
Onkel (m) 
U-Bahn (f) 
Verständnis (nt) 
Uniform (f) 
Union (f) 
Universität (f)/Uni 
Veganer (m) 
Gemüse (nt) 
Vegetarier (m) 
Video (nt) 
Dorf (nt) 
Virus (m) 
Besuch (m) 
Besucher (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
107 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
voice, vote 
waiter 
wall 
water 
way, route, road, path 
weather 
website 
west 
wheelchair 
wifi 
wind 
window 
wood, forest 
word 
work 
work, test, employment 
workbook, exercise book 
workplace, position, job 
world 
young people, (the) young people 
(the) young person, teenager, (a) young 
person, teenager (m) 
Stimme (f) 
Kellner (m) 
Mauer (f) 
Wasser (nt) 
Weg (m) 
Wetter (nt) 
Webseite (f) 
Westen (m) 
Rollstuhl (m) 
WLAN (nt) 
Wind (m) 
Fenster (nt) 
Wald (m) 
Wort (nt) 
Werk (nt) 
Arbeit (f) 
Heft (nt) 
Stelle (f) 
Welt (f) 
Jugendliche, (die) Jugendlichen (pl) 
(der) Jugendliche, (ein) Jugendlicher (m) 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
108 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
(the, a) young person, teenager (f) (die, eine) Jugendliche (f) 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
109 
Higher ONLY 
Nouns: Higher ONLY 
English German 
actor 
(the) adult, (a) adult (m) 
(the, a) adult (f) 
adults, (the) adults 
advantage, pro 
appliance, piece of equipment 
area 
argument, fight 
arrival 
association, club 
attention 
attitude 
bag 
bakery 
beginning; in the beginning 
blood 
body 
brand 
building 
bullying 
capital city 
Schauspieler (m) 
(der) Erwachsene, (ein) Erwachsener (m) 
(die, eine) Erwachsene (f) 
Erwachsene, (die) Erwachsenen (pl) 
Vorteil (m) 
Gerät (nt) 
Bereich (m) 
Streit (m) 
Ankunft (f) 
Verein (m) 
Aufmerksamkeit (f) 
Einstellung (f) 
Tüte (f) 
Bäckerei (f) 
Beginn (m); zu Beginn 
Blut (nt) 
Körper (m) 
Marke (f) 
Gebäude (nt) 
Mobbing (nt) 
Hauptstadt (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
110 
Nouns: Higher ONLY 
English German 
case 
cash 
cause 
ceiling, blanket 
change 
channel 
characteristic, quality 
choice 
circle, district 
citizen 
climate 
climate change 
company, enterprise, business 
competition 
competition 
content, plot 
contribution 
countryside, scenery, landscape 
credit card 
crisis 
customer 
customer 
Fall (m) 
Bargeld (nt) 
Ursache (f) 
Decke (f) 
Kleingeld (nt) 
Programm (nt) 
Eigenschaft (f) 
Wahl (f) 
Kreis (m) 
Bürger (m) 
Klima (nt) 
Klimawandel (m) 
Unternehmen (nt) 
Wettbewerb (m) 
Konkurrenz (f) 
Inhalt (m) 
Beitrag (m) 
Landschaft (f) 
Kreditkarte (f) 
Krise (f) 
Kunde (m) 
Kundin (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
111 
Nouns: Higher ONLY 
English German 
cybercrime 
damage 
decision 
departure 
dessert 
destination, goal 
difference 
disadvantage, con 
dish, course 
doubt 
drink 
earbuds 
edge 
effect 
employee 
equipment, gear 
event 
event 
excursion, trip, outing 
exercise, movement 
exhibition 
expert 
Cyberkriminalität (f) 
Schaden (m) 
Entscheidung (f) 
Abfahrt (f) 
Nachtisch (m) 
Ziel (nt) 
Unterschied (m) 
Nachteil (m) 
Gericht (nt) 
Zweifel (m) 
Getränk (nt) 
Ohrhörer (pl) 
Rand (m) 
Wirkung (f) 
Mitarbeiter (m) 
Ausrüstung (f) 
Ereignis (nt) 
Veranstaltung (f) 
Ausflug (m) 
Bewegung (f) 
Ausstellung (f) 
Experte (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
112 
Nouns: Higher ONLY 
English German 
expert 
explanation 
fact 
festival, holiday, fair, party 
fight, struggle 
floor, ground 
flower 
fork 
furnishings 
glasses 
grade, note 
grandad 
grandma, granny 
half 
headphones 
headteacher, director 
heart 
helmet 
higher education 
homeland, home country 
hope 
impression 
Expertin (f) 
Erklärung (f) 
Tatsache (f) 
Fest (nt) 
Kampf (m) 
Boden (m) 
Blume (f) 
Gabel (f) 
Einrichtung (f) 
Brille (f) 
Note (f) 
Opa (m) 
Oma (f) 
Hälfte (f) 
Kopfhörer (pl) 
Direktor (m) 
Herz (nt) 
Helm (m) 
Hochschulbildung (f) 
Heimat (f) 
Hoffnung (f) 
Eindruck (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
113 
Nouns: Higher ONLY 
English German 
influence 
inhabitant, resident 
initiative 
integration 
kilo(gram) 
knife 
knowledge 
law 
leaving qualification 
look, view, glance 
loss 
luck 
luggage 
majority 
material, fabric 
meal 
medicine 
member 
memory 
milk 
minority 
mistake, error 
Einfluss (m) 
Einwohner (m) 
Initiative (f) 
Integration (f) 
Kilo(gramm) (nt) 
Messer (nt) 
Kenntnis (f) 
Gesetz (nt) 
Abschluss (m) 
Blick (m) 
Verlust (m) 
Glück (nt) 
Gepäck (nt) 
Mehrheit (f) 
Stoff (m) 
Mahlzeit (f) 
(Arznei)mittel (nt) 
Mitglied (nt) 
Erinnerung (f) 
Milch (f) 
Minderheit (f) 
Fehler (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
114 
Nouns: Higher ONLY 
English German 
moment 
mood, atmosphere 
object 
opportunity 
opposite; on the other hand 
peace 
phase 
piece of bread (with butter), sandwich 
plate 
pollution 
population 
present 
pressure 
product 
progress 
public, audience 
purpose 
quantity, amount, crowd 
reality 
refugee 
relationship 
relationship 
Augenblick (m) 
Stimmung (f) 
Gegenstand (m) 
Gelegenheit (f) 
Gegenteil (nt); im Gegenteil 
Frieden (m) 
Phase (f) 
Butterbrot (nt) 
Teller (m) 
Verschmutzung (f) 
Bevölkerung (f) 
Gegenwart (f) 
Druck (m) 
Produkt (nt) 
Fortschritt (m) 
Publikum (nt) 
Zweck (m) 
Menge (f) 
Wirklichkeit (f) 
Flüchtling (m) 
Beziehung (f) 
Verhältnis (nt) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
115 
Nouns: Higher ONLY 
English German 
relative, relation 
responsibility 
result 
result, consequence 
review, criticism 
risks 
role model 
roof 
scene 
schnitzel, escalope 
screen, monitor 
security, safety 
sense, meaning 
sheet, leaf 
sign 
Sixth Form, college 
skill, ability, capability 
skin 
society, company 
solution 
sound, tone 
speech 
Verwandte (m/f) 
Verantwortung (f) 
Ergebnis (nt) 
Folge (f) 
Kritik (f) 
Risiken (pl) 
Vorbild (nt) 
Dach (nt) 
Szene (f) 
Schnitzel (nt) 
Bildschirm (m) 
Sicherheit (f) 
Sinn (m) 
Blatt (nt) 
Zeichen (nt) 
Oberstufe (f) 
Fähigkeit (f) 
Haut (f) 
Gesellschaft (f) 
Lösung (f) 
Ton (m) 
Rede (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
116 
Nouns: Higher ONLY 
English German 
spoon 
star 
starter 
state, condition 
style 
success 
suggestion, proposal 
support 
surroundings 
suspense, tension 
task, assignment, exercise 
the good (thing) 
thought 
timetable 
tin, can 
title 
traffic 
tram 
treatment 
twin 
type, kind, species 
value, worth 
Löffel (m) 
Stern (m) 
Vorspeise (f) 
Zustand (m) 
Stil (m) 
Erfolg (m) 
Vorschlag (m) 
Unterstützung (f) 
Umgebung (f) 
Spannung (f) 
Aufgabe (f) 
das Gute (nt) 
Gedanke (m) 
Stundenplan (m) 
Dose (f) 
Titel (m) 
Verkehr (m) 
Straßenbahn (f) 
Behandlung (f) 
Zwilling (m) 
Art (f) 
Wert (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
117 
Nouns: Higher ONLY 
English German 
vehicle 
victim 
victory 
viewer, audience member 
violence, force 
wall 
waste, rubbish 
way, manner 
while 
wish, desire 
worry 
writer 
youth, young people 
Fahrzeug (nt) 
Opfer (nt) 
Sieg (m) 
Zuschauer (m) 
Gewalt (f) 
Wand (f) 
Müll (m) 
Weise (f) 
Weile (f) 
Wunsch (m) 
Sorge (f) 
Schriftsteller (m) 
Jugend (f) 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
118 
Verbs 
Students are required to know the conjugated forms of these verbs following the 
regular patterns in the tenses outlined at each tier in the ‘Verbs’ section of Appendix 2: 
Grammar. They are also required to know some irregular inflected forms: where this is 
the case, we have marked the infinitive form with an asterisk (*) and then set out the 
required irregular inflected forms, per tier, in separate tables below. 
For infinitives, as well as for the present and imperfect tenses, students are expected to 
know both the English simple (e.g. infinitive to do; present I do; imperfect I did, I used to 
do) and English continuous (e.g. infinitive to be doing; present I am doing; imperfect I was 
doing) translations. We have only listed the English simple translations in the table below 
for simplicity. 
Foundation and Higher 
Verbs: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
to accept 
to allow 
to answer 
to answer, reply (to) 
to arrive 
to ask 
to be 
to be (situated) 
to be able to, can 
to be allowed to, may 
to be called, mean 
to be correct 
akzeptieren 
erlauben 
beantworten 
antworten (auf) 
ankommen 
fragen 
sein* 
sich befinden 
können* 
dürfen* 
heißen*^ 
stimmen 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
119 
Verbs: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
to be happy (about), make happy, please; 
to look forward to 
to become | (we) become | (we) will (aux) 
| (they) become | (they) will (aux) | (you 
(formal)) become | (you (formal)) will (aux) 
to begin, start 
to break 
to bring 
to bring along 
to buy 
to call, phone 
to call, shout 
to celebrate 
to change 
to change, alter 
to change, exchange 
to chat online 
to choose, vote 
to climb, rise, increase 
to close, shut 
to collect 
to come | coming 
to come back, return 
(sich) freuen (über); sich freuen auf 
 
werden* 
 
 
beginnen* 
brechen* 
bringen* 
mitbringen 
kaufen 
anrufen 
rufen 
feiern 
verändern 
ändern 
wechseln 
chatten 
wählen 
steigen 
schließen^ 
sammeln 
kommen 
zurückkommen 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
120 
Verbs: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
to come from 
to compare 
to concentrate (on) 
to cook 
to cost 
to cry, weep 
to dance 
to describe 
to discuss 
to do, make 
to download 
to drink 
to earn, deserve 
to eat 
to end, finish 
to fall 
to find 
to fit, suit 
to forbid 
to forget 
to function, work 
to get married, marry 
stammen (aus) 
vergleichen 
(sich) konzentrieren (auf) 
kochen 
kosten 
weinen 
tanzen 
beschreiben 
diskutieren (über) 
machen 
herunterladen 
trinken 
verdienen 
essen* 
enden 
fallen* 
finden 
passen 
verbieten 
vergessen* 
funktionieren 
heiraten 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
121 
Verbs: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
to get to know 
to get up, stand up 
to give 
to go (by transport), drive, travel 
to go camping 
to go, walk 
to happen 
to have 
to have to, must 
to hear, listen (to) 
to help 
to hike 
to hire, rent 
to hope 
to improve, make better, get better 
to inform 
to interest; to be interested in 
to know 
to know (something) 
to land 
to last 
to laugh 
kennenlernen^ 
aufstehen 
geben* 
fahren* 
zelten 
gehen* 
passieren 
haben* 
müssen* 
hören 
helfen* 
wandern 
mieten 
hoffen 
(sich) verbessern 
informieren 
interessieren; sich interessieren für 
kennen 
wissen* 
landen 
dauern 
lachen 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
122 
Verbs: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
to lay, put 
to lead, guide 
to learn 
to leave 
to let, allow, leave 
to like 
to listen 
to live 
to live, stay 
to look for, seek 
to look (like), to appear 
to lose 
to love 
to mean 
to meet 
to miss (e.g. the bus) 
to move, exercise 
to need, require 
to open 
to open, start 
to order 
to organise 
legen 
führen 
lernen 
verlassen 
lassen* 
mögen* 
zuhören 
leben 
wohnen 
suchen 
aussehen 
verlieren 
lieben 
bedeuten 
(sich) treffen (mit)* 
verpassen 
(sich) bewegen 
brauchen 
öffnen 
eröffnen 
bestellen 
organisieren 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
123 
Verbs: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
to ought to, be supposed to, should 
to paint 
to pass (an exam) 
to pay 
to pay 
to plan 
to play 
to please 
to practise 
to present, show 
to protect 
to pull, move 
to put (in) 
to put on, attract, get (oneself) dressed 
to put out, switch off 
to put, place 
to rain 
to read 
to receive, get 
to recommend 
to recycle 
to reduce 
sollen* 
malen 
bestehen 
bezahlen 
zahlen 
planen 
spielen 
gefallen* 
üben 
präsentieren  
schützen 
ziehen 
stecken 
(sich) anziehen 
ausmachen 
stellen 
regnen* 
lesen* 
bekommen 
empfehlen 
recyceln 
reduzieren 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
124 
Verbs: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
to reserve, book 
to respect 
to run 
to save 
to save (e.g. money) 
to say, tell 
to see, watch, look 
to sell 
to send 
to serve 
to set, place, put; to sit down 
to share 
to shine, seem, appear 
to shop 
to show 
to sing 
to sit 
to sleep 
to smile 
to smoke 
to snow 
to speak 
reservieren 
respektieren 
laufen* 
retten 
sparen 
sagen 
sehen* 
verkaufen 
schicken 
bedienen 
setzen; sich setzen; sich hinsetzen 
teilen 
scheinen 
einkaufen 
zeigen 
singen 
sitzen 
schlafen* 
lächeln 
rauchen 
schneien 
sprechen* 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
125 
Verbs: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
to spend (time) 
to stand 
to stay, remain 
to step (on) 
to stop, hold 
to stream 
to study (at university) 
to swim 
to take 
to take along, bring along 
to talk 
to tell 
to think 
to think, believe 
to think, have an opinion 
to throw 
to travel 
to try 
to try; to try on; to try out 
to understand; to get on with 
to use 
to visit, attend (school) 
verbringen 
stehen* 
bleiben 
treten (auf)* 
halten* 
streamen 
studieren 
schwimmen* 
nehmen* 
mitnehmen 
reden 
erzählen 
denken* 
glauben 
meinen 
werfen* 
reisen 
versuchen 
probieren; anprobieren; ausprobieren 
verstehen; sich verstehen mit 
benutzen 
besuchen 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
126 
Verbs: Foundation and Higher 
English German 
to wait (for) 
to (go for a) walk, stroll 
to want (to) 
to watch television 
to watch, look at 
to wear, have on 
to wear, carry 
to win 
to work 
to write 
warten (auf) 
spazieren (gehen) 
wollen* 
fernsehen 
ansehen, sich ansehen 
anhaben 
tragen* 
gewinnen* 
arbeiten 
schreiben 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
127 
Higher ONLY 
Verbs: Higher ONLY 
English German 
to achieve, perform, do 
to amuse oneself, chat 
to apologise, excuse 
to appear (on stage) 
to avoid 
to be; to feel 
to be enough/sufficient 
to be silent 
to become | (we) become | (we) will (aux) 
| (they) become | (they) will (aux) | (you 
(formal)) become | (you (formal)) will (aux) 
to begin, start 
to belong (to) 
to bring 
to build 
to call, shout 
to care (for) 
to cause 
to chat 
to check, control 
to choose, select 
to climb, rise, increase 
leisten 
(sich) unterhalten  
(sich) entschuldigen 
auftreten 
vermeiden 
sein; sich (dat)....sein* 
genügen 
schweigen 
werden* 
 
 
beginnen* 
gehören 
bringen* 
bauen 
rufen* 
pflegen 
verursachen 
plaudern 
kontrollieren 
auswählen 
steigen* 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
128 
Verbs: Higher ONLY 
English German 
to close, shut 
to come 
to complain 
to contain 
to continue, go on 
to contribute to 
to convince 
to count 
to criticise 
to dare, risk 
to decide 
to decide 
to decrease, reduce 
to deliver, supply 
to destroy 
to develop 
to disappear 
to discover 
to do, put 
to draw 
to dream 
to drink 
schließen*^ 
kommen* 
sich beschweren 
enthalten 
weitergehen 
beitragen zu 
überzeugen 
zählen 
kritisieren 
wagen 
entscheiden 
beschließen^ 
abnehmen 
liefern 
zerstören 
entwickeln 
verschwinden* 
entdecken 
tun* 
zeichnen 
träumen 
trinken* 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
129 
Verbs: Higher ONLY 
English German 
to drive, pursue (do sport) 
to eat 
to end 
to enjoy 
to excite, upset, annoy 
to exist 
to expect 
to experience 
to experience, find out 
to explain 
to express (oneself) 
to fall 
to fear; be afraid of 
to feel 
to fight, struggle 
to fill (in) 
to find 
to fly 
to follow 
to get, receive 
to give 
to give (as a present) 
treiben 
essen* 
beenden 
genießen^ 
aufregen 
existieren 
erwarten 
erleben 
erfahren 
erklären 
(sich) äußern^ 
fallen* 
fürchten; sich fürchten vor 
(sich) fühlen 
kämpfen 
(aus)füllen 
finden* 
fliegen* 
folgen 
kriegen 
geben* 
schenken 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
130 
Verbs: Higher ONLY 
English German 
to give up 
to go (by transport), drive, travel 
to go, walk 
to happen 
to have 
to help 
to hide 
to increase 
to injure (oneself), hurt 
to inspire, be enthusiastic 
to intend, plan 
to introduce (oneself), imagine 
to invite 
to know 
to know (something) 
to lack, be absent, miss 
to let, allow, leave 
to lie, be lying (down), be situated 
to look at, consider 
to look at, watch 
to maintain, claim 
to manage 
aufgeben 
fahren* 
gehen* 
geschehen* 
haben* 
helfen* 
(sich) verstecken 
zunehmen 
(sich) verletzen 
begeistern 
vorhaben 
(sich) vorstellen 
einladen* 
kennen* 
wissen* 
fehlen 
lassen* 
liegen* 
betrachten 
anschauen, sich anschauen 
behaupten 
schaffen 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
131 
Verbs: Higher ONLY 
English German 
to mention 
to name, call; to be called 
to notice, remark, comment 
to observe, watch 
to offer 
to own 
to perform 
to prepare 
to prevent, hinder 
to produce 
to promise 
to pull, move 
to reach, catch (e.g. the bus) 
to receive 
to recognise 
to record 
to remind; to remember 
to repeat 
to request, ask (for) 
to return 
to see, watch, look 
to separate 
erwähnen 
nennen; sich nennen* 
bemerken 
beobachten 
(an)bieten 
besitzen 
aufführen 
vorbereiten 
verhindern 
produzieren 
versprechen 
ziehen* 
erreichen 
erhalten 
erkennen 
aufnehmen 
erinnern; sich erinnern an 
wiederholen 
bitten (um)* 
zurückkehren 
sehen* 
trennen 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
132 
Verbs: Higher ONLY 
English German 
to shine, seem, appear 
to sing 
to sit 
to smell 
to solve 
to sound, ring 
to speak 
to spend (money), to give out 
to spend the night, stay 
to stand 
to start 
to start, found 
to stay, remain 
to stop 
to succeed 
to suffer 
to suggest 
to support 
to surprise 
to survive 
to take 
to take part in, participate in 
scheinen* 
singen* 
sitzen* 
riechen 
lösen 
klingen 
sprechen* 
ausgeben 
übernachten 
stehen* 
anfangen* 
gründen 
bleiben* 
aufhören 
gelingen 
leiden* 
vorschlagen 
unterstützen 
überraschen 
überleben 
nehmen 
teilnehmen an 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
133 
Verbs: Higher ONLY 
English German 
to take place 
to taste 
to teach 
to test, examine, check 
to thank 
to think 
to threaten 
to throw 
to train, educate 
to translate 
to treat 
to trust 
to understand; to get on with 
to use 
to view, visit 
to want, wish 
to warn 
to watch, look 
to worry, care (about) 
to write 
stattfinden 
schmecken 
unterrichten 
prüfen 
danken 
denken* 
drohen 
werfen* 
ausbilden 
übersetzen 
behandeln 
vertrauen 
verstehen; sich verstehen mit* 
nutzen 
besichtigen 
wünschen, sich wünschen 
warnen 
schauen 
sich sorgen (um) 
schreiben* 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
134 
Irregular inflected verb forms: Higher and Foundation 
 
English German  
to be sein 
(I) am 
(you (sing informal)) are 
(she, he, it, one) is 
(we) are | (they) are | (you (formal)) are 
(you (pl informal)) are 
(I) was | (I) used to be | (she, he, it, one) 
was | (she, he, it, one) used to be 
(we) were | (we) used to be | (they) were 
| (they) used to be | (you (formal)) were | 
(you (formal)) used to be 
(you (sing informal)) were | (you (sing 
informal)) used to be 
(you (pl informal)) were | (you (pl 
informal)) used to be 
bin 
bist 
ist 
sind 
seid 
war 
 
waren 
 
 
warst 
 
wart 
to be able to, can können 
(I) am able to, can | (she, he, it, one) is 
able to, can 
(you (sing informal)) are able to, can 
(I) was able to, could | (she, he, it, one) 
was able to, could 
(you (sing informal)) were able to, could 
kann 
 
kannst 
konnte 
 
konntest 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
135 
English German  
to be allowed to, may dürfen 
(I) am allowed to, may | (she, he, it, one) 
is allowed to, may 
(you (sing informal)) are allowed to, may 
(I) was allowed to | (she, he, it, one) was 
allowed to 
(you (sing informal)) were allowed to 
darf 
 
darfst 
durfte 
 
durftest 
to be called, mean heißen^ 
(you (sing informal)) are called | (he, she, 
it) is called 
heißt^ 
to become werden 
(you (sing informal)) become | (you (sing 
informal)) will (aux) 
(she, he, it, one) becomes | (she, he, it, 
one) will (aux) 
(we) become | (we) will (aux) | (they) 
become | (they) will (aux) | (you (formal)) 
become | (you (formal)) will (aux) 
(you (pl informal)) become | (you (pl 
informal)) will (aux) 
wirst 
 
wird 
 
werden 
 
 
werdet 
to begin, start beginnen 
began, started | (have, has) begun, 
started 
(aux) … begonnen 
to break brechen 
(you (sing informal)) break 
(he, she, it) breaks 
brichst 
bricht 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
136 
English German  
to bring bringen 
brought | (have, has) brought (aux) … gebracht 
to eat essen 
(you (sing informal)) eat | (he, she, it) eats 
ate | (have, has) eaten 
isst 
(aux) … gegessen 
to fall fallen 
(you (sing informal)) fall 
(he, she, it) falls 
fällst 
fällt 
to forget vergessen 
(you (sing informal)) forget | (he, she, it) 
forgets 
vergisst 
to give geben 
(you (sing informal)) give 
(he, she, it) gives 
gibst 
gibt 
to go, walk gehen 
went, walked | (have, has) gone, walked (aux) … gegangen 
to go (by transport), drive, travel fahren 
(you (sing informal)) go (by transport), 
drive, travel 
(he, she, it) goes (by transport), drives, 
travels 
fährst 
 
fährt 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
137 
English German  
to have haben 
(you (sing informal)) have 
(she, he, it, one) has 
(I) had | (I) used to have | (she, he, it, 
one) had | (she, he, it, one) used to have 
(you (sing informal)) had | (you (sing 
informal)) used to have 
(we) had | (we) used to have | (they) had 
| (they) used to have | (you (formal)) had 
| (you (formal)) used to have 
(you (pl informal)) had | (you (pl 
informal)) used to have 
hast 
hat 
hatte 
 
hattest 
 
hatten 
 
 
hattet 
to have to, must müssen 
(I) have to, must | (she, he, it, one) has to, 
must 
(you (sing informal)) have to, must 
(I) had to | (she, he, it, one) had to 
(you (sing informal)) had to 
muss 
 
musst 
musste 
musstest 
to help helfen 
(you (sing informal)) help 
(he, she, it) helps 
hilfst 
hilft 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
138 
English German  
to know (something) wissen 
(I) know (something) | (she, he, it, one) 
knows (something) 
(you (sing informal)) know (something) 
(we) know (something) | (they) know 
(something) | (you (formal)) know 
(something) 
knew (something) | (has, have) known 
(something) 
weiß^ 
 
weißt^ 
wissen 
 
(aux) … gewusst 
to let, allow, leave lassen 
(you (sing informal)) let, allow, leave | (he, 
she, it) lets, allows, leaves 
lässt 
to like mögen 
(I) like | (she, he, it, one) likes  
(you (sing informal)) like 
(I) liked | (she, he, it, one) liked 
(you (sing informal)) liked 
(I) would like (to) | (she, he, it, one) would 
like (to) 
(you (sing informal)) would like (to) 
(we) would like (to) | (you (formal)) would 
like (to) | (they) would like (to)  
(you (pl informal)) would like (to) 
mag 
magst 
mochte 
mochtest 
möchte 
möchtest 
möchten 
möchtet 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
139 
English German  
to meet (sich) treffen (mit) 
(you (sing informal)) meet 
(he, she, it) meets 
triffst 
trifft 
to ought to, be supposed to, should sollen 
(I) ought to, am supposed to, should | 
(she, he, it, one) ought to, is supposed to, 
should 
(you (sing informal)) ought to, are 
supposed to, should 
(I) was supposed to | (she, he, it, one) 
was supposed to | (I) should | (she, he, it, 
one) should 
(you (sing informal)) were supposed to | 
(you (sing informal)) should 
soll 
 
 
sollst 
 
sollte 
 
 
solltest 
to please gefallen 
(you (sing informal)) please 
(he, she, it) pleases 
gefällst 
gefällt 
to rain regnen 
(it) rains, is raining regnet 
to read lesen 
(you (sing informal)) read, (he, she, it) 
reads 
liest 
to run laufen 
(you (sing informal)) run 
(he, she, it) runs 
läufst 
läuft 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
140 
English German  
to see, watch, look sehen 
(you (sing informal)) see, watch, look 
(he, she, it) sees, watches, looks 
siehst 
sieht 
to sleep schlafen 
(you (sing informal)) sleep 
(he, she, it) sleeps 
schläfst 
schläft 
to speak sprechen 
(you (sing informal)) speak 
(he, she, it) speaks 
sprichst 
spricht 
to stand stehen 
stood | (have, has) stood (aux) … gestanden 
to step (on) treten (auf) 
(he, she, it) steps (on) tritt (auf) 
to stop, hold halten 
(you (sing informal)) stop, hold 
(he, she, it) stops, holds 
hältst 
hält 
to swim schwimmen 
swam | (have, has) swum (aux) … geschwommen 
to take nehmen 
(you (sing informal)) take 
(he, she, it) takes 
took | (have, has) taken 
nimmst 
nimmt 
(aux) … genommen 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
141 
English German  
to think denken 
thought | (have, has) thought (aux) … gedacht 
to throw werfen 
(you (sing informal)) throw 
(he, she, it) throws 
wirfst 
wirft 
to want (to) wollen 
(I) want (to) | (she, he, it, one) wants (to) 
(you (sing informal)) want (to) 
(I) wanted (to) | (she, he, it, one) wanted 
(to) 
(you (sing informal)) wanted (to) 
will 
willst 
wollte 
 
wolltest 
to wear, carry tragen 
(you (sing informal)) wear, carry 
(he, she, it) wears, carries 
trägst 
trägt 
to win gewinnen 
won | (have, has) won (aux) … gewonnen 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
142 
Irregular inflected verb forms: Higher ONLY 
 
English German  
to be; to feel sein; sich (dat)....sein 
(I) have been 
(you (sing informal)) have been 
(she, he, it, one) has been 
(we) have been | (they) have been | (you 
(formal)) have been 
(you (pl informal)) have been | Be! (pl 
informal) 
Be...! (sing informal) 
Be...! (formal) 
(I, she, he, it) were | (I, she, he, it) would 
be 
bin 
bist 
ist 
sind 
 
seid | Seid…! 
 
sei 
Seien Sie 
wäre 
to become werden 
(I, she, he, it) became 
(I, she, he, it) would 
wurde 
würde 
to begin, start beginnen 
(I, she, he, it) began, started begann 
to bring bringen 
(I, she, he, it) brought brachte 
to call, shout rufen  
(I, she, he, it) called, shouted rief 
to climb, rise, increase steigen 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
143 
English German  
(I, she, he, it) climbed, rose, increased stieg 
to close, shut schließen^ 
(I, she, he, it) closed, shut schloss 
to come kommen 
(I, she, he, it) came kam 
to disappear verschwinden 
(I, she, he, it) disappeared verschwand 
to do, put tun 
did, put | (has, have) done, put (aux) … getan 
to drink trinken 
(I, she, he, it) drank trank 
to eat essen 
(I, she, he, it) ate aß^ 
to fall fallen 
(I, she, he, it) fell fiel 
to find finden 
(I, she, he, it) found fand 
to fly fliegen 
(I, she, he, it) flew flog 
to give geben 
(I, she, he, it) gave gab 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
144 
English German  
to go, walk gehen 
(I, she, he, it) went, walked ging 
to go (by transport), drive, travel fahren 
(I, she, he, it) went, drove, travelled fuhr 
to happen geschehen 
(I, she, he, it) happened geschah 
to have haben 
you (sing informal)) have had 
(she, he, it, one) has had 
(I, she, he, it) had | (I, she, he, it) would 
have 
hast 
hat 
hätte 
to help helfen 
(I, she, he, it) helped half 
to invite einladen 
invited | (have, has) invited (aux) … eingeladen 
to know kennen 
(I, she, he, it) knew 
knew | (have, has) known 
kannte 
(aux) ... gekannt 
to know (something) wissen 
(I) have known (something) | (she, he, 
it, one) has known (something) 
(you (sing informal)) have known 
(something) 
(I, she, he, it) knew (something) 
weiß^ 
 
weißt^ 
 
wusste 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
145 
English German  
to let, allow, leave lassen 
(I, she, he, it) let, allowed, left ließ^ 
to lie, be lying (down), be situated liegen 
(I, she, he, it) lay lag 
to name, call; to be called nennen; sich nennen 
named | (have, has) named (aux) ... genannt 
to pull, move ziehen 
pulled, moved | (have, has) pulled, 
moved 
(aux) … gezogen 
to request, ask (for) bitten (um) 
requested, asked | (have, has) 
requested, asked 
(aux) … gebeten 
to see, watch, look sehen 
(I, she, he, it) saw, watched, looked sah 
to shine, seem, appear scheinen 
(I, she, he, it) seemed, appeared, shone schien 
to sing singen 
(I, she, he, it) sang sang 
to sit sitzen 
(I, she, he, it) sat 
sat | (have, has) sat 
saß^ 
(aux) ... gesessen  
to speak sprechen 
(I, she, he, it) spoke sprach 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
146 
English German  
to stand stehen 
(I, she, he, it) stood stand 
to start anfangen 
(you (sing informal)) start 
(he, she, it) starts 
(I, she, he, it) started 
started | (have, has) started 
fängst ... an 
fängt ... an 
fing…an 
(aux) ... angefangen 
to stay, remain bleiben 
(I, she, he, it) remained, stayed blieb 
to suffer lieden 
suffered | (have, has) suffered (aux) … gelitten 
to take nehmen 
(I, she, he, it) took nahm 
to think denken 
(I, she, he, it) thought dachte 
to throw werfen 
(I, she, he, it) threw warf 
to understand; to get on with verstehen; sich verstehen mit 
(I, she, he, it) understood verstand 
to write schreiben 
(I, she, he, it) wrote schrieb 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
147 
Appendix 2: Grammar 
The following grammar list is the full grammar content that will be assessed by this 
qualification, in both receptive and productive tasks, at each tier.  
Nouns, pronouns and determiners 
 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
Forming compound nouns 
• Add connecting letters: -e, -s/-es, -n/-en, 
-ens, -er (e.g. (die) Arbeitsstunden) 
• Omission of -e/-en from the first word 
in some instances (e.g. (das) Schulbuch, 
(das) Wohnzimmer) 
• Final word gender rule 
 
Forming feminine person nouns 
• Add -in to male person noun to make 
the feminine form (e.g. Freundin, 
Lehrerin) 
 
Forming plural nouns 
• Add -e to most masculine or neuter 
nouns (some add umlaut on the vowel 
ä/ö/ü) (e.g. Monat ➜ Monate; Platz ➜ 
Plätze; Jahr ➜ Jahre)  
• Also add -e to some, mostly single-
syllable, feminine nouns (some add 
umlaut on the vowel ä/ö/ü) (e.g. Angst 
➜ Ängste) 
• Add –(e)n to pluralise some masculine 
people nouns and weak masculine 
nouns (e.g. die Jungen) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
148 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
• No change in the plural for many 
nouns ending in -el/-en/-er, other than 
a change of article (e.g. der Artikel ➜ 
die Artikel; der Kuchen ➜ die Kuchen; 
das Theater ➜ die Theater) 
• Add -er to some masculine and neuter 
nouns (some add umlaut on vowel 
ä/ö/ü) (Mann ➜ Männer; Licht ➜ 
Lichter; Buch ➜ Bücher) 
• Add -n or -en to most feminine nouns 
and some neuter nouns (e.g. Frage ➜ 
Fragen; Zahl ➜ Zahlen; Auge ➜ Augen; 
Bett ➜ Betten) 
• Add -nen to feminine occupation 
nouns ending in -in (e.g. Lehrerin ➜ 
Lehrerinnen) 
• Add -s to some (typically borrowed) 
nouns (e.g. Hotel ➜ Hotels) 
• Add -se to feminine and neuter nouns 
ending in -nis (e.g. Verständnis ➜ 
Verständnisse) 
• Add -n to dative plural nouns (e.g. den 
Brüdern) 
Infinitives and adjectives used as nouns 
• e.g. schwimmen ➜ (das) Schwimmen, 
wandern ➜ (das) Wandern  
• Uninflected adjectives for languages 
e.g. englisch ➜ (das) Englisch 
• Nominative and accusative of plural 
adjectival nouns (e.g. die Reichen) and 
abstract neuter nouns with definite 
article (e.g. das Gute) and following viel, 
wenig, etwas and alles (e.g. etwas Gutes, 
alles Gute) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
149 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
Determiners 
Articles 
• Agreement of articles with noun for 
gender and number (der, die, das, ein, 
eine) 
• Different functions of definite and 
indefinite articles, including subject 
(nominative), direct object (accusative) 
and indirect object (dative) 
• Negation with noun phrases, using 
kein (nominative, accusative) 
Other determiners 
• Use of the following determiners in 
singular (and plural forms, where 
applicable) in nominative, accusative 
and dative cases: 
• Demonstrative adjective (dies-(er, e, es)) 
• Indefinite adjectives (jed-(er, e, es)), letzt-
(er, e, es)), nächst-(er, e, es)) 
• Interrogative adjectives (welch-(er, e, 
es)) 
• Possessive adjectives (mein, dein, sein, 
ihr, unser, euer, Ihr, ihr) 
• Quantifiers in uncountable singular 
forms only (viel, wenig) and plural 
forms (viele, wenige, alle, einige) 
Determiners 
Articles 
• Use of genitive for possession and 
following certain prepositions (e.g. 
trotz) in Listening and Reading only 
(e.g. der Hund meiner Tante; trotz des 
Wetters) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
150 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
Pronouns 
• Subject pronouns (ich, du, er, sie, es, 
man, wir, ihr, Sie and sie), including 
agreement and position 
• Use and position of singular direct 
object (accusative) pronouns (mich, 
dich, ihn, sie, es, Sie, einen) 
• Use of singular indirect object (dative) 
pronouns (mir, dir, ihm, ihr, ihm, Ihnen, 
einem) 
• Indefinite pronouns (jemand, niemand) 
as subject and direct object pronouns 
• Use of relative pronouns (der, die, das, 
die) in subject relative clauses (word 
order 3) 
• Use of singular and plural accusative 
reflexive pronouns (mich, dich, sich, 
uns, euch, sich) with verbs used 
reflexively and reciprocally 
• Use of interrogative pronouns wer, 
including in accusative (wen) and 
dative (wem) questions 
Pronouns 
• Use of plural direct object (accusative) 
pronouns (uns, euch Sie, sie) and 
reflexive pronoun sich, including 
reflexive and reciprocal use 
• Use of plural indirect (dative) object 
pronouns (uns, euch Ihnen, ihnen) 
• Position of indirect and direct objects 
in sentence (not juxtaposed with each 
other), in sentences with two nouns, 
and with one pronoun and one noun 
• Subject and object relative clauses 
(word order 3) using wh- pronouns (wo 
and was) 
• Use of singular and plural dative 
reflexive pronouns (mir, dir, sich, uns, 
euch, sich) with verbs used reflexively 
and reciprocally 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
151 
Verbs and tenses 
 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
Interrogatives and asking questions 
Interrogatives expressed through: 
• Verb-subject word order 
• Question words (was, wann, wie, wer, 
wo, wohin, woher, warum) followed by 
verb-subject word order where 
applicable (e.g. Wer kommt morgen?; 
Wann kommst du?) 
 
Tenses 
Weak (regular) and strong (irregular) verb 
inflections in 1st, 2nd, 3rd persons in both 
singular and plural for: 
Present 
To express: 
• English simple (I walk)  
• English ongoing (I am walking)  
• future meaning (with time adverbs) 
• past meaning (in written texts). 
• Irregular inflected forms of four very 
high frequency irregular verbs (haben, 
sein, werden, wissen) 
• Use of haben + noun where the 
English equivalent is ‘BE + adjective’ 
e.g. haben Hunger, Durst, Angst  
Tenses 
Present 
• with seit, as equivalent of ‘have been -
ing for x time’ (e.g. Ich lerne Deutsch seit 
vier Jahren) 
Simple past/imperfect 
• for written narrative use in 1st, 2nd, 3rd 
persons singular and plural, for weak 
and highly frequent strong verbs 
(where 1st/3rd person singular is listed 
in the vocabulary list) 
Imperative 
• 2nd person singular and plural, formal 
and informal forms, for weak and 
strong verbs, and sein 
Imperfect subjunctive 
• Imperfect subjunctive in conditional 
clauses : haben (hätte) and sein (wäre), 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
152 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
Perfect 
As equivalent of: 
• English simple past (I walked, he went) 
• English present perfect (I have walked, 
he has gone) 
• habitual (used to) meaning for perfect 
tense + früher 
Including past participle formation that 
patterns as follows: 
• Weak verbs ge—t (e.g. gemacht) ; -ieren 
(e.g. studiert); with inseparable prefixes 
be- (e.g. besucht), ent-, er- (e.g. erzählt), 
über-, and ver- (e.g. versucht) 
• Strong verbs ge- + infinitive (e.g. 
gegeben, gefahren); with inseparable 
prefixes be- (e.g. bekommen), ent-, er-, 
ge- (e.g. gefallen); ver- (e.g. vergessen); 
where past participles are the same as 
the infinitive 
• Verbs with past participle vowel 
changes ei ➜ ie (e.g. geblieben); i➜ u 
(e,g. gefunden); e ➜ o (e.g. gesprochen); 
ie ➜ o including those with 
inseparable prefixes 
Future 
• werden + infinitive as equivalent of 
both ‘will’ + verb and ‘BE + going to’ 
Simple past/imperfect 
• of haben, sein 
and würde, sollte + infinitive, 1st, 2nd, 3rd 
persons, singular and plural 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
153 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
Compound verbs  
e.g. ausgehen 
 
Impersonal verbs 
• es gibt 
• es gab 
 
Modal verbs 
• Use of present modals in all persons 
(dürfen, können, mögen, müssen, sollen, 
wollen) + infinitive 
• Use of conditional möcht- in all 
persons + noun, and + infinitive 
• Use of simple past/imperfect modals 
in 1st, 2nd, 3rd persons in singular 
only 
• Use of simple past/imperfect modals 
in all persons + infinitive 
Reflexive verbs 
• Use of all persons of verbs with 
accusative reflexive pronouns 
• Use of all persons of verbs with dative 
reflexive pronouns 
Word order 
• Main clause word order, including 
word order 2 (inversion) and 2-verb 
rule (2nd verb to end of main clause) 
(e.g. Er kommt morgen um 10 Uhr; 
Morgen kommt er um 10 Uhr; Er kann 
morgen um 10 Uhr kommen.) 
• Word order 3 (subordinate clauses, 
including subject relative clauses) in 
single-verb structures (e.g. weil er 
morgen um 10 Uhr kommt; Der Mann, 
der morgen um 10 Uhr kommt) 
• Word order 3 (subordinate clauses, 
including subject relative clauses) in 
two-verb structures (e.g. weil er morgen 
um 10 Uhr kommen kann, Der Mann, 
der morgen um 10 Uhr kommen kann) 
• Word order 3 with separable verbs in 
single-verb and two-verb structures 
(e.g. Obwohl wir am Wochenende 
ausgehen / ausgehen müssen) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
154 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
• Syntax of verbal negation with nie, 
nichts, nicht in main clause with single- 
and two-verb structures, in 
subordinate clauses with single verbs 
and with adjectives after nouns (e.g. 
Ich komme morgen nicht; ich kann 
morgen nicht kommen; weil ich morgen 
nicht komme; das Kleid ist nicht teuer.) 
• Main clause word order with 
separable verbs in the present tense 
• Syntax of sentence and element 
negation with nicht, including use of 
sondern (e.g. Ich komme nicht am 
Freitag sondern am Samstag.) 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
155 
Adjectives 
 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
Adjectival phrases 
• Singular and plural adjective endings 
for adjectives including after definite 
and indefinite articles and before 
nouns, and plural adjective endings 
for adjectives used without article 
including before nouns, in nominative, 
accusative and dative cases (e.g. Die 
kleine Stadt hat gute Geschäfte) 
• Use of (uninflected) adjectives after 
nouns as verbal complement where 
the adverbial form is identical 
• Comparative adjective structures with 
als and so … wie, including common 
irregular forms (besser, höher, mehr) 
(e.g. Der Hund ist schneller als das 
Kaninchen; mein Bruder ist so groß wie 
meine Schwester) 
• Change of spelling for some 
comparative adjectives (e.g. teuer ➜ 
teurer, dunkel ➜ dunkler, groß ➜ 
größer) 
• Compound adjectives (e.g. dunkelgrün, 
hellblau) 
• Regular -re- and postnominal 
superlative adjective structures and 
common irregulars (der/die/das beste, 
am besten, der/die/das höchste, am 
höchsten, der/die/das meiste, am 
meisten, der/die/das nächste, am 
nächsten) 
• Some superlative adjectives change 
their spelling, such as adding e to 
those ending in -d, -t, -s, -ß, -sch, -x and 
-z (e.g. das interessantesteste Buch) 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
156 
Adverbs 
 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
• Position of adverbs of time, manner, 
place 
• Use of verb + gern to express like, and 
verb + lieber to express preference 
• Comparative adverb structures, 
including common irregular forms 
(besser, höher, lieber, mehr) 
• Regular superlative adverb structures 
(and common irregulars listed in the 
vocabulary list) 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
157 
Prepositions 
 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
• Use of prepositions after verbs (e.g. 
warten auf) 
• Spelling of the word that follows fixed 
case with accusative prepositions (bis, 
durch, für, ohne), dative prepositions 
(aus, bei, mit, nach, von, zu), and dual 
case prepositions (an, auf, in) 
• Use of contracted forms of an, bei, in, 
von and zu with definite article 
• Da- compounds darauf, damit, dafür, 
davon (e.g. Ich freue mich darauf) 
• Infinitive constructions using 
prepositions ohne/statt … zu; um … zu; 
verbs with zu … (e.g. beginnen, hoffen, 
versuchen) 
• Spelling of the word that follows fixed 
case with accusative prepositions 
(gegen, um), dative prepositions (laut, 
seit), and dual case prepositions 
(zwischen, über, unter, hinter, vor, neben) 
• Use of bei or am + nominalised verb to 
mean ‘while/when doing something’ 
(e.g. Beim Essen trinke ich nie) 
• Use of prepositions with da(r)- and 
wo(r)- prefixes in main clauses (e.g. Sie 
steht daneben; Worauf wartest du?) 
• Passive voice avoidance structure 
using preposition man with active verb 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
158 
Derivational morphology 
These grammar rules are primarily required for the Reading exam, as derived forms of 
any base words listed in our vocabulary list, or base words for any derived forms in our 
vocabulary list, may usually only appear in the Reading exam. 
Only one affix from this section will be applied to a base word to create a derived form. 
For example, using the rules below we may add the prefix Lieblings- to Haus to create 
Lieblingshaus or we may add the suffix -chen to Haus to create Häuschen, but we will not 
apply both prefix and suffix to create Lieblingshäuschen. Affixes from the rest of the 
grammar list above, for example to denote gender, number or case, may be applied to 
derived forms however - i.e. if we were to add the suffix -ung to the stem of the verb 
beschreiben to create Beschreibung in line with the derivational morphology rules below, 
we could then use the rules from the grammar list above to form the plural 
Beschreibungen. 
 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
Prefixes 
• Add prefix Lieblings- to nouns to mean 
‘favourite’ 
• Add prefix Haupt- to nouns to mean 
‘main’ 
• Add prefix un- to create adjectives 
where the English meaning is ‘the 
opposite’ (e.g. unruhig, unglücklich) 
 
Suffixes 
• Add suffix -te (1-19) and -ste (20-) to 
change cardinal into ordinal numbers 
(e.g. zweite, zwanzigste) 
• Add suffix -ung to a verb stem to 
change into nouns with equivalent and 
transparent meaning (e.g. reservieren 
➜ (die) Reservierung) 
Suffixes 
• Add -chen, -lein to create nouns, only 
when the English equivalent is ‘little’ 
(e.g. Häuschen, Kätzchen) 
• Add -heit or -keit to adjectives/adverbs 
to create nouns, only when the English 
equivalent is ‘-ty’ or ‘-ness’ (e.g. 
Krankheit, Notwendigkeit)  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
159 
• Add suffix to a verb stem (-en verbs) to 
change into male agent nouns with 
equivalent and transparent meaning 
(e.g. malen ➜ (der) Maler) 
• Add suffix -s to nouns for days and 
times of day to change them into 
adverbs (e.g. Montag ➜ montags; 
Nachmittag ➜ nachmittags) 
• Add -los to nouns to create adjectives, 
only with the English equivalent ‘-less’ 
or meaning ‘without’ (e.g. arbeitslos) 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
160 
Sound-symbol correspondences (SSCs) 
The list which follows specifies key differences in sound-symbol correspondences (SSCs) 
between German and English which students will need to learn at GCSE to be able to 
read out loud (Read aloud task in Paper 1, Speaking) and transcribe (Dictation task in 
Paper 2, Listening) with sufficient accuracy at this level, along with an example word 
from our vocabulary list containing the SSC. It is not an exhaustive list of all the SSCs in 
the German language. Where a letter or combination of letters is pronounced (or a 
sound spelt) in approximately the same way in German as in English, it is not listed. 
Students will be expected to pronounce words with stress patterns that allow their 
speech to be clear and comprehensible. 
The use of hyphens indicates the position of the letters in a word, when position is 
relevant to the sound: xx- (at the beginning of a word); -xx- (in the middle of a word); -xx 
(at the end of a word).  
 
Sound-symbol correspondence Example 
long a / ah / aa Tag / Jahr / Haar 
short a zusammen  
long e / eh / ee lesen / nehmen / leer 
short e lernen  
ei / ai Polizei / Mai 
z Zeit 
w schwer 
ie lieben  
long o / oh Person / ohne 
short o dort  
long i / ih wir / ihr 
short i bitte 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
161 
Sound-symbol correspondence Example 
hard ch machen  
soft ch Mädchen  
long u / uh Buch / Uhr 
short u Grund 
long ü / long y / üh Tür / System / früh 
short ü / short y Stück / Typ 
long ä / äh spät / wählen 
short ä Geschäft  
long ö / öh Gröβe / höher 
short ö zwölf  
äu Geräusch 
sch schnell  
sp- spielen 
st- stehen  
s- / -s- singen / leise 
ß / ss / -s Fuβ / dass / besonders 
er erst 
unstressed -er Zimmer 
v Vater 
au auch  
consonantal r Problem 
vocalic r klar  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
162 
Sound-symbol correspondence Example 
eu Euro 
th Thema 
unvoiced -b / -d / -g halb / Land / ruhig 
-ig wenig  
j jemand  
-tion Situation  
qu bequem  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
163 
Appendix 3: Names of people used in 
assessments  
Assessments in this qualification will only use names taken from the following list, which 
is representative of the most popular German names in Germany and across the 
German speaking world, in the current GCSE level age group, as well as some names for 
older adults. 
We hope students will all become familiar with these names during the course of 
teaching, so that all students come to the exams with the same knowledge and 
understanding. By committing to only use these names in our assessments, we aim to 
remove a barrier to understanding and avoid possible confusion over whether a proper 
noun is referring to a person or place. Ideally, if all students are familiar with these 
names before starting an assessment, all their comprehension focus can be on 
understanding the assessed content of the paper. 
 
14-16-year-old girls’ 
names 
14-16-year-old boys’ 
names 
14-16-year-old names used 
by both boys and girls 
Alina 
Anna 
Charlotte 
Elif 
Emily 
Hanna 
Jana 
Johanna 
Katharina 
Lara 
Layla 
Arda 
Ben 
Can 
Elias 
Felix 
Finn 
Jan 
Joel 
Jonas 
Julian 
Leon 
Bente 
Chris 
Kim 
Mika 
Robin 
Sascha 
Toni 
Yannie 
Yuki 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
164 
14-16-year-old girls’ 
names 
14-16-year-old boys’ 
names 
14-16-year-old names used 
by both boys and girls 
Lea 
Lena 
Leonie 
Marie 
Mia 
Mila 
Paula 
Samira 
Sofie 
Yasmin 
Lukas 
Malik 
Matteo 
Maximillian 
Milan 
Mohammed 
Noah 
Paul 
Tim 
Yusuf 
 
Adult male names Adult female names 
Helmut Frida 
Martin Linda 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
165 
Appendix 4: Transferable skills 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently flagged 
the need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable them to 
respond with confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the world of 
work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines skills, or 
competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that can be 
learned and that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform an activity 
or task and can be built upon and extended through learning.’ [
3F
1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected and 
evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this process, 
we identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the most evidence-
based and robust skills framework. We adapted the framework slightly to include the 
Program for International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT Literacy and Collaborative 
Problem Solving (CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves: [
4F
2]  
Cognitive skills 
• Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
• Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
• Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve 
general cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
• ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and communicate. [
5F
3]  
 
 
 
[1]  OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012) 
[2]  Koenig J A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop (National 
Academies Press, 2011) 
[3]  PISA – The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy (2011) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
166 
Interpersonal skills 
• Communication – active listening, oral communication, written communication, 
assertive communication and non-verbal communication. 
• Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, service 
orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and negotiation. 
• Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared 
understanding, taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team 
organisation. 
Intrapersonal skills 
• Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work 
stress, adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, and 
physical adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
• Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual 
teams, work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and able 
to acquire new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher 
education, as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the teaching 
and learning of this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning materials, 
developed with stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in German 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
167 
Appendix 5: Codes 
Type of code Use of code Code 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for 
performance tables is assigned a 
discount code indicating the subject 
area to which it belongs. 
Discount codes are published by DfE in 
the RAISEonline library 
(www.raiseonline.org) 
FKG 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an 
Ofqual Regulated Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) code. 
The RQF code is known as a 
Qualification Number (QN). This is the 
code that features in the DfE Section 96 
and on the LARA as being eligible for 
16–18 and 19+ funding, and is to be 
used for all qualification funding 
purposes. The QN will appear on 
students’ final certification 
documentation. 
The QN for this 
qualification is: 
610/3473/3 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to 
enter students for a qualification. 
Centres will need to use the entry codes 
only when claiming students’ 
qualifications. 
GCSE – 1GN1 
 
Paper/Component 
codes 
These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be 
entered for individual 
components/papers. 
Non-examination 
assessment: Paper 1: 
1GN1/1F and 1H 
Paper 2: 1GN1/2F and 2H 
Paper 3: 1GN1/3F and 3H 
Paper 4: 1GN1/4F and 4H 
 DB281123 GQ000025 GCSE_GERMAN_SPECIFICATION_2024_ISSUE_1.DOCX.1–175/0 

 
 
May 2025 
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel,  
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com 
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited 
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office: 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL.  
VAT Reg No GB 278 53712 