
Component 1 gives opportunities for learners to explore and cultivate fundamental
skills, knowledge and understanding through a variety of experiences. These may
include using sources, such as the local environment, gallery visits, workshops or
other resources, to gather visually rich research which supports in-depth
investigations. During the course, learners should be encouraged to experiment,
collaborate, make informed creative decisions and innovate. Their studies should be
developed to achieve appropriate depth and a suitably high degree of rigour.
Curatorial considerations in the presentation of their work should also be fostered.
The purpose of this approach is primarily to develop a foundation to support
confident navigation through learners’ creative journeys in the latter part of
Component 1 and throughout Component 2.
There is also an emphasis on the value of drawing skills. All A level Art and Design
specifications require learners to develop the skills to ‘record experiences and
observations, in a variety of ways using drawing or other appropriate visual forms;
undertake research; and gather, select and organise visual and other appropriate
information’. This focus should encourage learners to appreciate the significance of
drawing in the widest sense, by recognising and reviewing how it feeds the creative
process across disciplines.
For more guidance and information on the definitions and purposes of drawing refer
to Appendix A.
The components for this specification have been devised to demonstrate knowledge
and understanding of:
 relevant materials, processes, technologies and resources
 how ideas, feelings and meanings can be conveyed and interpreted in images
and artefacts
 how images and artefacts relate to the time and place in which they were made
and to their social and cultural contexts
 continuity and change in different genres, styles and traditions
 a working vocabulary and specialist terminology.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 6
The components equally require learners to develop the skills to:
 record experiences and observations, in a variety of ways using drawing or other
appropriate visual forms; undertake research; and gather, select and organise
visual and other appropriate information
 explore relevant resources; analyse, discuss and evaluate images, objects and
artefacts; and make and record independent judgements
 use knowledge and understanding of the work of others to develop and extend
thinking and inform own work
 generate and explore potential lines of enquiry using appropriate media and
techniques
 apply knowledge and understanding in making images and artefacts; review and
modify work; and plan and develop ideas in the light of their own and others’
evaluations
 organise, select and communicate ideas, solutions and responses and present
them in a range of visual, tactile and/or sensory forms.
Learners can work entirely in digital media or entirely in non-digital media, or in a
mixture of both, provided the aims and assessment objectives are met.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 7
Learners may study one or more of the following options selected from a broad-based
course, titled Art, Craft and Design, and six endorsed titles.
Art, Craft and Design
This is a broad-based course that provides flexibility in content and approach. Learners can
choose this option if they want to explore and create work associated with more than one
endorsed title. Learners opting for Art, Craft and Design explore practical and
critical/contextual work through a range of 2D and/or 3D processes and media throughout
the earlier stages of their personal investigation and must include evidence of working with
processes and media associated with more than one title in their submission. The final
resolution of their exploratory work can either be selected from 2D and/or 3D processes and
media associated with a single endorsed title or a combination of disciplines from more than
one endorsed title.
In Component 2, the Externally Set Assignment, learners can choose to produce work in the
preparatory study and sustained focus periods which reflects either more than one endorsed
title or one endorsed title.
All work submitted for both components 1 and 2, as with all endorsed titles, will be assessed
holistically in relation to the four assessment objectives, taking account of the breadth and
depth of the evidence presented.
Art and Design (Fine Art)
Possible areas of study include:
 painting and drawing
 mixed media, including collage and assemblage
 performance and conceptual art
 sculpture
 land or environmental art
 installation
 printmaking: relief, intaglio, screen processes and lithography
 film, television, animation, video, photography
 digital media.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 8
Art and Design (Critical and Contextual Studies)
P ossible formats and approaches which could be explored include:
Critic ala a pnrda cctoicnatl eaxntdu athl esoturedtiiceasl (setnuddyo rosf ethde t ihtluem) an form in Art, Craft & Design presented
in an audio-visual form
 eras or movements such as Expressionism, Brit Art or Bauhaus documented as a
series of gallery guides
 aspects of contemporary practice such as digital imaging scripted as a TV
documentary
 environmental or political issues in Art exhibited as display boards or placards
 relationships between image and text presented in Powerpoint or e-book format
 an exploration of narrative art presented in a sketchbook or storyboard that includes
extended commentary
 use of symbolism and allegory investigated in an illustrated essay.
Art and Design (Textile Design)
PToesxstibillee Daeresaigs no f( esntuddoyr sinecdlu tditele: )
 fashion
 costume
 digitally or traditionally printed and/or dyed fabrics, garments and materials
 interior design
 constructed textiles (knitted, woven, embellished or combined with other
materials)
 textile installation
 accessories.
Art and Design (Graphic Communication)
Possible areas of study include:
 illustration
 typography
 editorial
 advertising and branding
 package design
 design for print
 computer graphics
 multimedia design
 animation and special effects
 storyboarding and layout
 bookworks
 web and app design
 game design.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 9
Art and Design (Three-Dimensional Design)
Possible areas of study include:
 ceramics
 sculpture
 jewellery/body ornament
 exhibition design
 production design
 performance design
 interior design
 product design
 environmental design
 architectural design
 3-D animation and puppet design and construction
 furniture design
 3-D digital design.
Art and Design (Photography)
Possible areas of study include:
 photographing people
 photographing places
 still-life photography
 documentary photography
 photojournalism
 experimental imagery
 photographic installation
 fashion photography
 digital imaging
 moving image (video, film, animation).
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 10
This component consists of a major, in-depth, practical, critical and theoretical
investigative project/theme-based portfolio and outcome/s with integrated
extended written critical and contextual analysis (1000 words minimum).
Assignments, briefs or themes undertaken are to be determined by the
learner and teacher.
This component should enable learners to effectively develop an introductory
foundation of core skills and encourage in-depth, specialist-related learning,
knowledge, contextualisation skills and critical thinking. The time available for this
component provides increased opportunities to focus on the acquisition of valuable
skills (which include experimentation, risk-taking, drawing and the ability to analyse
and synthesise information and ideas) as well as develop and refine techniques.
The introductory aspects of the course will culminate in a practical project/portfolio
with integrated written elements (1000 words minimum), in which learners should
develop, in consultation with their teacher, a personal investigation based on a
theme, concept or specific design brief which is of personal significance and links to
the contexts of contemporary and/or past artists, designers or craftspeople.
The component should enable learners to engage in a suitable depth of study.
This can be achieved, for example, through one or more of the following:
 rigorous exploration of an interdisciplinary or multidisciplinary approach to their
work
 extended development of themes, ideas or issues that are of significance to
learners
 specialisation in a particular medium, technique or process related to option
choice or
 further theoretical research to develop increased understanding through integrated
practical, written and other means of communication.
Learners should be discriminating when selecting, evaluating and presenting their
portfolio for assessment and make considered curatorial decisions in the
presentation of their work, using formats which are well-suited to the purpose of the
work. The formats should aim to be innovative and engaging. Contexts, resources
and audiences should be taken into account.
Extended written, critical, contextual and analytical material can take a variety of
forms, such as a personal study, an illustrated essay, a digital presentation or
blog, illustrated study sheets, a written report, a journal, an article or review and
should reflect upon the learner’s work and that of other practitioners. In order to
meet the 1000 word minimum requirement for extended writing that applies to all
submissions, learners must present written evidence in sections of not less than
200 words. To enable learners to develop an argument in sufficient detail and
demonstrate appropriate depth of critical understanding, a minimum of 400 words
extended writing must be submitted in conjunction with visual and other evidence to
meet the requirements for AO1. Depending on the nature of the personal
investigation, learners may also choose to use extended writing, together with visual
and other evidence, to address any or all of the other Assessment Objectives AO2,
AO3 and AO4.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 11
In AO4, for example, learners may use extended writing to add meaning to their work
and evaluate the processes through which their intentions have been realised. In AO3,
they may use extended writing, along with drawing, as a means of recording
observations and demonstrating depth of insight into the subject of their investigation
and to critically reflect upon what they have learned. In AO2, extended written
commentary might be used to consider the relationships between practical working
methods and outcomes as well as demonstrating an on-going review of these.
Whatever the format of written response, the 1000 word minimum requirement in
sections of not less than 200 words applies in all instances. Due regard should be
given to maintaining coherence and continuity in all extended writing.
Particular attention should be given to both visual and written elements and to
establishing clear and coherent connections between the two. Written work should
not be regarded as a separate assessment requirement but as an integral part of the
work created for each Assessment Objective. In assessing the Personal
Investigation, therefore, written and practical responses will be assessed holistically.
It is thus essential that they are directly and purposefully integrated.
It should be noted that extended writing is not meant to replace brief written
annotation, as used, for example, to accompany drawings in sketchbooks or design
notebooks. This good practice is encouraged. However, such annotation will not
form part of the extended writing requirement of 1000 words minimum.
Learners should also:
 ensure that written work is legible and communication is clear
 use a form and style of writing which is suitable for purpose
 organise information clearly and coherently, using appropriate working
vocabulary and specialist terminology.
The Personal Investigation is internally assessed by the centre (ensuring that marks
are submitted to WJEC by the May deadline) and externally moderated. Work
produced for this component will be marked in relation to all four assessment
objectives.
(For more information and guidance on Extended Writing within the Personal
Investigation, see Appendix B.)
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 12
This component represents the culmination of learners’ Advanced level study and
provides a substantial challenge. Learners are required to develop independently a
personal response to one of a varied range of stimuli within specified time
constraints. Learners must therefore bring together the best of their understanding,
knowledge and skills built up over their course of study and demonstrate their highest
achievement through this externally set assignment.
The Externally Set Assignment consists of a series of visual (including moving
image) and written stimuli set by WJEC. Learners are required to select one of the
stimuli and develop it in the form of:
 a personal response or
 an issue to be addressed or
 a problem to be considered or
 a specific design brief or
 another suitable starting point.
Learners will develop their response over a preparatory study period (duration
determined by the centre). Responses must take the form of critical, practical and
theoretical preparatory work and/or supporting studies, which will inform the
resolution of these ideas in a 15 hour sustained focus study. Following the
preparatory study period, learners will be allocated a period of 15 hours sustained
focus study to realise their response unaided and under supervised conditions.
Once the 15 hour sustained focus period has commenced, learners must not have
access outside the sustained focus period session either to their preparatory study
and research work or to work produced during the sustained focus period. At the end
of each sustained focus session all candidates’ component 2 work must be stored
securely by the centre to ensure that no additional work is brought in or taken out of
the designated workplace.
At the conclusion of their preparatory study and sustained focus periods of work,
learners will be required to select, evaluate and present their submissions for
assessment. Work completed during the sustained focus period must be clearly
identified. In addition, learners must ensure that all secondary source material is
appropriately acknowledged. If work is included in the submission which is not
entirely that of the learner, such as quotes and images produced by others, it is
essential that each of these is specifically identified and acknowledged.
Learners are assessed on their ability to work independently, within specific time
constraints and in relation to all four assessment objectives. Both the preparatory
study and sustained focus work are assessed together. See Section 3.2 for
conditions relating to the Externally Set Assignment.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 13
The assessment time period
 The Externally Set Assignment materials are to be released to candidates on or
after 1 February of the second year of the A level course.
 The start of the preparatory study period is defined as the date upon which the
externally set assignment materials are presented to the learner. The preparatory
study period may commence on or after 1 February. The preparatory study
period finishes upon commencement of the sustained focus work.
 The start and finish dates of the preparatory study period and the 15 hour
sustained focus study are determined by the centre but will need to take into
account the May deadline for the submission of marks to WJEC.
 Work is internally assessed and externally moderated.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 14
Art, Craft and Design
This is a broad-based course that provides flexibility in content and approach.
Learners can choose this option if they want to explore and create work associated
with more than one endorsed title. Learners opting for Art, Craft and Design explore
practical and critical/contextual work through a range of 2D and/or 3D processes and
media throughout the earlier stages of their personal investigation and must include
evidence of working with processes and media associated with more than one title in
their submission. The final resolution of their exploratory work can either be selected
from 2D and/or 3D processes and media associated with a single endorsed title or a
combination of disciplines from more than one endorsed title.
In Component 2, the Externally Set Assignment, learners can choose to produce
work in the preparatory study and sustained focus periods which reflects either more
than one endorsed title or one endorsed title.
All work submitted for both components 1 and 2, as with all endorsed titles, will be
assessed holistically in relation to the four assessment objectives, taking account of
the breadth and depth of the evidence presented.
For this title and others that follow, it might be helpful to refer to broad, working
definitions of ‘art’, ‘craft’ and ‘design’, recognising that demarcations between these
are becoming increasingly blurred.
Art
Art combines practical and intellectual activity and tends to focus on creative
expression. Processes and outcomes are influenced by certain constraints or
intentions, many of which are personally determined by the artist. Processes can be
structured or open-ended and might involve exploration of experiences, feelings,
perceptions and observations that may include direct, critical and analytical study of
artefacts, objects, places and people. They may be initiated by the individual or in
response to given stimuli, such as a theme, issue, or problem. Outcomes can reflect
the individual’s imagination, influences and intentions in following an idea, conveying
an experience or expressing feelings, often with the purpose of engaging others who
will see the work.
Craft
Craft combines practical and intellectual skills and focuses on creatively using them
to sensitively manipulate materials, tools and processes. It involves applying
knowledge and understanding of materials and their working characteristics, together
with craft skills and creative intentions that take account of the needs of both the
maker and the user of the final outcome. Although learners need to have a working
knowledge and appreciation of traditional materials, tools and processes, they should
also be familiar with the use of new and emerging materials and technologies in
contemporary craftwork. It is essential that appropriate emphasis is placed on
creative ideas and imaginative approaches, in the use of materials and craft skills.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 15
Design
Design places emphasis on the way practical and intellectual activity combine in
order to respond to people’s needs. Usually, these are not identified by the designer
alone and this distinguishes design from most art and craft procedures that have
largely been initiated by the individual artist or craftsperson. The designer tends to
work within externally set parameters and takes account of such matters as the use
that is to be made of the outcome, durability, ergonomics, aesthetic appearance,
costs, availability of materials and methods of production. Processes and outcomes
can range from being quirky, imaginative and risky to thoughtful adaptation and
improvement of existing designs.
Art, Craft and Design is distinguishable from other options inasmuch as learners are
enabled to demonstrate personal interests and abilities across a broad course of
study.
They should explore selected practical and contextual areas of art, craft and design
through a range of two and/or three dimensional media and processes.
Art, craft and design can involve use of an almost limitless range of materials,
techniques and processes, but due regard should be given to achieving appropriate
depth as well as breadth of learning experiences.
As part of their studies for Art, Craft and Design learners are encouraged to
consider the following:
AO1
 Development of ideas that are informed by investigative contextual study of
historical and contemporary art, craft and design and other sources relevant to
the selected area of study.
 Awareness of the wide variety of work produced by artists, craftspeople and
designers and differences in their methods, approaches, purposes and intentions.
 Analytical skill and critical and contextual understanding in appraising, comparing
and contrasting the work of relevant artists, craftspeople and designers and other
contextual sources and in formative and summative evaluation of personal
outcomes.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 16
AO2
 Selection of, and purposeful experimentation with, a sufficient and appropriate
breadth of media and processes, mixed media and combinations of media,
exercising suitable control of these to maximise creative potential, showing
evidence of appropriate depth and breadth of study.
 Exploration of stimulating resources and rich visual and tactile sources to initiate
and develop innovative ideas, with due regard to relevant formal elements,
particularly composition. Clear relationships should be established between
working methods and outcomes. Each significant step in the creative process
should be documented, with due regard given to the penultimate stage of
development so that final outcomes do not suddenly appear.
 Discrimination shown in reviewing and refining ideas as work progresses. Skilful
control exercised in attending to detail, such as re-constructing parts of three-
dimensional craft pieces, to produce well resolved outcomes of quality.
AO3
 Gathering, selecting, organising and communicating relevant information in
undertaking research into visual and other sources of reference, showing
personal interests and judgements. Due attention given to selecting appropriate
sources of enquiry and rigorously analysing these to extract informative detail.
 Recording, by drawing and other suitable means, such as colour, tonal and
textural notes, photographs and annotation in sketchbooks and on study sheets,
ideas, observations and insights that are in line with personal intentions.
 Critical reflection on progression of work in order to effectively review what has
been learned, acquire deeper understanding and clarify purposes and meanings.
Where appropriate, learning could be transferred to new contexts, such as
adapting an expressive, abstract painted response to cross sections of fruit in
order to develop graphic designs for new, locally-produced fruit yoghurts.
AO4
 Presentation of truly personal, imaginative final outcomes that, together with
selective evidence of the processes by which they were produced, effectively
realise stated intentions.
 Explicit connections made, where appropriate, between the different elements of
the submission, including contextual, practical and written responses, presenting
work that is meaningful, well informed and in an order which can be easily
followed.
 Consideration of different presentational formats and selection of the most
appropriate of these for the submission. Due regard should be given to the
purpose of the work and how it might engage the interest of an audience, such as
a display of an art, a craft and a design outcome developed from a common
theme, accompanied by a screen-based programme of visuals and text.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 17
Endorsed Title Option: Art and Design (Fine Art)
Possible areas of study include:
 painting and drawing
 mixed media, including collage and assemblage
 performance and conceptual art
 sculpture
 land or environmental art
 installation
 printmaking: relief, intaglio, screen processes and lithography
 film, animation, video, photography
 digital media.
Fine Art may be distinguishable by the emphasis it places on aesthetic and
intellectual purposes rather than on practical, functional and utilitarian considerations.
This option covers a broad and developing area of study that includes painting,
drawing, ceramics, sculpture, installation, performance and conceptual art and
aspects of print-making, photography and film.
It utilises traditional, new and emerging media and processes and involves
expressive use of a particularly wide range of materials, techniques and skills.
As part of their studies for Fine Art learners are encouraged to consider the
following:
AO1
 Development of ideas that are informed by contextual study of historical and
contemporary fine art and other sources such as architecture, music, dance,
drama, production design and published media and the place of fine art within
these.
 Awareness of the wide variety of fine art processes and outcomes and the
differences between fine art sculpture, ceramics, printmaking and photography
and utilitarian application of these art forms. Where appropriate, personal
interpretations should demonstrate the distinction between expressive and
functional approaches.
 Analytical skill and critical and contextual understanding in appraising, comparing
and contrasting the work of relevant fine artists and other contextual sources and
in formative and summative evaluation of personal outcomes.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 18
AO2
 Selection of, and experimentation with, a sufficient and appropriate breadth of
fine art media and processes, mixed media and combinations of media,
exercising suitable control of these to maximise creative potential.
 Exploration of stimulating resources and rich visual and tactile sources to initiate
and develop innovative ideas, with due regard to line, tone, colour, texture and
other visual elements, particularly composition. Clear relationships should be
established between working methods and outcomes. Each significant step in the
creative process should be documented, with due regard given to the penultimate
stage of development so that final outcomes do not suddenly appear.
 Discrimination shown in reviewing ideas as work develops. Careful control
exercised in refining detail, such as delineation of anatomical structure in
portraying the human form, to produce well resolved outcomes of quality.
AO3
 Gathering, selecting, organising and communicating relevant information in
undertaking research into visual and tactile sources of reference, showing
personal interests and judgements. Due attention given to selecting appropriate
sources of enquiry and rigorously analysing these to extract informative detail.
 Recording, by drawing and other suitable means, such as colour, tonal and
textural notes, photographs and annotation in sketchbooks and on study sheets,
ideas, observations and insights that are in line with personal intentions.
 Critical reflection on work and progress in order to effectively review what has
been learned, show deeper understanding and clarify purposes and meanings.
AO4
 Presentation of creative responses that are essentially personal and effectively
realise stated intentions, such as a triptych comprising surface prints,
experimental photographs and painted portraits depicting the life stages of a
family member.
 Explicit connections made, where appropriate, between the different elements of
the submission, including contextual, practical and written responses, presenting
work that is meaningful, well informed and in an order which can be easily
followed.
 Consideration of different presentational formats and selection of the most
appropriate of these for the submission, giving due regard to the purpose of the
work and how it might engage the interest of an audience.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 19
Endorsed Title Option: Art and Design (Critical and Contextual Studies)
Possible areas of study include:
 a practical and theoretical study of the human form in Art, Craft & Design
presented in an audio-visual form
 eras or movements such as Expressionism, Brit Art or Bauhaus
documented as a series of gallery guides
 aspects of contemporary practice such as digital imaging, scripted as a TV
documentary
 environmental or political issues in Art exhibited as display boards or
placards
 relationships between image and text presented in PowerPoint or e-book
format
 an exploration of narrative art presented in a sketchbook or storyboard
format that includes extended commentary
 use of symbolism and allegory investigated in an illustrated essay.
Critical and Contextual Studies is a unique option inasmuch as it enables learners to
develop innovative opportunities to acquire critical, contextual and curatorial
knowledge, understanding and skills in appreciating artefacts, texts and images
within particular cultural environments, alongside relevant practical investigations.
The option provides for a broad range of intellectual and practical learning
experiences through a variety of lively and creative strategies for developing and
presenting personal, practical, critical and contextual responses.
These may include a wide variety of practical outcomes that demonstrate
understanding of, for example, the work of an artist, a movement or theme by means
such as devising an audio-visual presentation, development of an informative
annotated display, design of learning resources through a variety of illustrated texts
written in different formats and for a range of purposes.
These might take the form of gallery guides, exhibition brochures, magazine spreads,
newspaper articles, documentary television scripts and factual or fictional discussions
or exchanges between artists, craftspeople or designers using a variety of
communication methods.
It is necessary to emphasise that this option is different from traditional approaches
to the history of art, and learners are required to provide evidence of achievement
across all four assessment objectives.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 20
As part of their studies for Critical and Contextual Studies learners are
encouraged to consider the following:
AO1
 Development of ideas that are informed by investigative contextual study of
historical and contemporary art, craft and design and other sources, showing
understanding of how artefacts and images are reflective of the time, place
and other contexts within which they are produced.
 Awareness of the wide variety of work produced by artists, craftspeople and
designers, the relationship between their disciplines and differences in their
methods, approaches, purposes and intentions.
 Investigative, analytical skill and critical and contextual understanding in
appraising, comparing and contrasting the work of relevant artists,
craftspeople and designers and other contextual sources and in formative and
summative evaluation of personal outcomes.
AO2
 Judicious selection and purposeful exploration of a sufficient and appropriate
breadth of media, material, techniques and processes, critical and contextual
topics, themes, periods, movements and styles and ways in which ideas,
attitudes and beliefs have influenced art, craft and design.
 Investigation of stimulating resources including visual and tactile sources, live
and recorded artists’ presentations, radio and TV arts programmes,
newspaper and magazine exhibition reviews, publications and selective use
of the Internet. Wherever possible, visits should be undertaken to primary
sources such as galleries, museums, studios and workshops of artists,
craftspeople and designers to encounter and engage with creative outcomes
and their makers at first hand.
 Discrimination shown in reviewing and refining ideas as work progresses.
Skilful control exercised in attending to detail in interpreting, evaluating and
communicating judgements about images, objects and artefacts, to produce
well resolved outcomes of quality.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 21
AO3
 Gathering, selecting, organising and communicating relevant information in
undertaking research into appropriate sources of reference, showing curiosity,
personal interests and judgements. Due attention given to selecting
appropriate sources of enquiry and rigorously analysing these to extract
informative detail.
 Recording, by a variety of suitable means, such as written notes, sketches,
colour, tonal and textural notes, photographs in workbooks, sketchbooks and
on study sheets, ideas, observations and insights that are in line with
personal intentions.
 Critical reflection on progression of work in order to effectively review what
has been learned, showing deeper understanding, clarify purposes and
meanings and ability to transfer learning to a new context such as adapting a
written and illustrated exposition of the life and work of a local artist to a
documentary TV script.
AO4
 Presentation of innovative responses that are essentially personal and
effectively realise stated intentions, such as a fictitious series of letters
exchanged between a landscape painter and a landscape photographer in
which they compare, in words and images, differences in their approaches.
 Clear connections made, where appropriate, between the different elements
of the submission, including contextual, practical and written responses,
presenting work that is meaningful, well informed and in an order which can
be easily followed.
 Consideration of different presentational formats and selection of the most
appropriate of these for the submission, giving due regard to the purpose of
the work and how it might engage the interest of an audience or editor, for
example, production of a gallery resource pack for KS3 learners.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 22
Endorsed Title Option: Art and Design (Textile Design)
Possible areas of study include:
 fashion
 costume
 digitally or traditionally printed and/or dyed fabrics, garments and materials
 interior design
 constructed textiles (knitted, woven, embellished or combined with other
materials)
 textile installation
 accessories.
Textile Design encompasses a very broad range of materials, techniques and
processes, including a growing number of interdisciplinary approaches. These
comprise woven, embroidered, knitted, printed, painted, dyed, manipulated,
embellished and constructional methods which are utilised to produce a great variety
of textile outcomes that include costume and fashion design, accessories and body
adornment. The range is increasing as new materials and technologies emerge.
As part of their studies for Textile Design learners are encouraged to consider
the following:
AO1
 Development of ideas that are informed by contextual study of historical and
contemporary textile design in our own and other cultures and other sources such
as fine art, architecture, photography, published media and production design.
 Awareness of the wide variety of creative textile processes and outcomes and the
relationship between functional and aesthetic considerations, showing
understanding of how these are applied and adapted to meet particular needs.
Sensitive response to issues such as cultural traditions, disability, recycling, and
upcycling,
 Analytical skill and critical and contextual understanding in appraising, comparing
and contrasting the work of relevant textile designers and other contextual
sources and in formative and summative evaluation of personal textile outcomes.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 23
AO2
 Selection of, and purposeful experimentation with, a sufficient and appropriate
range of textile materials and processes, mixed media and combinations of
techniques, exercising suitable control of these to maximise creative potential.
Technical details may be included, but should be selective and concise. Concern
with technical processes or craft processes should not assume greater
importance than the progression of creative ideas.
 Exploration of stimulating resources and rich visual and tactile sources to initiate
and develop innovative ideas, with due regard to line, colour, pattern, texture and
other visual elements, particularly form. Clear relationships should be established
between working methods and outcomes. Each significant step in the creative
process should be documented, with due regard given to the penultimate stage of
development so that final outcomes do not suddenly appear.
 Discrimination shown in reviewing ideas as work develops. Careful control
exercised in refining detail, such as the design and production of decorative
features, to produce well resolved outcomes of quality.
AO3
 Gathering, selecting, organising and communicating relevant information in
undertaking research into visual and tactile sources of reference, showing
personal interests and judgements. Due attention given to selecting appropriate
sources of enquiry and rigorously analysing these to extract informative detail.
 Recording in sketchbooks, workbooks and on study sheets, observations and
insights that are in line with personal intentions, such as colour, pattern and
textural notes, by means of drawing, mark-making and other suitable methods
such as photographs and analytical commentary.
 Critical reflection on work and progress in order to effectively review what has
been learned, show deeper understanding and clarify purposes and meanings.
AO4
 Presentation of creative responses that are essentially personal and which
effectively realise stated intentions, such as machine embroidered, appliqué
panels for the new home of a close friend.
 Explicit connections made, where appropriate, between the different elements of
the submission, including contextual, practical and written responses, presenting
work that is meaningful, well informed and in an order which can be easily
followed.
 Consideration of different presentational formats, such as through a studio photo-
shoot of a theatrical costume or sketches of the textile product in a suitable
setting. Selection of the most appropriate of these for the submission, giving due
regard to the purpose of the work and how it might engage the interest of an
audience or potential clients. It is not necessary to always produce finished items
or garments but they should be complete enough to demonstrate ability to take
them through to a resolved conclusion.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 24
Endorsed Title Option: Art and Design (Graphic Communication)
Possible areas of study include:
 illustration
 typography
 editorial
 advertising and branding
 package design
 design for print
 computer graphics
 multimedia design
 animation and special effects
 web and app design
 game design
 bookworks.
Graphic Communication may be defined as the process by which ideas are
communicated through the use of symbols, drawings, photographs and typography to
convey concepts and/or emotions.
This option encompasses a wide and developing area of study, incorporating a
variety of related disciplines and utilising traditional skills, such as calligraphy and
hand-formed lettering, alongside cutting-edge digital technologies.
Boundaries between related graphic processes are becoming increasingly blurred
but aspects, such as advertising, packaging design, computer games, web and multi-
media design, illustration and typography, provide an indication of what might be
covered within the option.
Graphic Communication may also be closely associated with animation, architecture,
photography and design for print. Outcomes can be two and three dimensional, and
can take the form of posters, brochures, flyers, T-shirts, CD/DVD sleeves, book
covers, magazine spreads, calendars, stamps, packaging, publicity materials, vehicle
livery, billboards, advertising, logos, branding, corporate identity, and three
dimensional point-of-sale and exhibition design.
As part of their studies for Graphic Communication learners are encouraged to
consider the following:
AO1
 Development of ideas that are informed by contextual study of past and present
graphic design and other sources such as television and cinema, fine art, product
design and published media.
 Awareness of the variety of issues that influence the purposes, meanings and
contexts of graphic design such as ethical and conservational considerations,
marketing strategies, promotional campaigning, reprographic processes and
magazine and journal production.
 Analytical skill and critical and contextual understanding in appraising, comparing
and contrasting the work of relevant graphic designers, other contextual sources
and in the formative and summative evaluation of personal design processes and
outcomes.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 25
AO2
 Selection of, and experimentation with, appropriate graphic design media and
processes, with controlled use of typography and imagery from primary and
secondary sources, including purposeful manipulation using digital software.
Technical details may be included, but should be selective and concise. Concern
with technical processes should not assume greater importance than the
progression of creative ideas.
 Exploration of stimulating resources and studio-based and environmental sources
to initiate and develop innovative ideas, with due regard to composition and
layout, proportion, line, tone, colour, texture, scale and other visual elements..
The full potential of graphic communication should be explored through
experimentation with established and emerging technologies and, where
appropriate, combining graphic design methods with other processes to originate
new ways of working. Each significant step in the creative process should be
documented, with particular attention given to the penultimate stage so that final
outcomes do not suddenly appear.
 Discrimination in reviewing ideas as work develops. Careful control exercised in
refining detail, such as selection of fonts, relationship of typography to images
and a suitable reprographic process to produce outcomes of quality.
AO3
 Gathering, selecting, organising and communicating relevant information in
undertaking research into visual and other sources of reference. Due attention
given to the selection of the most appropriate images and the analysis and
annotation of these, rather than including multiple thumbnail prints with no
evaluative comments.
 Recording, through drawing, photographs and by other means, such as layout
sketches, storyboards and written notes, ideas, observations and insights that are
relevant to personal intentions.
 Critical reflection on work and progress in order to review what has been learned,
deepen understanding and clarify purpose and meaning.
AO4
 Presentation of creative responses that are essentially personal, effectively
realise stated intentions and fulfil design requirements.
 Explicit connections made, where appropriate, between the different elements of
the submission, including contextual, practical and written responses, presenting
work that is meaningful, well informed and in an order which can be easily
followed.
 Consideration of different presentational formats, such as public transport
advertising or bus shelter posters, selecting the most appropriate of these for the
submission, giving due regard to the purpose of the work and how it might
engage the interest of an audience or potential clients. If the print size or cost of a
preferred format is a constraint, then this could be drawn, described and/or
presented as a scale model.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 26
Endorsed Title Option: Art and Design (Three-Dimensional Design)
Possible areas of study include:
 ceramics
 sculpture
 jewellery/body ornament
 exhibition design
 production design
 performance design
 interior design
 product design
 environmental design
 architectural design
 3-D animation and puppet design and construction
 furniture design.
Three-Dimensional Design is distinguishable in this option by the emphasis placed
upon functional and utilitarian considerations as compared to three-dimensional
outcomes produced in other disciplines, such as sculpture in Fine Art, where the
intentions might be centred upon the aesthetic qualities of expressive form.
Three-Dimensional Design covers a particularly wide range of activities ranging in
scale from jewellery and body adornment to architectural and environmental design.
Other aspects include functional ceramics, product design, interior and exhibition
design, theatre and production design incorporating film and television. Aspects of
craft may also be included, such as puppet design and construction and single items
of furniture that are concerned with functionality and manual skills as well as
aesthetic qualities.
As part of their studies for Three-Dimensional Design learners are encouraged
to consider the following:
AO1
 Development of ideas that are informed by contextual study of past and
present three-dimensional design in our own and other cultures and sources
such as science fiction games and publications, film and television, fine art
and textiles.
 Awareness of the variety of factors that influence the purposes, meanings and
contexts of three-dimensional design such as ergonomic factors, ethical,
conservational and economic considerations, production methods and the
practical criteria of a given space. Relevant knowledge of working
arrangements within which particular three-dimensional outcomes are
produced, such as in set production for a stage play. Understanding that most
designers are essentially responsive and collaborative.
 Analytical skill, critical and contextual understanding in appraising, comparing
and contrasting the work of relevant three-dimensional designers and other
contextual sources and in formative and summative evaluation of personal
design processes and outcomes. Personal responses to inspirational images
rather than production of cut and paste ‘mood’ boards.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 27
AO2
 Selection of, and experimentation with, appropriate three-dimensional design
media and processes, such as wood, clay, plastic, metal, card and paper, with
controlled and safe use of suitable tools and equipment and, where relevant,
specialised use of computer aided design and control. Technical details may be
included, but should be selective and concise. Concern with technical processes
should not assume greater importance than the progression of creative ideas.
 Exploration of stimulating resources and workshop-based and environmental
sources to initiate and develop innovative ideas, with due regard to the purpose
of the intended outcome, its surface, structure, texture, colour, form, mass,
volume, scale, proportion, durability and strength and other three dimensional
elements. The full potential of selected aspects of three-dimensional design
should be explored through experimentation with traditional and emerging
technologies and, where appropriate, combining three-dimensional design
methods with other processes to originate new ways of working. Each significant
step in the creative process should be documented, with particular attention given
to the penultimate stage, so that final outcomes do not suddenly appear.
 Discrimination in reviewing and refining ideas as work develops. Careful control
exercised in attending to detail, such as well-formed connections of components,
functional working parts, surface finish and aesthetic appearance, to realise
quality outcomes.
AO3
 Gathering, selecting, organising and communicating relevant information in
undertaking research and enquiry into three-dimensional, visual, tactile and other
sources of reference. Due attention given to rigorous analysis of the most
appropriate design possibilities and problem-solving solutions.
 Recording, through sketches, perspective drawings, technical drawings by hand
and CAD, working plans, photographs, written notes and by other means, ideas,
observations and insights that are relevant to personal intentions.
 Critical reflection on work and progress in order to review what has been learned,
deepen understanding, clarify purpose and, where appropriate, transfer learning
to a new context, such as from stage to screen.
AO4
 Presentation of creative outcomes that are essentially personal solutions to
design requirements and effectively realise stated intentions with evidence of
personal curiosity and engagement.
 Explicit connections made, where appropriate, between the different elements of
the submission, including contextual, practical and written responses, presenting
work in an order which can be easily followed.
 Consideration of different presentational formats, such as design sheets and
audio-visual programme, selecting the most appropriate of these for the
submission. Due regard should be given to the purpose of the work and how it
might engage the interest of an audience or potential clients, such as a producer
or design studio. If the cost of a preferred format is a constraint, then this could
be drawn, described and/or presented using less expensive materials. Outcomes
may take the form of finished pieces, prototypes and full size or scale models.
They could be one-off pieces or capable of small batch or mass production.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 28
Endorsed Title Option: Art and Design (Photography)
Possible areas of study include:
 photographing people
 photographing places
 still-life photography
 documentary photography
 photojournalism
 experimental imagery
 photographic installation
 fashion photography
 digital imaging
 moving image (video, film, animation).
This option covers a broad and changing area of study with light-based imagery
spanning almost two centuries.
Learners might engage with early light-based images and rudimentary technology,
such as a pinhole camera, as well as the most contemporary, which may include the
use of digital cameras, video camcorders, photocopiers, scanners and mobile
phones. They may also work exclusively with film based or digital technology or with
both. Outcomes can be screen or print based, comprise still or moving images and
might be discrete to the subject area or combined with other art forms.
As part of their studies for Photography learners are encouraged to consider
the following:
AO1
 Development of ideas that are informed by contextual study of past and present
photographic and other sources such as film, fine art, installation art, graphic
design, production design and published media and the place of photography
within these.
 Awareness of the variety of photographic and motion picture genre and, where
appropriate, relating personal work to a particular genre.
 Analytical skill and critical and contextual understanding in appraising, comparing
and contrasting the work of relevant photographers and other contextual sources
and in formative and summative evaluation of personal photographic outcomes.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 29
AO2
 Selection of, and experimentation with, appropriate photographic media and
processes, other media and combinations of media, with controlled use of
lighting, shutter speed, aperture, lenses, filters and digital software. Technical
details may be included, but should be selective and concise. Concern with
technical processes should not assume greater importance than the progression
of creative ideas.
 Exploration of stimulating resources and studio-based and environmental sources
to initiate and develop innovative ideas, with due regard to viewpoint,
composition, tone, colour, texture, scale and other visual elements. Each
significant step in the creative process should be documented. The full potential
of photography should be explored through experimentation with traditional and
digital media, where appropriate, combining photographic and other techniques
to originate new ways of working.
 Discrimination in reviewing ideas as work develops. Careful control exercised in
refining detail, such as in editing, image manipulation and print resolution, to
produce outcomes of quality.
AO3
 Gathering, selecting, organising and communicating relevant information in
undertaking research into visual and tactile sources of reference. Due attention
should be given to the selection of only the most significant images and the
analysis and annotation of these, rather than including multiple thumbnail/contact
prints with no evaluative comments.
 Recording, through photography and by other means, such as sketches,
storyboards and written notes, ideas, observations and insights that are relevant
to personal intentions.
 Critical reflection on work and progress in order to review what has been learned,
deepen understanding and clarify purpose and meaning.
AO4
 Presentation of creative responses that are essentially personal and effectively
realise stated intentions, such as a photographic poster to support a strongly held
opinion or images of architectural structures projected onto a three-dimensional
construction.
 Explicit connections made, where appropriate, between the different elements of
the submission, including contextual, practical and written responses, presenting
work in an order which can be easily followed.
 Consideration of different presentational formats, such as animated sequences
and use of mixed media, selecting the most appropriate of these for the
submission, giving due regard to the purpose of the work and how it might
engage the interest of an audience or potential clients. If the print size or cost of a
preferred format is a constraint, then this could be drawn, described and/or
presented as a scale model.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 30
The same four assessment objectives apply across both components. Each
assessment objective is equally weighted. Below are the assessment objectives for
this specification.
Learners must demonstrate their ability to:
AO1
Develop ideas through sustained and focused investigations informed by
contextual and other sources, demonstrating analytical and critical understanding.
AO2
Explore and select appropriate resources, media, materials, techniques and
processes, reviewing and refining ideas as work develops.
AO3
Record ideas, observations and insights relevant to intentions, reflecting critically
on work and progress.
AO4
Present a personal and meaningful response that realises intentions and, where
appropriate, makes connections between visual and other elements.
The table below shows the weighting and marks available for each assessment
objective, for each component and for the qualification as a whole.
AO1 AO2 AO3 AO4
Component Weighting % Weighting % Weighting % Weighting %
Marks Marks Marks Marks
Component 1:
Personal Investigation
60% of A level 15% 15% 15% 15%
120 marks 30 30 30 30
Component 2:
Externally Set Assignment
40% of A level 10% 10% 10% 10%
80 marks 20 20 20 20
Total Weighting 25% 25% 25% 25%
Total Marks (200) 50 50 50 50
The overall qualification grade is calculated by adding together the marks for
Components 1 and 2 to give a total mark. This mark will then be converted to the
overall A level qualification grade using the A level qualification grade boundaries
established for the relevant examination series.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 31
Component 1 is internally assessed and externally moderated. It will be marked out
of 120 (each of the four assessment objectives will be marked out of 30). The
completion date is determined by the centre. The centre must take into account time
needed for internal assessment and the submission of marks to WJEC by the May
deadline. It is recommended that centres consider setting internal deadline dates for
the completion of Component 1 before the Externally Set Assignment is commenced
in February. This will allow more time for marking and ensure learners concentrate
fully on the Externally Set Assignment.
It is important that centres give due consideration to the determination by learners and
teachers of assignments, themes and/or briefs for Component 1 to ensure that they
allow learners to meet the assessment objectives. If in doubt about assignments,
themes and/or briefs, refer to the resources and guidance on the website.
Component 2 is internally assessed and externally moderated. It will be marked out
of 80 (each of the four assessment objectives will be marked out of 20). The
Externally Set Assignment paper will be sent to centres in advance of the 1 February
release date. The paper must not be released to candidates before 1 February.
 Learners must choose one of the twelve set assignments. They will then
have a period of time to carry out the necessary research and preparatory
studies. The duration of the research and preparatory study period is
determined by the centre.
 Following this research and preparatory study period, candidates will be
allocated a period of 15 hours sustained focus study to realise their
response unaided and under supervised conditions.
 The start of the preparatory study period is defined as the date upon which
the externally set assignment materials are presented to the learner. The
preparatory study period may commence on or after 1 February. The
preparatory study period finishes upon commencement of the sustained
focus work.
 The start and finish dates of both the preparatory study and the 15 hour
sustained focus study periods are determined by the centre taking into
account the May deadline for submitting all internally assessed marks to
WJEC.

Conditions for the Externally Set Assignment, Component 2
Teachers may give guidance to candidates during the preparatory study and
research period, but this must be restricted to:
 the availability and suitability of sources and materials
 the prevention of plagiarism
 ensuring the work is conducted in accordance with specification requirements
and procedures, including health and safety issues.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 32
It is essential that learners’ responses are both personal and independent.
Once the 15 hour sustained focus period has commenced, learners must not have
access outside the sustained focus period sessions either to their preparatory study
and research work or to work produced during the sustained focus period. At the end
of each sustained focus session, all candidates’ work must be stored securely by the
centre.
It is the responsibility of the centre to monitor the 15 hour sustained focus period
sessions in order to ensure that no additional work is brought in or taken out of the
designated workplace.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 33
Formats for submissions
Both components can be submitted in any appropriate format such as sketchbooks,
visual diaries, traditional or e-portfolios, mounted exhibitions, installations, digital
presentations or any combination of these. There is no restriction on content, format
or scale of work or the amount of evidence to be selected and presented, although
emphasis should be on quality rather than quantity. Components may, for example,
consist of:
 one or more finally resolved pieces together with sheets of relevant research
and preparatory studies including evidence of personal response and
creative development
 a collection of related studies including at least one finished piece, together
with portfolio evidence of the process of their development or
 one or more sketchbooks/workbooks together with one or more finished
pieces.
Authentication and Acknowledgements
It is important that assessment is rigorously monitored by centres to ensure that
candidates' work is their own. All candidates are required to sign an authentication
statement endorsing the originality of their assignment(s) and centres must countersign
that they have taken all reasonable steps to validate this. Authentication
documentation must be completed by all learners, not just for those learners selected
for the sample to be seen by the moderator. The documents must be signed by both
the learner and teacher. Learner Statements will support this process by explaining
and authenticating the personal, creative journey of each learner within each
component. Examples of both these forms are available on the website.
All secondary source materials, such as images of artists’ works or quotes, must be
clearly acknowledged and any work which is not entirely that of the learner should be
identified.
Assessment: mark schemes and indicative content (see Appendix C)
Teachers should use the mark schemes provided in this specification, referring to the
indicative content for guidance, when conducting internal assessment of components
1 and 2. These are designed to present a system that links the assessment
objectives to marks and helps to discriminate clearly between the varying levels of
achievement. The mark schemes will be of most value when used in conjunction with
guidance and assessed examples of work, which will be made available annually by
WJEC to help centres identify the quality of work associated with the various mark
bands.
Internal Standardisation
It is essential that where there is more than one teacher in a centre or consortium, work
from all teaching groups is standardised internally. This is necessary to ensure that the
final assessment reflects a single agreed standard for all teaching groups involved.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 34
School or College Consortia
If a school or college is part of a consortium with joint teaching arrangements (where
learners from different schools and/or colleges have been taught together but are
entered their own school or college), WJEC must be informed annually by:
 completing the Application for Centre Consortium Arrangements for centre-
assessed forms (a Joint Council of Qualifications form)
 appointing a consortium coordinator who is responsible for ensuring the
internal standardisation of all teaching groups across the consortium.
It is the responsibility of the consortium coordinator to make available at the lead
school or college the sample of consortium work identified for moderation together
with the required documentation.
Submission of marks
Centres need to submit marks for internally assessed work online during the summer
term of the year when the work is to be submitted for moderation. When marks have
been submitted to WJEC, the online system will apply the sample formula based on
the overall rank order for the total entry and immediately identify the sample of
learners whose work is selected for moderation.
The moderation process
Following internal assessment, submission of marks to WJEC and the identification of
the moderation sample, moderation will take place by a visiting moderator. This
normally takes place in June and will include all work identified for moderation at a
centre (both A level components and AS candidate work, where a centre enters for
both A level and AS). All centres will receive detailed feedback from the moderation.
It is the centre’s responsibility to ensure that learners present their work in the most
appropriate format for the work produced. It is vital that all work is clearly labelled and
that related elements (for example, sketchbooks and outcomes) are displayed
together. Centres are also responsible for ensuring that the work presented for the
visiting moderator is the same work as that originally submitted for internal
assessment and has not been supplemented by any additional material.
Moderators will provide detailed feedback to centres through a report which will be
made available on the day results are issued. Adjustments will be made when it is
deemed that the centre’s internal assessment does not to conform to agreed
common standards established by WJEC. If centres are not in agreement with the
outcomes of the moderation, they may access a range of post results services as
outlined on the website.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 35
This is a linear qualification in which all assessments must be taken at the end of the
course. Assessment opportunities will be available in the summer series each year,
until the end of the life of this specification. Summer 2017 will be the first
assessment opportunity.
A qualification may be taken more than once. Candidates must resit all examination
components in the same series.
Marks for NEA may be carried forward for the life of the specification. If a candidate
resits an NEA component (rather than carrying forward the previous NEA mark), it is
the new mark that will count towards the overall grade, even if it is lower than a
previous attempt.
Where a candidate has certificated on two or more previous occasions, the most
recent NEA mark is carried forward, regardless of whether that mark is higher or
lower (unless that mark is absent)
The entry code appears below.
WJEC Eduqas A level Art and Design (Art, Craft and Design) A650QS
WJEC Eduqas A level Art and Design (Fine Art) A651QS
WJEC Eduqas A level Art and Design (Critical and Contextual) A652QS
WJEC Eduqas A level Art and Design (Textile Design) A653QS
WJEC Eduqas A level Art and Design (Graphic Communication) A654QS
WJEC Eduqas A level Art and Design (Three-Dimensional Design) A655QS
WJEC Eduqas A level Art and Design (Photography) A656QS
The current edition of our Entry Procedures and Coding Information gives up-to-date
entry procedures and entry codes.
A level qualifications are reported as a grade from A* to E. Results not attaining the
minimum standard for the award will be reported as U (unclassified).
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 36
In response to the recommendations of the creative industries, higher education, the
National Society for Education in Art and Design, the Cultural Learning Alliance, the Arts
Council and expert teachers, there is now an increased emphasis being placed on the
value of drawing within this A level Art and Design specification. It is suggested that
drawing skills should be an integral part of both Components 1 and 2 to ensure learners
are able to confidently utilise this fundamental aspect of the creative process and of visual
language. This should also strengthen practice, support progression and meet the
demands of higher education and/or the creative industries.
It may be argued that drawing uniquely increases the capacity of learners to see and
understand the visual and tactile world. Importantly, it can enable them to think visually and
communicate these thoughts to others. In assessing A level Art and Design submissions,
moderators often recognise that reluctance to visualise ideas through drawing seems to limit
the vitality and scope of learners’ creativity. Even if learners have acquired only a modest
level of competency, they can still make purposeful use of drawing to record information,
visualise thoughts and communicate possibilities. There is need for all learners to develop
competence in forms of drawing that are appropriate to the option which they are studying.
Sketchbooks or craft/design workbooks provide particularly effective vehicles for learners to
record, through drawing and other means, interesting snippets of information, try out
speculative possibilities and explore materials and techniques as part of investigative study.
These are sometimes referred to as visual diaries and, as such, will contain rough ideas and
unfinished visual notes. They are not intended to form a collection of finished pieces of
work.
It should be noted that drawing can be placed in a variety of contexts within this
specification as it is in the creative process. The term ‘drawing’ is often associated with, for
example, Fine Art representational recording and common perceptions regarding traditional
command of technique. However, there are many other contexts for drawing which are
appropriate to other areas from Textile Design through to Animation or Photography.
These include:
 the purposeful use of drawing to record information
 its application in the designing, visualisation or expression of ideas
 its potential to communicate possibilities, such as compositional arrangements.
Drawing may take the form of:
 sketches
 analytical observational studies
 storyboards
 thumbnail sketches
 layouts
 roughs
 experimental or expressive studies
 2 or 3-D modelling
 detailed designs or elevations.
Drawing or recording can also be conducted via the use of digital tools such as a stylus and
software programme, or traditional media such as charcoal or pen. Drawing can similarly be
highly effective when digital tools and technologies are integrated with more traditional
processes.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 37
There is a requirement in all A level Art and Design specifications for extended writing,
1000 words minimum, which may contain images and texts and must clearly relate to the
practical, critical and theoretical work undertaken. To clarify what may be defined as
extended writing, the phrase ' in sections of not less than 200 words' is used in this
specification. This written element is incorporated in Component 1, the Personal
Investigation in this specification.
Writing activities should help learners to:
 develop the ability to ‘engage’ with works of art/craft/design by being prepared to
devote thought, time and energy to study them through ‘sustained and focused
investigations’ so that they can respond and relate to them personally
 successfully communicate their ideas, enabling them to understand the meanings of the
visual methods and approaches they themselves use as well as be able to analyse
those used by others
 demonstrate understanding of the different contexts in which particular artefacts and
artworks were originally made and are currently being considered.
Learners may use the extended writing element to provide evidence that they are able to:
 compare and contrast works of art/craft/design produced in different cultures and
contexts and evaluate the ways in which these influence their purpose, meaning and
interpretation
 document the depth and breadth of their learning activities
 maintain a record of progression in their learning
 communicate what they have discovered fully and clearly to others, including the
appropriate use of specialist terminology
 organise their theoretical research so that they can direct and re-direct their
investigations
 raise issues and questions to identify promising or unusual lines of enquiry
 work out or speculate upon particular aspects of their work in order to consolidate
and deepen knowledge and understanding
 refer back to what they have learned so that this can be built upon and, where
appropriate, transferred to a new context
 draw together findings from different sources to summarise progress and look for
possible connections to new learning
 generate innovative and original thoughts and ideas
 refine skills of creative and critical thinking, analysis and synthesis
 reflect upon, review and evaluate the processes and outcomes of their learning.
As noted in the subject content for Component 1, it is important that learners regard
extended writing as an integral part of their Personal Investigation. In assessing the Personal
Investigation, therefore, written and practical responses will be assessed holistically. It is
essential that they are directly and purposefully integrated and that learners aim to make
connections between all elements of their work as clearly as possible.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 38
Possible formats and presentation methods for extended writing
(1000 words minimum)
Learners may use or combine any of the suggested formats listed below to develop the
extended written element of their personal investigation. Extended writing presented as
part of AO1 must total a minimum of 400 words. If learners choose to use extended
writing for addressing AO2, AO3 and/or AO4, this must be presented in sections of at least
200 words. Whatever the format of written responses, the 1000 word minimum
requirement applies in all instances.
This list of suggestions is neither obligatory nor exhaustive:
 research reports
 brochures
 exhibition catalogues
 illustrated essays
 scripts for oral presentations or interviews
 blogs or journals
 newspaper/magazine articles
 critiques or debates
 reviews
 evaluation reports
 audio-visual presentation scripts
 webpages.
As noted in the specification itself, extended writing is not intended to replace brief written
annotation, as used, for example, to accompany drawings in sketchbooks or design
notebooks. This good practice is encouraged. However, such annotation will not form part
of the extended writing requirement of 1000 words minimum.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 39
Mark Scheme for ART & DESIGN A Level COMPONENT 1 : Personal Investigation = Total Marks 120
AO1 AO2 AO3 AO4
Develop ideas through sustained and focused Explore and select appropriate resources, media, Record ideas, observations and insights relevant Present a personal and meaningful response
investigations informed by contextual and other materials, techniques and processes, reviewing to intentions, reflecting critically on work and that realises intentions and, where appropriate,
sources, demonstrating analytical and critical and refining ideas as work develops. progress. makes connections between visual and other
understanding. elements.
5 25 - 30 25 - 30 25 - 30 25 - 30
Sophisticated and thorough development of ideas Sophisticated evidence of selecting appropriate Sophisticated ability to record observations, Highly imaginative, personal and meaningful
through coherently sustained, focused and in-depth resources, media and processes. experiences, ideas and insights relevant to responses presented, with intentions realised in a
investigations. intentions within the context of thorough and perceptive and coherent way.
Rigorous and confident exploration of materials and coherent research and enquiry.
Perceptive and rigorous visual and written critical highly skilful control of techniques to fully exploit Significant and perceptive connections between
analysis and evaluation applied to highly relevant their creative potential. Perceptive, rigorous and effective critical reflection visual, written, oral and other elements, where
contextual and other sources, including the on work and progress is demonstrated. appropriate, conveyed in a highly convincing way.
perceptive and rigorous use of appropriate specialist Significant and perceptive relationships established
vocabulary. between working methods and outcomes that are
continually reviewed and sensitively refined.
Mature and comprehensive responses and
interpretations consistently informed by very good
understanding of associated purposes, meanings
and contexts.
4 19 - 24 19 - 24 19 - 24 19 - 24
Thorough development of ideas through sustained Good evidence of selecting the appropriate Good ability to record observations, experiences, Imaginative, personal and meaningful responses
and focused investigations. resources, media and processes. ideas and insights relevant to intentions within the presented, with intentions realised in a very
context of thorough research and enquiry. competent and clear way.
Rigorous visual and written critical analysis and Confident exploration of materials and skilful control
evaluation applied to highly relevant contextual and of techniques to exploit their creative potential. Rigorous and effective critical reflection on work and Significant connections between visual, written, oral
other sources, including the rigorous use of progress is demonstrated. and other elements, where appropriate, conveyed in
appropriate specialist vocabulary. Significant relationships established between a convincing way.
working methods and outcomes that are frequently
Comprehensive responses and interpretations reviewed and appropriately refined.
informed by a good understanding of purposes,
meanings and contexts.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 40
AO1 AO2 AO3 AO4
3 13 - 18 13 - 18 13 - 18 13 - 18
Reasonable development of ideas through Reasonable evidence of selecting appropriate Reasonable ability to record observations, Reasonably imaginative, personal and meaningful
investigations that are generally sustained. resources, media and processes. experiences, ideas and insights relevant to responses presented, with intentions realised in a
intentions within the context of reasonable research satisfactory way.
Reasonable visual and written critical analysis and Reasonable exploration of materials and control of and enquiry.
evaluation of generally relevant contextual and other techniques to exploit their creative potential. Relevant connections between visual, written, oral
sources, including the reasonable use of specialist Reasonably effective critical reflection on work and and other elements, where appropriate, conveyed in
vocabulary. Relationships established between working methods progress is demonstrated. a reasonably convincing way.
and outcomes that are reviewed and reasonably
Responses and interpretations are generally refined.
informed by understanding of purposes, meanings
and contexts.
2 7 - 12 7 - 12 7 - 12 7 - 12
Some development of ideas through investigations, Some evidence of selecting resources, media and Some ability to record observations, experiences, Some ability to present imaginative, personal and
some of which are sustained. processes, some of which are appropriate. ideas and insights relevant to intentions within the meaningful responses, with intentions realised in an
context of some research and enquiry. inconsistent way.
Some visual and written critical analysis and Some exploration of materials and control of
evaluation of some relevant contextual and other techniques to exploit their creative potential. Some critical reflection on work and progress is Some connections between visual, written, oral and
sources, including some use of specialist demonstrated. other elements, where appropriate, conveyed in a
vocabulary. Links sometimes made between working methods partly convincing way.
and outcomes that are sometimes reviewed and to
Responses and interpretations are sometimes some extent refined.
informed by understanding of purposes, meanings
and contexts.
1 1 - 6 1 - 6 1 - 6 1 - 6
Limited development of ideas through investigations. Limited evidence of selecting resources, media and Limited ability to record observations, experiences, Limited ability to present imaginative, personal and
processes, a minimum of which are appropriate. ideas and insights relevant to intentions within the meaningful responses, with intentions realised in a
Limited visual and written critical analysis and context of limited research and enquiry. limited way.
evaluation with minimal reference to contextual and Limited attempts made to explore materials and
other sources, with limited use of specialist control techniques to exploit their creative potential. Limited critical reflection on work and progress is Limited evidence of connections between visual,
vocabulary. demonstrated. written, oral and other elements, where appropriate,
Limited links are made between working methods conveyed in a limited way.
Limited responses and interpretations partially and outcomes that, to some extent are reviewed and
informed by limited understanding of aspects of refined in a limited way.
purpose, meaning and context.
0 0 Response not worthy of credit or not attempted. 0 Response not worthy of credit or not attempted. 0 Response not worthy of credit or not attempted. 0 Response not worthy of credit or not attempted.
Assessment of extended writing: a minimum of 400 words extended writing must be included as evidence for AO1. Depending on the nature of the personal investigation,
learners may also choose to use extended writing, together with visual and other evidence, to address any or all of the other Assessment Objectives AO2, AO3 and AO4. For
AO2, AO3 and/or AO4, extended writing must be presented in sections of 200 words minimum. Whatever the format of written responses, the 1000 word minimum
requirement applies in all instances.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 41
Mark Scheme for ART & DESIGN A Level COMPONENT 2 : Externally Set Assignment = Total Marks 80
AO1 AO2 AO3 AO4
Develop ideas through sustained and focused Explore and select appropriate resources, media, Record ideas, observations and insights relevant Present a personal and meaningful response that
investigations informed by contextual and other materials, techniques and processes, reviewing to intentions, reflecting critically on work and realises intentions and, where appropriate,
sources, demonstrating analytical and critical and refining ideas as work develops. progress. makes connections between visual and other
understanding. elements.
5 17 - 20 17 - 20 17 - 20 17 - 20
Sophisticated and thorough development of ideas Sophisticated evidence of selecting appropriate Sophisticated ability to record observations, Highly imaginative, personal and meaningful
through coherently sustained, focused and in-depth resources, media and processes. experiences, ideas and insights relevant to responses presented, with intentions realised in a
investigations. intentions within the context of thorough and perceptive and coherent way.
Rigorous and confident exploration of materials and coherent research and enquiry.
Perceptive and rigorous critical analysis and highly skilful control of techniques to fully exploit Significant and perceptive connections between
evaluation applied to highly relevant contextual and their creative potential. Perceptive, rigorous and effective critical reflection visual, written, oral and other elements, where
other sources. on work and progress is demonstrated. appropriate, conveyed in a highly convincing way.
Significant and perceptive relationships established
Mature and comprehensive responses and between working methods and outcomes that are
interpretations consistently informed by very good continually reviewed and sensitively refined.
understanding of associated purposes, meanings
and contexts.
4 13 - 16 13 - 16 13 - 16 13 - 16
Thorough development of ideas through sustained Good evidence of selecting the most appropriate Good ability to record observations, experiences, Imaginative, personal and meaningful responses
and focused investigations. resources, media and processes. ideas and insights relevant to intentions within the presented, with intentions realised in a very
context of thorough research and enquiry. competent and clear way.
Rigorous critical analysis and evaluation applied to Confident exploration of materials and skilful control
appropriate contextual and other sources. of techniques to exploit their creative potential. Rigorous and effective critical reflection on work and Significant connections between visual, written, oral
progress is demonstrated. and other elements, where appropriate, conveyed in
Comprehensive responses and interpretations Significant relationships established between a convincing way.
informed by a good understanding of purposes, working methods and outcomes that are frequently
meanings and contexts. reviewed and appropriately refined.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 42
AO1 AO2 AO3 AO4
3 9 - 12 9 - 12 9 - 12 9 - 12
Reasonable development of ideas through Reasonable evidence of selecting appropriate Reasonable ability to record observations, Reasonably imaginative, personal and meaningful
investigations that are generally sustained. resources, media and processes. experiences, ideas and insights relevant to responses presented, with intentions realised in a
intentions within the context of reasonable research satisfactory way.
Reasonable critical analysis and evaluation of Reasonable exploration of materials and control of and enquiry.
generally relevant contextual and other sources. techniques to exploit their creative potential. Relevant connections between visual, written, oral
Reasonably effective critical reflection on work and and other elements, where appropriate, conveyed in
Responses and interpretations are generally Relationships established between working methods progress is demonstrated. a reasonably convincing way.
informed by understanding of purposes, meanings and outcomes that are reviewed and reasonably
and contexts. refined.
2 5 - 8 5 - 8 5 - 8 5 - 8
Some development of ideas through investigations, Some evidence of selecting resources, media and Some ability to record observations, experiences, Some ability to present imaginative, personal and
some of which are sustained. processes, some of which are appropriate. ideas and insights relevant to intentions within the meaningful responses, with intentions realised in an
context of some research and enquiry. inconsistent way.
Some critical analysis and evaluation of some Some exploration of materials and control of
relevant contextual and other sources. techniques to exploit their creative potential. Some critical reflection on work and progress is Some connections between visual, written, oral and
demonstrated. other elements, where appropriate, conveyed in a
Responses and interpretations are sometimes Links sometimes made between working methods partly convincing way.
informed by understanding of purposes, meanings and outcomes that are sometimes reviewed and to
and contexts. some extent refined.
1 1 - 4 1 - 4 1 - 4 1 - 4
Limited development of ideas through investigations. Limited evidence of selecting resources, media and Limited ability to record observations, experiences, Limited ability to present imaginative, personal and
processes, a minimum of which are appropriate. ideas and insights relevant to intentions within the meaningful responses, with intentions realised in a
Limited critical analysis and evaluation with minimal context of limited research and enquiry. limited way.
reference to contextual and other sources. Limited attempts made to explore materials and
control techniques to exploit their creative potential. Limited reflection on work and progress is Limited evidence of connections between visual,
Limited responses and interpretations partially demonstrated. written, oral and other elements, where appropriate,
informed by limited understanding of aspects of Limited links are made between working methods conveyed in a limited way.
purpose, meaning and context. and outcomes that, to some extent are reviewed and
refined in a limited way.
0 0 Response not worthy of credit or not attempted. 0 Response not worthy of credit or not attempted. 0 Response not worthy of credit or not attempted. 0 Response not worthy of credit or not attempted.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 43
NOTE: This content is not prescriptive but learners are expected to give consideration to the aspects referred to
below. Each submission will be assessed on its merits according to the generic mark scheme based on the four
assessment objectives. Teachers may refer to this indicative content for additional guidance.
Art, Craft & Design is distinguishable from other options inasmuch as learners are enabled to demonstrate
personal interests and abilities across a particularly broad course of study. They should explore selected
practical and contextual areas of art, craft and design through a range of two and/or three dimensional media
and processes. Art, Craft and Design can involve use of an almost limitless range of materials, techniques and
processes, but due regard should be given to achieving appropriate depth, as well as breadth of learning
experiences.
Submissions for Art and Design (Art, Craft and Design) should aim to present evidence of the following
in order to meet assessment requirements.
AO1 Contextual understanding
• Development of ideas that are informed by investigative contextual study of historical and contemporary
art, craft and design and other sources relevant to the selected area of study.
• Awareness of the wide variety of work produced by artists, craftspeople and designers and differences in
their methods, approaches, purposes and intentions.
• Analytical skill and critical and contextual understanding in appraising, comparing and contrasting the work
of relevant artists, craftspeople and designers and other contextual sources and in the formative and
summative evaluation of personal outcomes.
AO2 Creative making
• Selection of, and purposeful experimentation with, a sufficient and appropriate breadth of media and
processes, mixed media and combinations of media, exercising suitable control of these to maximise
creative potential, showing evidence of appropriate depth and breadth of study.
• Exploration of stimulating resources and rich visual and tactile sources to initiate and develop innovative
ideas, with due regard to relevant formal elements, particularly composition. Clear relationships should be
established between working methods and outcomes. Each significant step in the creative process should
be documented, with due regard given to the penultimate stage of development so that final outcomes do
not suddenly appear.
• Discrimination shown in reviewing and refining ideas as work progresses. Skilful control exercised in
attending to detail, such as re-constructing parts of three-dimensional craft pieces, to produce well resolved
outcomes of quality.
AO3 Reflective recording
• Gathering, selecting, organising and communicating relevant information in undertaking research into
visual and other sources of reference, showing personal interests and judgements. Due attention given to
selecting appropriate sources of enquiry and rigorously analysing these to extract informative detail.
• Recording, by drawing and other suitable means, such as colour, tonal and textural notes, photographs
and annotation in sketchbooks and on study sheets, ideas, observations and insights that are in line with
personal intentions.
• Critical reflection on progression of work in order to effectively review what has been learned, acquire
deeper understanding and clarify purposes and meanings. Where appropriate, learning could be
transferred to new contexts, such as adapting an expressive, abstract painted response to cross sections
of fruit to develop graphic designs for new, locally-produced fruit yoghurts.
AO4 Personal presentation
• Presentation of truly personal, imaginative final outcomes that, together with selective evidence of the
processes by which they were produced, effectively realise stated intentions.
• Explicit connections made, where appropriate, between the different elements of the submission, including
contextual, practical and written responses, presenting work that is meaningful, well informed and in an
order which can be easily followed.
• Consideration of different presentational formats and selection of the most appropriate of these for the
submission. Due regard should be given to the purpose of the work and how it might engage the interest
of an audience, such as a display of an art, a craft and a design outcome developed from a common
theme, accompanied by a screen-based programme of visuals and text.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 44
NOTE: This content is not prescriptive but learners are expected to give consideration to the aspects referred to
below. Each submission will be assessed on its merits according to the generic mark scheme based on the four
assessment objectives. Teachers may refer to this indicative content for additional guidance.
Fine Art may be distinguishable by the emphasis it places on aesthetic and intellectual purposes rather than on
practical, functional and utilitarian considerations. This option covers a broad and developing area of study that
includes painting, drawing, ceramics, sculpture, installation, performance and conceptual art and aspects of
print-making, photography and film. It utilises traditional, new and emerging media and processes and involves
expressive use of a particularly wide range of materials, techniques and skills.
Submissions for Art and Design (Fine Art) should aim to present evidence of the following in order to
meet assessment requirements.
AO1 Contextual understanding
• Development of ideas that are informed by contextual study of historical and contemporary fine art and
other sources such as architecture, music, dance, drama, production design and published media and the
place of fine art within these.
• Awareness of the wide variety of fine art processes and outcomes and the differences between fine art
sculpture, ceramics, printmaking and photography and utilitarian application of these art forms. Where
appropriate, personal interpretations should demonstrate the distinction between expressive and functional
approaches.
• Analytical skill and critical and contextual understanding in appraising, comparing and contrasting the work
of relevant fine artists and other contextual sources and in the formative and summative evaluation of
personal outcomes.
AO2 Creative making
• Selection of, and experimentation with, a sufficient and appropriate breadth of fine art media and
processes, mixed media and combinations of media, exercising suitable control of these to maximise
creative potential.
• Exploration of stimulating resources and rich visual and tactile sources to initiate and develop innovative
ideas, with due regard to line, tone, colour, texture and other visual elements, particularly composition.
Clear relationships should be established between working methods and outcomes. Each significant step
in the creative process should be documented, with due regard given to the penultimate stage of
development so that final outcomes do not suddenly appear.
• Discrimination shown in reviewing ideas as work develops. Careful control exercised in refining detail, such
as delineation of anatomical structure in portraying the human form, to produce well resolved outcomes of
quality.
AO3 Reflective recording
• Gathering, selecting, organising and communicating relevant information in undertaking research into
visual and tactile sources of reference, showing personal interests and judgements. Due attention given to
selecting appropriate sources of enquiry and rigorously analysing these to extract informative detail.
• Recording, by drawing and other suitable means, such as colour, tonal and textural notes, photographs
and annotation in sketchbooks and on study sheets, ideas, observations and insights that are in line with
personal intentions.
• Critical reflection on work and progress in order to effectively review what has been learned, show deeper
understanding and clarify purposes and meanings.
AO4 Personal presentation
• Presentation of creative responses that are essentially personal and effectively realise stated intentions,
such as a triptych comprising surface prints, experimental photographs and painted portraits depicting the
life stages of a family member.
• Explicit connections made, where appropriate, between the different elements of the submission, including
contextual, practical and written responses, presenting work that is meaningful, well informed and in an
order which can be easily followed.
• Consideration of different presentational formats and selection of the most appropriate of these for the
submission, giving due regard to the purpose of the work and how it might engage the interest of an
audience.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 45
NOTE: This content is not prescriptive but learners are expected to give consideration to the aspects referred to
below. Each submission will be assessed on its merits according to the generic mark scheme based on the four
assessment objectives. Teachers may refer to this indicative content for additional guidance.
Critical and Contextual Studies is a unique option inasmuch as it enables learners to develop innovative opportunities
to acquire critical, contextual and curatorial knowledge, understanding and skills in appreciating artefacts, texts and
images within particular cultural environments, alongside relevant practical investigations. The option provides for a
broad range of intellectual and practical learning experiences through a variety of lively and creative strategies for
developing and presenting personal, practical, critical and contextual responses. These may include a wide variety of
practical outcomes that demonstrate understanding of, for example, the work of an artist, a movement or theme by
means such as devising an audio-visual presentation, the development of an informative annotated display, the design
of learning resources and through a variety of illustrated texts written in different formats and for a range of purposes.
These might take the form of gallery guides, exhibition brochures, magazine spreads, newspaper articles,
documentary television scripts and factual or fictional discussions or exchanges between artists, craftspeople or
designers using a range of communication methods. It is necessary to emphasise that this option is different from
traditional approaches to the history of art and learners are required to provide evidence of achievement across all four
assessment objectives.
Submissions for Art and Design (Critical and Contextual Studies) should aim to present evidence of the
following in order to meet assessment requirements.
AO1 Contextual understanding
• Development of ideas that are informed by investigative contextual study of historical and contemporary art,
craft and design and other sources, showing understanding of how artefacts and images are reflective of the
time, place and other contexts within which they are produced.
• Awareness of the wide variety of work produced by artists, craftspeople and designers, the relationship between
their disciplines and differences in their methods, approaches, purposes and intentions.
• Investigative, analytical skill and critical and contextual understanding in appraising, comparing and contrasting
the work of relevant artists, craftspeople and designers and other contextual sources and in the formative and
summative evaluation of personal outcomes.
AO2 Creative making
• Judicious selection and purposeful exploration of a sufficient and appropriate breadth of media, material,
techniques and processes, critical and contextual topics, themes, periods, movements and styles and ways in
which ideas, attitudes and beliefs have influenced art, craft and design.
• Investigation of stimulating resources including visual and tactile sources, live and recorded artists’
presentations, radio and TV arts programmes, newspaper and magazine exhibition reviews, publications and
selective use of the Internet. Wherever possible, visits should be undertaken to primary sources such as
galleries, museums, studios and workshops of artists, craftspeople and designers to encounter and engage with
creative outcomes and their makers at first hand.
• Discrimination shown in reviewing and refining ideas as work progresses. Skilful control exercised in attending
to detail in interpreting, evaluating and communicating judgements about images, objects and artefacts, to
produce well resolved outcomes of quality.
AO3 Reflective recording
• Gathering, selecting, organising and communicating relevant information in undertaking research into
appropriate sources of reference, showing curiosity, personal interests and judgements. Due attention given to
selecting appropriate sources of enquiry and rigorously analysing these to extract informative detail.
• Recording, by a variety of suitable means, such as written notes, sketches, colour, tonal and textural notes,
photographs in workbooks, sketchbooks and on study sheets, ideas, observations and insights that are in line
with personal intentions.
• Critical reflection on progression of work in order to effectively review what has been learned, showing deeper
understanding, clarify purposes and meanings and ability to transfer learning to a new context such as adapting
a written and illustrated exposition of the life and work of a local artist to a documentary TV script.
AO4 Personal presentation
• Presentation of innovative responses that are essentially personal and effectively realise stated intentions, such
as a fictitious series of letters exchanged between a landscape painter and a landscape photographer in which
they compare, in words and images, differences in their approaches.
• Clear connections made, where appropriate, between the different elements of the submission, including
contextual, practical and written responses, presenting work that is meaningful, well informed and in an order
which can be easily followed.
• Consideration of different presentational formats and selection of the most appropriate of these for the
submission, giving due regard to the purpose of the work and how it might engage the interest of an audience or
editor, for example, production of a gallery resource pack for KS3 learners.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 46
NOTE: This content is not prescriptive but learners are expected to give consideration to the aspects referred to
below. Each submission will be assessed on its merits according to the generic mark scheme based on the four
assessment objectives. Teachers may refer to this indicative content for additional guidance.
Textile Design encompasses a very broad range of materials, techniques and processes, including a growing
number of interdisciplinary approaches. These comprise woven, embroidered, knitted, printed, painted, dyed,
manipulated, embellished and constructional methods which are utilised to produce a great variety of textile
outcomes that include costume and fashion design, accessories and body adornment. The range is increasing
as new materials and technologies emerge.
Submissions for Art and Design (Textile Design) should aim to present evidence of the following in
order to meet assessment requirements.
AO1 Contextual understanding
• Development of ideas that are informed by contextual study of historical and contemporary textile design in
our own and other cultures and other sources such as fine art, architecture, photography, published media
and production design.
• Awareness of the wide variety of creative textile processes and outcomes and the relationship between
functional and aesthetic considerations, showing understanding of how these are applied and adapted to
meet particular needs. Sensitive response to issues such as cultural traditions, disability, recycling, and
upcycling.
• Analytical skill and critical and contextual understanding in appraising, comparing and contrasting the work
of relevant textile designers and other contextual sources and in the formative and summative evaluation of
personal textile outcomes.
AO2 Creative making
• Selection of, and purposeful experimentation with, a sufficient and appropriate range of textile materials
and processes, mixed media and combinations of techniques, exercising suitable control of these to
maximise creative potential. Technical details may be included, but should be selective and concise.
Concern with technical or craft processes should not assume greater importance than the progression of
creative ideas.
• Exploration of stimulating resources and rich visual and tactile sources to initiate and develop innovative
ideas, with due regard to line, colour, pattern, texture and other visual elements, particularly form. Clear
relationships established between working methods and outcomes. Each significant step in the creative
process documented, with due regard given to the penultimate stage of development so that final
outcomes do not suddenly appear.
• Discrimination shown in reviewing ideas as work develops. Careful control exercised in refining detail,
such as the design and production of decorative features, to produce well resolved outcomes of quality.
AO3 Reflective recording
• Gathering, selecting, organising and communicating relevant information in undertaking research into
visual and tactile sources of reference, showing personal interests and judgements. Due attention given to
selecting appropriate sources of enquiry and rigorously analysing these to extract informative detail.
• Recording in sketchbooks, workbooks and on study sheets, observations and insights that are in line with
personal intentions, such as colour, pattern and textural notes, by means of sketching, mark-making and
other suitable methods such as photographs and analytical commentary.
• Critical reflection on work and progress in order to effectively review what has been learned, show deeper
understanding and clarify purposes and meanings.
AO4 Personal presentation
• Presentation of creative responses that are essentially personal and which effectively realise stated
intentions, such as machine embroidered, appliqué panels for the new home of a close friend.
• Explicit connections made, where appropriate, between the different elements of the submission, including
contextual, practical and written responses, presenting work that is meaningful, well informed and in an
order which can be easily followed.
• Consideration of different presentational formats, such as through a studio photo- shoot of a theatrical
costume or sketches of the textile product in a suitable setting. Selection of the most appropriate of these
for the submission, giving due regard to the purpose of the work and how it might engage the interest of an
audience or potential clients. It is not necessary to always produce finished items or garments but they
should be complete enough to demonstrate ability to take them through to a resolved conclusion.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 47
NOTE: This content is not prescriptive but learners are expected to give consideration to the various aspects referred
to below. Each submission will be assessed on its merits according to the generic mark scheme based on the four
assessment objectives. Teachers may refer to this indicative content for additional guidance.
Graphic Communication may be defined as the process by which ideas are communicated through the use of
symbols, drawings, photographs and typography to convey concepts and/or emotions. This option encompasses a
wide and developing area of study, incorporating a variety of related disciplines and utilising traditional skills, such as
calligraphy and hand-formed lettering, alongside cutting-edge digital technologies. Boundaries between related
graphic processes are becoming increasingly blurred but aspects, such as advertising, packaging design, computer
games, web and multi-media design, illustration and typography, provide an indication of what might be covered within
the option. Graphic communication may also be closely associated with animation, architecture, photography and
design for print. Outcomes can be two and three dimensional, and can take the form of posters, brochures, flyers, T-
shirts, CD/DVD sleeves, book covers, magazine spreads, calendars, stamps, packaging, publicity materials, vehicle
livery, billboards, advertising, logos, branding, corporate identity, and three dimensional point-of-sale and exhibition
design.
Submissions for Art and Design (Graphic Communication) should aim to present evidence of the
following in order to meet assessment requirements.
AO1 Contextual understanding
• Development of ideas that are informed by contextual study of past and present graphic design and other
sources such as television and cinema, fine art, product design and published media.
• Awareness of the variety of issues that influence the purposes, meanings and contexts of graphic design such as
ethical and conservational considerations, marketing strategies, promotional campaigning, reprographic
processes and magazine and journal production.
• Analytical skill and critical and contextual understanding in appraising, comparing and contrasting the work of
relevant graphic designers, other contextual sources and in the formative and summative evaluation of personal
design processes and outcomes.
AO2 Creative making
• Selection of, and experimentation with, appropriate graphic design media and processes, with controlled use of
typography and imagery from primary and secondary sources, including purposeful manipulation using digital
software. Technical details may be included, but should be selective and concise. Concern with technical
processes should not assume greater importance than the progression of creative ideas.
• Exploration of stimulating resources and studio-based and environmental sources to initiate and develop
innovative ideas, with due regard to composition and layout, proportion, line, tone, colour, texture, scale and
other visual elements. The full potential of graphic communication should be explored through experimentation
with established and emerging technologies and, where appropriate, combining graphic design methods with
other processes to originate new ways of working. Each significant step in the creative process should be
documented, with particular attention given to the penultimate stage so that final outcomes do not suddenly
appear.
• Discrimination in reviewing ideas as work develops. Careful control exercised in refining detail, such as selection
of fonts, relationship of typography to images and a suitable reprographic process to produce outcomes of
quality.
AO3 Reflective recording
• Gathering, selecting, organising and communicating relevant information in undertaking research into visual and
other sources of reference. Due attention given to the selection of the most appropriate images and the analysis
and annotation of these, rather than including multiple thumbnail prints with no evaluative comments.
• Recording, through drawing, photographs and by other means, such as layout sketches, storyboards and written
notes, ideas, observations and insights that are relevant to personal intentions.
• Critical reflection on work and progress in order to review what has been learned, deepen understanding and
clarify purpose and meaning.
AO4 Personal presentation
• Presentation of creative responses that are essentially personal, effectively realise stated intentions and fulfil
design requirements.
• Explicit connections made, where appropriate, between the different elements of the submission, including
contextual, practical and written responses, presenting work that is meaningful, well informed and in an order
which can be easily followed.
• Consideration of different presentational formats, such as public transport advertising or bus shelter posters,
selecting the most appropriate of these for the submission, giving due regard to the purpose of the work and how
it might engage the interest of an audience or potential clients. If the print size or cost of a preferred format is a
constraint, then this could be drawn, described and/or presented as a scale model.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 48
NOTE: This content is not prescriptive but learners are expected to give consideration to the various aspects referred to
below. Each submission will be assessed on its merits according to the generic mark scheme based on the four assessment
objectives. Teachers may refer to this indicative content for additional guidance.
Three-Dimensional Design is distinguishable in this option by the emphasis placed upon functional and utilitarian
considerations as compared to three-dimensional outcomes produced in other disciplines, such as sculpture in Fine Art,
where the intentions might be centred upon the aesthetic qualities of expressive form. Three-Dimensional Design covers a
particularly wide range of activities ranging in scale from jewellery and body adornment to architectural and environmental
design. Other aspects include functional ceramics, product design, interior and exhibition design, theatre and production
design incorporating film and television. Aspects of craft may also be included, such as puppet design and construction and
single items of furniture that are concerned with functionality and manual skills as well as aesthetic qualities.
Submissions for Art and Design (Three-Dimensional Design) should aim to present evidence of the
following in order to meet assessment requirements.
AO1 Contextual understanding
• Development of ideas that are informed by contextual study of past and present three dimensional design in our own
and other cultures and sources such as science fiction games and publications, film and television, fine art and textiles.
• Awareness of the variety of factors that influence the purposes, meanings and contexts of three dimensional design
such as ergonomic factors, ethical, conservational and economic considerations, production methods and the practical
criteria of a given space. Relevant knowledge of working arrangements within which particular three dimensional
outcomes are produced, such as in set production for a stage play. Understanding that most designers are essentially
responsive and collaborative.
• Analytical skill, critical and contextual understanding in appraising, comparing and contrasting the work of relevant
three dimensional designers and other contextual sources and in the formative and summative evaluation of personal
design processes and outcomes. Personal responses to inspirational images rather than production of cut and paste
‘mood’ boards.
AO2 Creative making
• Selection of, and experimentation with, appropriate three-dimensional design media and processes, such as wood,
clay, plastic, metal, card and paper, with controlled and safe use of suitable tools and equipment and, where relevant,
specialised use of computer aided design and control. Technical details may be included, but should be selective and
concise. Concern with technical processes should not assume greater importance than the progression of creative
ideas.
• Exploration of stimulating resources and workshop-based and environmental sources to initiate and develop innovative
ideas, with due regard to the use to be made of the intended outcome, its surface, structure, texture, colour, form,
mass, volume, scale, proportion, durability and strength and other three dimensional elements. The full potential of
selected aspects of three-dimensional design should be explored through experimentation with traditional and
emerging technologies and, where appropriate, combining three-dimensional design methods with other processes to
originate new ways of working. Each significant step in the creative process should be documented, with particular
attention given to the penultimate stage, so that final outcomes do not suddenly appear.
• Discrimination in reviewing and refining ideas as work develops. Careful control exercised in attending to detail, such
as well-formed connections of components, functional working parts, surface finish and aesthetic appearance, to
realise outcomes of quality.
AO3 Reflective recording
• Gathering, selecting, organising and communicating relevant information in undertaking research and enquiry into
three-dimensional, visual, tactile and other sources of reference. Due attention given to rigorous analysis of the most
appropriate design possibilities and problem-solving solutions.
• Recording, through sketches, perspective drawings, technical drawings by hand and CAD, working plans, photographs,
written notes and by other means, ideas, observations and insights that are relevant to personal intentions.
• Critical reflection on work and progress in order to review what has been learned, deepen understanding, clarify
purpose and, where appropriate, transfer learning to a new context, such as from stage to screen.
AO4 Personal presentation
• Presentation of creative outcomes that are essentially personal solutions to design requirements and effectively realise
stated intentions with evidence of personal curiosity and engagement.
• Explicit connections made, where appropriate, between the different elements of the submission, including contextual,
practical and written responses, presenting work in an order which can be easily followed.
• Consideration of different presentational formats, such as design sheets and audio-visual programme, selecting the
most appropriate of these for the submission. Due regard should be given to the purpose of the work and how it might
engage the interest of an audience or potential clients, such as a producer or design studio. If the cost of a preferred
format is a constraint, then this could be drawn, described and/or presented using less expensive materials. Outcomes
may take the form of finished pieces, prototypes and full size or scale models. They could be one-off pieces or
capable of small batch or mass production.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 49
NOTE: This content is not prescriptive but learners are expected to give consideration to the various aspects
referred to below. Each submission will be assessed on its merits according to the generic mark scheme based
on the four assessment objectives. Teachers may refer to this indicative content for additional guidance.
This option covers a broad and changing area of study with light-based imagery spanning almost two centuries.
Learners might engage with early light-based images and rudimentary technology, such as a pinhole camera, as
well as the most contemporary, which may include the use of digital cameras, video camcorders, photocopiers,
scanners and mobile phones. They may also work exclusively with film based or digital technology or with both.
Outcomes can be screen or print-based, comprise still or moving images and might be discrete to the subject
area or combined with other art forms.
Submissions for Art and Design (Photography) should aim to present evidence of the following in order
to meet assessment requirements.
AO1 Contextual understanding
• Development of ideas that are informed by contextual study of past and present photographic and other
sources such as film, fine art, installation art, graphic design, production design and published media and
the place of photography within these.
• Awareness of the variety of photographic and motion picture genre and, where appropriate, relating
personal work to a particular genre.
• Analytical skill and critical and contextual understanding in appraising, comparing and contrasting the work
of relevant photographers and other contextual sources and in the formative and summative evaluation of
personal photographic outcomes.
AO2 Creative making
• Selection of, and experimentation with, appropriate photographic media and processes, other media and
combinations of media, with controlled use of lighting, shutter speed, aperture, lenses, filters and digital
software. Technical details may be included, but should be selective and concise. Concern with technical
processes should not assume greater importance than the progression of creative ideas.
• Exploration of stimulating resources and studio-based and environmental sources to initiate and develop
innovative ideas, with due regard to viewpoint, composition, tone, colour, texture, scale and other visual
elements. Each significant step in the creative process should be documented. The full potential of
photography should be explored through experimentation with traditional and digital media, where
appropriate, combining photographic and other techniques to originate new ways of working.
• Discrimination in reviewing ideas as work develops. Careful control exercised in refining detail, such as in
editing, image manipulation and print resolution, to produce outcomes of quality.
AO3 Reflective recording
• Gathering, selecting, organising and communicating relevant information in undertaking research into
visual and tactile sources of reference. Due attention should be given to the selection of only the most
significant images and the analysis and annotation of these, rather than including multiple
thumbnail/contact prints with no evaluative comments.
• Recording, through photography and by other means, such as sketches, storyboards and written notes,
ideas, observations and insights that are relevant to personal intentions.
• Critical reflection on work and progress in order to review what has been learned, deepen understanding
and clarify purpose and meaning.
AO4 Personal presentation
• Presentation of creative responses that are essentially personal and effectively realise stated intentions,
such as a photographic poster to support a strongly held opinion or images of architectural structures
projected onto a three-dimensional construction.
• Explicit connections made, where appropriate, between the different elements of the submission, including
contextual, practical and written responses, presenting work in an order which can be easily followed.
• Consideration of different presentational formats, such as animated sequences and use of mixed media,
selecting the most appropriate of these for the submission, giving due regard to the purpose of the work
and how it might engage the interest of an audience or potential clients. If the print size or cost of a
preferred format is a constraint, then this could be drawn, described and/or presented as a scale model.
A LEVEL ART and DESIGN 50
A level specification in Art and Design/ED
09/10/14 v2
