
Component 1 10% 10% 7.5% 2.5%  30%
Component 2 10% 10% 10%   30%
Component 3 5.5% 7.5% 2% 5%  20%
Component 4 2.5% 2.5% 2.5% 2.5% 10% 20%
Overall Weighting 28% 30% 22% 10% 10% 100%
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ENGLISH LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 12
Non-exam assessment accounts for 20% of this A level. Please refer to the Joint
Council for Qualifications (JCQ) Instructions for Conducting Coursework on the JCQ
website, www.jcq.org.uk, for further information.
In this specification, non-exam assessment:
 enables learners to undertake independent and sustained studies to develop their
skills as producers and interpreters of language
 develops creative skills related to planning, drafting, editing and presenting
original writing and in the analysis of a range of texts
 offers the chance to develop competence in written expression in a range of
genres
 enables learners to undertake research in exploring contextual factors that have
helped shaped the production and reception of texts
 allows centres and candidates to select material that is culturally, personally and
academically relevant
 encourages integration of knowledge, understanding and skills in extended
pieces of work
 promotes both synthesis and reflection when reading and producing texts.
Task-setting
It is important that centres give due consideration to the setting of non-exam
assessment assignments to ensure that they make full use of the opportunity to allow
candidates to display independence and those skills necessary for attainment at the
highest levels of performance.
Candidates’ assignments should be devised to enable them to fully engage with the
assessment objectives relevant to this component.
If in doubt about a non-exam assessment task, then it is always possible to consult
the Subject Officer at WJEC.
Refer to Section 2.4 for the full requirements of the non-exam assessment
component.
Word count
It is the centre's responsibility to inform candidates of the guidance relating to word
count for each task in Component 4:
Component 4 Advisory Word Count
Section A 1500 words
Section B per task 850-1000 words per task
The advisory word count includes quotations used within a candidate’s assignment.
References made through footnotes and bibliographies are excluded from the word
count.
Candidates are expected to follow the guidelines on the length of folders as stated in
this specification. Candidates who offer work that is too short are penalising
themselves by not allowing appropriate coverage of the required assessment
objectives. Candidates who significantly exceed the word count are penalising
themselves through a lack of precision and focus.
For each task within the non-exam assessment component, candidates are required
to record the total word counts for each task on the coversheet.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ENGLISH LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 13
Authentication
It is important that non-exam assessment is rigorously monitored by centres to
ensure that candidates' work is their own.
Centres could monitor in a number of ways, for example:
• careful record-keeping of the progress of learners’ work, particularly the
submission of drafts
• careful consideration of whether the work submitted is characteristic of the
learner’s ability/attainment
• keeping the work that students have submitted secure in a securely locked
cabinet or cupboard.
All candidates are required to sign a statement endorsing the originality of their
assignment(s) and centres must countersign that they have taken all reasonable steps
to validate this. The Non-exam Assessment Folder coversheet should be
completed for all candidates, not just for those candidates selected for the sample to
be sent to the moderator. The forms can be downloaded from the subject page at
www.eduqas.co.uk. Validity can be further enhanced by careful attention to the
following points:
Acknowledgements
References to particular critics' work or other sources must always be clearly
acknowledged: by direct reference if a quotation is used; and by an appended
bibliography.
Drafting
Guidance may be given by teachers in the re-drafting of assignments but this must
only consist of general observations. Once an assignment is finally submitted and
marked, the work may not be further revised. In no cases are fair copies of marked
work acceptable. Drafts must be included for the external moderator where they are
likely to be important for a fair assessment of the final version.
Plagiarism
Centres are required to be vigilant and to refuse to award marks or submit for
moderation any work which they consider to be not the candidate’s own. Candidates
will be penalised for any attempt to plagiarise. General advice and guidance on how to
proceed if plagiarism is suspected can be found on the JCQ website.
Assessment grids
When assessing folders of non-exam assessment, teachers should study the
assessment grids, which are designed to present a system that links the assessment
objectives to marks, and which helps to discriminate clearly between the varying
levels of achievement.
The grids will be of most value when used in conjunction with examples of non-exam
assessment which will be issued annually to help centres identify the quality of work
associated with the various mark bands.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ENGLISH LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 14
Teachers must make specific reference to the assessment objectives in the
comments that they write on the work and on the coversheets. Teachers are required
to record separate marks for each assessment objective in the spaces provided on
the coversheet and to total the overall mark in the box provided. A summative
comment and individual assessment objective comments for each task must be
included on each candidate’s coversheet showing clearly how marks have been
awarded by the centre.
Copies of the assessment grids can be located in Appendix B.
Submissions of marks and administration
Centres need to submit marks for internally assessed work online during the summer
term of the year when the work is to be submitted for moderation. When the marks
have been submitted to WJEC, the online system will apply the sample formula
based on the overall rank order for the total entry and immediately identify the
sample of candidates whose work is selected for moderation.
 Only the candidates selected for the sample should be sent to the moderator in
rank order.
 Each selected candidate’s non-exam assessment folder must be accompanied by
an Non-exam Assessment Folder coversheet on which the candidate must
supply brief titles and/or explanations of each piece, and the teacher must
provide an overall comment for the moderator.
 The coversheet must be signed by both the candidate and the teacher.
N.B. Please remember that all candidates’ work, not just the sample, must be
authenticated internally by signing a coversheet.
The moderation sample of candidates' work should be sent to the external moderator
by an agreed date in the final summer term of the A level course.
Standardisation and moderation
It is essential that where there is more than one teacher in a centre, work from all
teaching groups is standardised internally. This is designed to ensure that the final
assessment reflects a single agreed standard for all teaching groups involved.
Standardising material will be issued by WJEC to assist with this process.
In order that assessments may be standardised fairly, each centre is assigned an
external moderator by WJEC. It is essential that the moderator is aware of the aims of
the assignments and the way that criteria have been used to make a final assessment.
All centres will receive detailed feedback from the moderation.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ENGLISH LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 15
This is a linear qualification in which all assessments must be taken at the end of the
course. Assessment opportunities will be available in the summer series each year,
until the end of the life of this specification. Summer 2017 will be the first
assessment opportunity.
A qualification may be taken more than once. Candidates must resit all examination
components in the same series.
Marks for NEA may be carried forward for the life of the specification. If a candidate
resits an NEA component (rather than carrying forward the previous NEA mark), it is
the new mark that will count towards the overall grade, even if it is lower than a
previous attempt.
Where a candidate has certificated on two or more previous occasions, the most
recent NEA mark is carried forward, regardless of whether that mark is higher or
lower (unless that mark is absent)
The entry code appears below.
WJEC Eduqas A level English Language and Literature: A710QS
The current edition of our Entry Procedures and Coding Information gives up-to-date
entry procedures.
A level qualifications are reported as a grade from A* to E. Results not attaining the
minimum standard for the award will be reported as U (unclassified).
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ENGLISH LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 16
Learners must choose one genre and one text from the list below for detailed study. In
addition to the texts selected for detailed study, learners must also select at least one text
within the same genre for wider reading. Texts for wider reading may be drawn from this list
but are not restricted to those listed below.
Genre: Gothic
Bram Stoker: Dracula
Mary Shelley: Frankenstein
Jane Austen: Northanger Abbey
Angela Carter: The Bloody Chamber and other stories
Daphne Du Maurier: Rebecca
Susan Hill: The Woman in Black
Sarah Waters: The Little Stranger
Shirley Jackson: The Haunting of Hill House
Wilkie Collins: The Woman in White
Elizabeth Gaskell : Gothic Tales
Horace Walpole: The Castle of Otranto
Ann Radcliffe: The Mysteries of Udolpho
Genre: Science Fiction
Ray Bradbury: The Illustrated Man and other short stories
H.G. Wells: The War of the Worlds
Kurt Vonnegut: The Sirens of Titans
Isaac Asimov: Foundation
JG Ballard: The Drowned World
Aldous Huxley: Brave New World
Iain M Banks: Consider Phlebas
China Mieville: Embassytown
John Fowles: The Magus
Doris Lessing: Shikasta
Don DeLillo: Ratner’s Star
Genre: Romance
Jane Austen: Pride and Prejudice, Emma, Persuasion, Sense and Sensibility
Emily Brontë: Wuthering Heights
Charlotte Brontë: Vilette
Thomas Hardy: Tess of the D’Urbervilles, Jude the Obscure
Audrey Niffenegger: The Time Traveler’s Wife
Truman Capote: Breakfast At Tiffany’s
A.S. Byatt: Possession
F. Scott Fitzgerald: The Great Gatsby, Tender is the Night
George Eliot: Mill on the Floss
Michael Ondaatje: The English Patient
E. M. Forster: A Room with a View
Ian McEwan: Enduring Love, On Chesil Beach
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ENGLISH LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 17
Genre: Dystopia
Margaret Atwood: The Handmaid’s Tale, Oryx and Crake
Ray Bradbury: Fahrenheit 451
George Orwell: 1984
Aldous Huxley: Brave New World
Anthony Burgess: A Clockwork Orange
Cormac McCarthy: The Road
Kazuo Ishiguro: Never Let Me Go
Phillip K Dick: Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?
William Gibson: Neuromancer
Jack London: Iron Heel
David Mitchell: Cloud Atlas
H.G. Wells: The Time Machine
Genre: Crime
Arthur Conan Doyle: Short Stories
Donna Tartt: The Secret History
John Buchan: The Thirty-Nine Steps
Raymond Chandler: Farewell, My Lovely
Joseph Conrad: The Secret Agent
Graham Greene: Brighton Rock
Kate Summerscale: The Suspicions of Mr Whicher
David Guterson: Snow Falling on Cedars
Iain Banks: The Crow Road
Wilkie Collins: The Moonstone
John Le Carre: The Spy Who Came in from the Cold
Patricia Highsmith: The Talented Mr Ripley
Genre: Satire/Comedy
Jonathan Swift: Gulliver’s Travels
Henry Fielding: Tom Jones
Stella Gibbons: Cold Comfort Farm
Evelyn Waugh: Scoop, Decline and Fall
David Lodge: Small World, Changing Places, Therapy
Kingsley Amis: Lucky Jim
Iris Murdoch: The Sea, the Sea
Anthony Burgess: Inside Mr Enderby
Charles Dickens: David Copperfield
William Makepeace Thackeray: Vanity Fair
Genre: Historical Fiction
Charles Dickens: A Tale of Two Cities, Bleak House
George Eliot: Middlemarch, Daniel Deronda, Romola
William Makepeace Thackeray: Vanity Fair
Hilary Mantel: Wolf Hall, Bring up the Bodies
Elizabeth Gaskell: North and South
John Fowles: The French Lieutenant's Woman
Tracy Chevalier: Fallen Angels
Margaret Forster: Lady's Maid
Sir Walter Scott: Ivanhoe
Tracy Chevalier: Girl with a Pearl Earring
Margaret Atwood: The Penelopiad
Jeffery Eugenides: Middlesex
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ENGLISH LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 18
Genre: War/Conflict
Pat Barker: Regeneration, The Eye in the Door, The Ghost Road
Sebastian Faulks: Birdsong
Joseph Heller: Catch 22
JG Ballard: Empire of the Sun
Khaled Hosseini: The Kite Runner
Ernest Hemingway: A Farewell to Arms, For Whom the Bell Tolls
Andrea Levy: Small Island
Susan Hill: Strange Meeting
Kurt Vonnegut: Slaughterhouse 5
Vera Brittain: Testament of Youth
James Fennimore Cooper: The Last of the Mohicans
Genre: Adventure/Journeys
Mark Twain: The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn
Robert Louis Stevenson: Kidnapped, Treasure Island
Jack Kerouac: On The Road
Joseph Conrad: Heart of Darkness
E.M. Forster: A Passage to India
Daniel Defoe: Robinson Crusoe
Jack London: Call of the Wild
Jon Krakauer: Into Thin Air, Into the Wild
Aron Ralston: 127 Hours: Between a Rock and a Hard Place
Genre: Life-writing
Sylvia Plath: The Bell Jar
Janet Frame: An Angel at my Table
Malcolm X: The Autobiography of Malcolm X
Gertrude Stein: The Autobiography of Alice B Toklas
Winston Churchill: My Early Life
Nelson Mandela: Long Walk to Freedom
Francis Spufford: The Child That Books Built
George Orwell: Down and Out in Paris and London, The Road to Wigan Pier
Robert Graves: Goodbye to All That
Alice Walker: The Same River Twice
Siegfried Sassoon: Memoirs of an Infantry Officer
Jeanette Winterson: Why be Happy when You Could be Normal
Azar Nafisi: Reading Lolita in Tehran
Michael Chabon: Manhood for Amateurs
Genre: Journalism
Introduction by Ian Jack: The Granta Book of Reportage
Ryszard Kapuscinski: The Soccer War
Martin Wainwright (ed.): The Bedside Guardian 2013
Eleanor Mills with Kira Cochrane (ed.): Cupcakes and Kalashnikovs: 100 Years of the Best
Journalism by Women
John Pilger (ed.): Tell Me No Lies
Ian Jack: The Country Formerly Known as Great Britain
Andrew O’Hagan: The Atlantic Ocean
Barbara Ehrenreich: Going to Extremes
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ENGLISH LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 19
Genre: Travel
Bill Bryson (any travel writing)
Paul Theroux (any travel writing)
Robert Minhinnick: Watching the Fire-Eater
Mark Twain: Innocents Abroad
Jonathan Raban: Passage To Juneau
Ian Jack (ed.): Granta 94: On the Road Again - Where Travel Writing Went Next
Charles Dickens: On Travel
Elizabeth A. Bohls (Editor), Ian Duncan (Editor):Travel Writing 1700-1830: An Anthology
P.J.O'Rourke: Holidays in Heck
Salman Rushdie: The Jaguar Smile: Nicaraguan Journey
Ernesto "Che" Guevara: The Motorcycle Diaries
Tim Butcher: Blood River
Heinrich Harrer: Seven Years in Tibet
Katherine Boo: Behind the Beautiful Forevers
Genre: Identity/The Outsider
Margaret Atwood: Surfacing
Iain Banks: The Wasp Factory
J.D. Salinger: The Catcher in the Rye
James Joyce : Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man
Radclyffe Hall: The Well of Loneliness
Hari Kunzru: The Impressionist
Irvine Welsh: Trainspotting
Anne Tyler: The Accidental Tourist
Bruce Chatwin: On The Black Hill
DBC Pierre: Vernon God Little
William Golding: Pincher Martin
Robert Louis Stevenson: The Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ENGLISH LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 20
Band AO1 AO2 AO3 AO4
Apply concepts and methods from integrated Analyse ways in which meanings are Demonstrate the significance and Explore connections across texts,
linguistic and literary study as appropriate, shaped in texts influence of the contexts in which texts are informed by linguistic and literary
using associated terminology and coherent produced and received concepts and methods
written expression (10 marks) (10 marks) (10 marks) (10 marks)
5 9-10 marks 9-10 marks 9-10 marks 9-10 marks
 thorough knowledge, understanding and  perceptive analysis of how language  confident evaluation of impact of  astute and illuminating connections
insights gained from integrated study choices, form and structure affect contextual factors in shaping the between key text and wider reading
 sophisticated and purposeful application of meaning production and reception of key text and including comments on style, attitudes
concepts and methods; apt textual support  mature and assured reading of texts wider reading etc.
 accurate and precise use of terminology  convincing and perceptive sub-textual  confident grasp of overview  confident connections across selected
 effectively organised response, utilising an exploration within selected genre genre
academic style and register  confident understanding of and  purposeful and productive comparisons
 confident and fluent expression appreciation of writers’ techniques
4 7-8 marks 7-8 marks 7-8 marks 7-8 marks
 clear evidence of integrated study  sustained analysis of how language  sound awareness of the influence of  secure exploration of connections
 purposeful use of terminology choices, form and structure affect contextual factors on the production and between key text and wider reading
 clearly understands and applies relevant meaning reception of key text and wider reading  secure understanding of connections
concepts and methods  thoughtful reading of texts  secure grasp of overview within selected genre
 coherent written expression  secure reading of implicit meaning  well-selected points of comparison
 effectively organised and shaped response  sound understanding of literary/linguistic and/or contrast
features
3 5-6 marks 5-6 marks 5-6 marks 5-6 marks
 some evidence of integrated study  some analysis of how language choices,  sensible awareness of the influence of  sensible exploration of connections
 reasonable use of terminology form and structure affect meaning, contextual factors on the production and between key text and wider reading
 some understanding of literary/linguistic though may not always be sustained reception of key text and wider reading  sensible understanding of connections
concepts and methods, not always relevant  sensible reading of texts  sensible grasp of overview within selected genre
 generally accurate and coherent written  sensible reading of implicit meaning  reasonable selection of points for
expression  sensible understanding of literary/ comparison and/or contrast
 clearly organised linguistic features
2 3-4 marks 3-4 marks 3-4 marks 3-4 marks
 basic evidence of integrated study  basic analysis of how language choices,  basic awareness of the influence of  basic exploration of connections between
 basic use of key terminology, though may form and structure affect meaning contextual factors on the production and key text and wider reading
include some inaccuracy  awareness of key linguistic/ literary reception of key text and wider reading  some understanding of connections
 basic understanding of concepts and features  basic overview within selected genre
methods  straightforward understanding of texts/  points of comparison and/or contrast may
 lapses in quality of written expression genre with some generalisation and be tenuous at times, or a tendency to be
 straightforward organisation simplification superficial
1 1-2 marks 1-2 marks 1-2 marks 1-2 marks
 limited evidence of integrated study  limited awareness of how some of the  limited awareness of the influence of  limited exploration of connections
 limited application of concepts and methods most obvious choices in language, form, contextual factors on the production and between key text and wider reading
 irregular use of terminology structure and vocabulary create basic reception of key text and wider reading  limited evidence of understanding of
 frequent lapses in clarity meaning  limited overview basic points of comparison and/or
 response may lack organisation  superficial analysis of texts contrast; texts may be discussed
individually and unevenly
 limited understanding of genre
0 marks: Response not worthy of credit or not attempted
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ENGLISH LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 21
Assessment Grid for Component 4 Section B: Related Creative Writing
Band AO5
Demonstrate expertise and creativity in the use of English to communicate in different ways
(20 marks per task)
5 17-20 marks
 style is confidently controlled for audience, form, genre and purpose
 writing is original and engaging; individuality is most marked at the top of the band
 language choices reveal detailed knowledge of linguistic and literary features and their impact
 strong degree of technical accuracy and consciousness in vocabulary and punctuation choices
4 13-16 marks
 register is engaged and clearly suited to audience, form, genre and purpose
 evidence of thoughtful creativity and response will show some signs of originality
 language choices are appropriate and increasingly purposeful at the top of the band
 mostly secure levels of technical accuracy
3 9-12 marks
 style and tone are appropriate for audience, form, genre and purpose
 creates a personal voice and makes a conscious attempt to organise material for effect
 language choices reveal sound knowledge of linguistic and literary features and their impact
 generally sound levels of technical accuracy though there may be some lapses
2 5-8 marks
 some variation in register for audience, form, genre and purpose, increasingly more successful at the top of the band
 attempts to engage creatively with task and to match form and content to purpose
 some language choices are appropriate but not always purposeful in relation to task
 some technical errors
1 1-4 marks
 style is not always successful and there may be limited attempts to vary register appropriately for audience, form, genre and purpose
 limited engagement with the task and limited creativity
 language choices frequently inappropriate in relation to task
 frequent inaccuracies
0 marks: Response not worthy of credit or not attempted
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ENGLISH LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 22
The full list of poems included in the WJEC English Language and Literature Poetry Pre-
1914 Anthology and required for study in Section A of Component 1 is set out below.
THE PASSIONATE SHEPHERD TO HIS LOVE
Christopher Marlowe (1564-1593)
SONNET 73/SONNET 130
William Shakespeare (1564-1616)
THERE IS A GARDEN IN HER FACE
Thomas Campion (1567-1620)
A VALEDICTION FORBIDDING MOURNING/THE FLEA
John Donne (1572-1631)
TO VIRGINS, TO MAKE MUCH OF TIME
Robert Herrick (1591-1674)
THE COLLAR
George Herbert (1593-1633)
ON HIS BLINDNESS
John Milton (1608-1674)
THE AUTHOR TO HER BOOK/TO MY DEAR AND LOVING HUSBAND
Anne Bradstreet (1612-1672)
THE PICTURE OF LITTLE T.C. IN A PROSPECT OF FLOWERS
Andrew Marvell (1621-1678)
A SATIRICAL ELEGY ON THE DEATH OF A LATE FAMOUS GENERAL
Jonathan Swift (1716-1771)
LONDON/THE SCHOOLBOY
William Blake (1757-1827)
EXTRACT FROM THE PRELUDE BOOK IV/UPON WESTMINSTER BRIDGE
William Wordsworth (1770-1850)
KUBLA KHAN (EXTRACT)
Samuel Taylor Coleridge
EPITAPH ON A WELL KNOWN POET
Thomas Moore (1779-1852)
SHE WALKS IN BEAUTY
Lord Byron (1788-1824)
OZYMANDIAS/ENGLAND IN 1819
Percy Bysshe Shelley (1792-1822)
TO AUTUMN/ON FIRST LOOKING INTO CHAPMAN’S HOMER
John Keats (1795-1821)
HOW DO I LOVE THEE?
Elizabeth Barrett Browning (1806-1861)
THE KRAKEN
Alfred Lord Tennyson (1809-1892)
MY LAST DUCHESS/NEVER THE TIME AND THE PLACE
Robert Browning (1812-1889)
SPELLBOUND/REMEMBRANCE
Emily Brontë (1818-1848)
THE LATEST DECALOGUE
Arthur Hugh Clough (1819-1861)
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ENGLISH LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 23
THERE’S A CERTAIN SLANT OF LIGHT
Emily Dickinson (1830-1886)
SONG/A BIRTHDAY
Christina Georgina Rossetti (1830-1894)
GOD’S GRANDEUR
Gerard Manley Hopkins (1844-1889)
THE DARKLING THRUSH/THE VOICE
Thomas Hardy (1840-1928)
TO A CHILD DANCING IN THE WIND/HE WISHES FOR THE CLOTHS OF HEAVEN
W.B.Yeats (1865-1939)
LEISURE
William Henry Davies (1871-1940)
A level English Language and Literature Specification for teaching from 2015 HT/GH
ED 27 10 2014
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
