
Component 1 7.5% 10% 5% 2.5% 5% 30%
Component 2 5% 7.5% 7.5% 5% 5% 30%
Component 3 7.5% 7.5% 2.5% - 2.5% 20%
Component 4 5% 5% 5% 2.5% 2.5% 20%
Overall
weighting 25% 30% 20% 10% 15% 100%
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ENGLISH LITERATURE 12
Non-exam assessment accounts for 20% of this A level. Please refer to the Joint
Council for Qualifications (JCQ) Instructions for Conducting Coursework on the JCQ
website, www.jcq.org.uk, for further information.
In this specification, non-exam assessment enables learners to:
• pursue wider reading during the course
• undertake independent and sustained study of literary texts
• undertake research in exploring contextual factors that have helped shape the
production and reception of texts, including literary traditions of texts
• select material that is culturally, personally and academically relevant
• research other interpretations of texts
• explore connections and comparisons between texts in greater depth and detail
• plan, draft and edit work.
It is not expected that complete critical works will be studied in preparation for this
component, but learners should engage with literary sources.
It is important that learners give sufficient emphasis to their own reading of the texts
and that they make clear how other readings have informed their response. Other
readings should be engaged with, not simply explained or used as endorsement of
the candidates’ own views.
Task-setting
It is important that centres give due consideration to the setting of non-exam
assessment assignments to ensure that they make full use of the opportunity to allow
candidates to display independence and those skills necessary for attainment at the
highest levels of performance.
Candidates’ assignments should be devised to enable them to fully engage with the
assessment objectives relevant to this component.
If in doubt about a non-exam assessment task, then it is always possible to consult
the Subject Officer at WJEC.
Word count
It is the centre's responsibility to inform learners of the guidance relating to word
count for Component 4:
Component 4 Advisory Word Count
Prose Study 2500-3500 words
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ENGLISH LITERATURE 13
The advisory word count includes quotations used within a candidate’s assignment.
References made through footnotes and bibliographies are excluded from the word
count.
Candidates are expected to follow the guidelines on the length of folders as stated in
this specification. Candidates who offer work that is too short are penalising
themselves by not allowing appropriate coverage of the required assessment
objectives. Candidates who exceed the advisory word count are penalising
themselves through a lack of precision and focus.
Learners are required to record the total word count on the coversheet.
Authentication
It is important that non-exam assessment is rigorously monitored by centres to
ensure that candidates' work is their own.
Centres could monitor in a number of ways, for example:
• careful record-keeping of the progress of learners’ work, particularly the submission
of drafts
• careful consideration of whether the work submitted is characteristic of the learner’s
ability/attainment
• keeping the work that students have submitted secure in a securely locked cabinet
or cupboard.
All candidates are required to sign a statement endorsing the originality of their
assignment(s) and centres must countersign that they have taken all reasonable steps
to validate this. The Non-Exam Assessment Folder coversheet should be
completed for all candidates, not just for those candidates selected for the sample to
be sent to the moderator. The forms can be downloaded from the subject page at
www.eduqas.co.uk. Validity can be further enhanced by careful attention to the
following points:
Acknowledgements
References to particular critics' work or other sources must always be clearly
acknowledged: by direct reference if a quotation is used; and by an appended
bibliography.
Drafting
Guidance may be given by teachers in the re-drafting of assignments but this must
only consist of general observations. Once an assignment is finally submitted and
marked the work may not be further revised. In no cases are fair copies of marked
work acceptable. Drafts must be included for the external moderator where they are
likely to be important for a fair assessment of the final version.
Plagiarism
Centres are required to be vigilant and to refuse to award marks or submit for
moderation any work which they consider to be not the candidate’s own. Candidates
will be penalised for any attempt to plagiarise. General advice and guidance on how to
proceed if plagiarism is suspected can be found on the JCQ website.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ENGLISH LITERATURE 14
Assessment grid
When assessing folders of non-exam assessment, teachers should study the
assessment grid in Appendix A of this specification, which is designed to present a
system that links the assessment objectives to marks, and which helps to
discriminate clearly between the varying levels of achievement.
The grid will be of most value when used in conjunction with examples of non-exam
assessment which will be issued annually to help centres identify the quality of work
associated with the various mark bands.
Teachers must make specific reference to the assessment objectives in the
comments that they write on the work and on the coversheets. Teachers are required
to record separate marks for each assessment objective in the spaces provided on
the coversheet and to total the overall mark in the box provided. A summative
comment and individual assessment objective comments for each task must be
included on each candidate’s coversheet showing clearly how marks have been
awarded by the centre.
Submissions of marks and administration
Centres need to submit marks for internally assessed work online during the summer
term of the year when the work is to be submitted for moderation. When the marks
have been submitted to WJEC, the online system will apply the sample formula
based on the overall rank order for the total entry and immediately identify the
sample of candidates whose work is selected for moderation.
• Only the candidates selected for the sample should be sent to the moderator in
rank order.
• Each selected candidate’s non-exam assessment folder must be accompanied by a
Non-Exam Assessment Folder coversheet on which the candidate must supply a
brief title and/or explanation of their assignments, and the teacher must provide an
overall comment for the moderator.
• The coversheet must be signed by both the candidate and the teacher.
N.B. Please remember that all candidates’ work, not just the sample, must be
authenticated internally by signing a coversheet.
The moderation sample of candidates' work should be sent to the external moderator
by an agreed date in the final summer term of the A level course.
Standardisation and moderation
It is essential that where there is more than one teacher in a centre, work from all
teaching groups is standardised internally. This is designed to ensure that the final
assessment reflects a single agreed standard for all teaching groups involved.
Standardising material will be issued by WJEC to assist with this process.
In order that assessments may be standardised fairly, each centre is assigned an
external moderator by WJEC. It is essential that the moderator is aware of the aims of
the assignments and the way that criteria have been used to make a final assessment.
All centres will receive detailed feedback from the moderation.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ENGLISH LITERATURE 15
This is a linear qualification in which all assessments must be taken at the end of the
course. Assessment opportunities will be available in the summer series each year,
until the end of the life of this specification. Summer 2017 will be the first
assessment opportunity.
A qualification may be taken more than once. Candidates must resit all examination
components in the same series.
Marks for NEA may be carried forward for the life of the specification. If a candidate
resits an NEA component (rather than carrying forward the previous NEA mark), it is
the new mark that will count towards the overall grade, even if it is lower than a
previous attempt.
Where a candidate has certificated on two or more previous occasions, the most
recent NEA mark is carried forward, regardless of whether that mark is higher or
lower (unless that mark is absent)
The entry code appears below.
WJEC Eduqas A level English Literature: A720QS
The current edition of our Entry Procedures and Coding Information gives up-to-date
entry procedures.
A level qualifications are reported as a grade from A* to E. Results not attaining the
minimum standard for the award will be reported as U (unclassified).
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ENGLISH LITERATURE 16
B and AO1 AO2 AO3 AO4 AO5
Articulate informed, personal and creative Analyse ways in which meanings are Demonstrate understanding of the Explore connections across Explore literary texts informed
responses to literary texts, using associated shaped in literary texts significance and influence of the literary texts by different interpretations
concepts and terminology, and coherent, contexts in which literary texts are
accurate written expression 20 marks written and received 10 marks
20 marks 20 marks 10 marks
5 17-20 marks 17-20 marks 17-20 marks 9-10 marks 9-10 marks
• sophisticated, creative and individual • perceptive, sophisticated analysis and • perceptive, productive discussion of • productive and illuminating • mature and confident
response to texts; ideas are thoughtful and evaluation of writers’ use of language significance and influence of contexts connections/comparisons discussion of other relevant
response is fully engaged and relevant and prose techniques to create • confident analysis of connections between texts interpretations of texts
• confident, perceptive application of literary meaning between texts and contexts • autonomous, independent
concepts and terminology • confident and apt textual support reader
• effectively organised; demonstrates flair; • confident discussion of implicit
high levels of technical accuracy and adopts meaning
a clear academic style and register
4 13-16 marks 13-16 marks 13-16 marks 7-8 marks 7-8 marks
• clearly informed, engaged and well- • sound, accurate analysis and • sound, secure appreciation and • sound, secure and purposeful • makes sound and
structured response with clear knowledge of evaluation of writers’ use of language understanding of significance and connections and comparisons purposeful use of other
the texts and prose techniques to create influence of contexts between texts relevant interpretations of
• sound and apt application of concepts and meaning • sound, secure understanding of texts
terminology • secure, apt textual support connections between texts and
• expression is accurate and clear; response • sound, secure grasp of implicit contexts
is organised and shows some evidence of meaning
an academic style and register
3 9-12 marks 9-12 marks 9-12 marks 5-6 marks 5-6 marks
• clearly engages with texts and response is • purposeful, detailed and mostly • clear grasp of significance and • makes generally clear and • makes clear and
mostly relevant relevant analysis of writers’ use of influence of contexts appropriate appropriate use of other
• some sensible use of key concepts and language and prose techniques to • clear understanding of connections connections/comparisons relevant interpretations of
generally accurate use and application of create meaning between contexts and texts between texts texts
terminology • generally clear and accurate textual
• reasonably coherent response; generally support
clearly organised; expression generally • grasps implicit meaning
accurate and clear, though there may be
some lapses
2 5-8 marks 5-8 marks 5-8 marks 3-4 marks 3-4 marks
• attempts to engage with texts and structure • makes some valid points about use of • acknowledges the importance of • can make some superficial, • acknowledges that texts can
response, though may not always be writers’ use of language and prose contexts usually valid be interpreted in more than
relevant to the question; response may be techniques to create meaning • makes some connections between connections/comparisons one way
restricted to a literal reading • supports points by some appropriate texts and contexts between texts
• some, though may not always be relevant, reference to texts
use of concepts and terminology • shows some grasp of implicit meaning
• expression may feature some inaccuracies
1 1-4 marks 1-4 marks 1-4 marks 1-2 marks 1-2 marks
• superficial approach to texts that may show • identifies basic stylistic features • describes wider contexts in which • identifies superficial
only partial/simple understanding • discussion tends to be texts are written and received connections/comparisons • describes others' views of
• grasp of basic terminology, though this may narrative/descriptive in nature • attempts to make superficial between texts texts with partial
be uneven • offers some support in the form of connections between understanding
• errors in expression and lapses in clarity quotations or references to texts contexts and texts.
which may not always be relevant
0 marks: Response not worthy of credit or not attempted
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ENGLISH LITERATURE 17
Prescribed poems for study – Component 1, Section A part (i): Poetry pre-1900
John Donne, Selected Poems, (Penguin Classics)
Page Poem
3 The Good Morrow
3 Song ('Go and catch a falling star')
6 The Sun Rising
9 The Canonization
12 Song (‘Sweetest love, I do not go’)
15 Air and Angels
17 The Anniversary
20 Twicknam Garden
25 Love’s Exchange
28 A Valediction of Weeping
29 Love’s Alchemy
30 The Flea
33 A Nocturnal upon St Lucy’s Day, Being the Shortest Day
36 The Apparition
37 A Valediction Forbidding Mourning
39 The Ecstasy
41 Love’s Deity
45 The Funeral
46 The Blossom
48 The Relic
50 The Dissolution
54 Farewell to Love
62 Elegy: Change
65 Elegy: His Picture
68 Elegy: The Comparison
70 Elegy: The Autumnal
80 Elegy: To His Mistress Going to Bed
178 Holy Sonnet III (‘Oh might those sighs and tears’)
179 Holy Sonnet V (‘I am a little world’)
179 Holy Sonnet VI (‘This is my play’s last scene’)
181 Holy Sonnet IX (‘If poisonous minerals’)
181 Holy Sonnet X (‘Death be not proud’)
182 Holy Sonnet XI (‘Spit in my face, you Jews’)
183 Holy Sonnet XIII (‘What if this present’)
184 Holy Sonnet XIV ('Batter my heart')
185 Holy Sonnet XVII (‘Since she, whom I loved’)
186 Holy Sonnet XIX (‘O, to vex me’)
190 Good Friday, 1613. Riding Westward
195 Hymn to God my God, in my Sickness
197 A Hymn to God the Father
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ENGLISH LITERATURE 18
John Keats, Selected Poems, (Penguin Classics)
(For assessment to 2021 only)
Page Poem
3 Imitation of Spenser
12 On First Looking into Chapman’s Homer
35 On the Sea
99 On Sitting Down to Read King Lear Once Again
100 ‘When I have fears that I may cease to be’
109 Isabella; or, The Pot of Basil
127 On Visiting the Tomb of Burns
165 The Eve of St Agnes
184 La Belle Dame sans Merci. A Ballad
186 To Sleep
187 Ode to Psyche
191 Ode on a Grecian Urn
193 Ode to a Nightingale
195 Ode on Melancholy
219 ‘Bright star! would I were steadfast as thou art’
219 To Autumn
William Blake, Poems selected by Patti Smith (Vintage)
(For assessment from 2022)
Page Poem
4 To Spring
5 To Summer
6 To Autumn
7 To Winter
9 Song: How sweet I roam'd from field to field
34 Mary
36 The Crystal Cabinet
46 from Proverbs of Hell
78 Introduction
79 The Shepherd
80 The Ecchoing Green
81 The Lamb
82 The Little Black Boy
83 The Blossom
84 The Chimney Sweeper
85 The Little Boy Lost
86 The Little Boy Found
87 Laughing Song
88 A Cradle Song
90 The Divine Image
91 Holy Thursday
92 Night
94 Spring
95 Nurse's Song
96 Infant Joy
97 A Dream
98 On Another's Sorrow
100 Introduction
101 Earth's Answer
102 The Clod & The Pebble
103 Holy Thursday
104 The Little Girl Lost
106 The Little Girl Found
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL ENGLISH LITERATURE 19
William Blake, Poems selected by Patti Smith (Vintage) (continued)
(For assessment from 2022)
Page Poem
108 The Chimney Sweeper
109 Nurse's Song
110 The Sick Rose
111 The Fly
112 The Angel
113 The Tyger
114 My Pretty Rose Tree
115 Ah! Sun-flower
116 The Lilly
117 The Garden of Love
118 The Little Vagabond
119 London
120 The Human Abstract
121 Infant Sorrow
122 A Poison Tree
123 A Little Boy Lost
124 A Little Girl Lost
126 To Tirzah
127 The School Boy
129 The Voice of the Ancient Bard
Christina Rossetti, Selected Poems (Penguin Classics)
Page Poem
13 Have you forgotten?
14 Sweet Death
16 Remember
27 From the Antique
30 Echo
47 A Triad
50 ‘Whatsoever is right, that shall ye receive’
53 An Apple-Gathering
58 Up-Hill
67 Goblin Market
83 ‘No, Thank You, John’
84 ‘Out of the Deep’
85 The Queen of Hearts
89 Twice
112 Memory
114 Amor Mundi
131 A Daughter of Eve
131 A Smile and a Sigh
132 Autumn Violets
132 ‘They Desire a Better Country’
142 Confluents
152 The Key-Note
153 De Profundis
157 The Thread of Life
179 A Castle-Builder’s World
187 The Greatest of these is Charity
192 ‘Standing afar off for the fear of her torment’
192 Vigil of St Bartholomew
193 ‘Who hath despised the day of small things?’
193 Tune me, O Lord, into one harmony
A Level English Literature Specification for teaching from 2015/ED/HT 18.03.20
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
