2.2 Component 2
Global filmmaking perspectives
Component at a glance
Section A: Section B: Section C: Section D:
Global Film Documentary Film Film Movements - Film Movements –
Silent Cinema Experimental Film
Two-film study Single film study Single film study Single film study
Learners are required Learners are required Learners are required Learners are required
to study two films, one to study one film from to study one film from to study one film from
from each of the the following category: the following category: the following category:
following categories:
• Documentary film • Silent Cinema • Experimental film
• European film (1960-2001)
• Outside Europe
Questions will focus Questions will focus Questions will focus Questions will focus
on: on: on: on:
• Core study areas • Core study areas • Core study areas • Core study areas
• Critical Debates • Critical Debates • Narrative
• Filmmakers' • Auteur
theories
Total: 40 marks Total: 20 marks Total: 20 marks Total: 20 marks
Introduction
For this component, learners must study:
• two non-English language films, one European and one from outside Europe
(two-film study)
• one documentary film
• one film option from a 1920s silent film movement
• one film option from an experimental film movement.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL FILM STUDIES 26
Section A: Global film (two-film study)
For this two-film study, learners must study one non-English language European film from
Group 1 and one non-English language film produced outside Europe from Group 2 in relation
to:
• the core study areas
Group 1: European film
Films
• Life is Beautiful (Benigni, Italy, 1997)
• Pan’s Labyrinth (Del Toro, Spain, 2006)
• Mustang (Ergűven, France/Turkey, 2015)
• Portrait of a Lady on Fire (Sciamma, France, 2019
• Another Round (Vinterberg, Denmark, 2020)
• The Worst Person in the World (Trier, Norway, 2021).
Group 2: Outside Europe
Films
• City of God (Meirelles, Brazil, 2002)
• House of Flying Daggers (Zhang, China, 2004)
• Taxi Tehran (Panahi, Iran, 2015)
• A Fantastic Woman (Lelio, Chile, 2017)
• Roma (Cuarón, Mexico, 2018)
• Parasite (Bong Joon-Ho, South Korea, 2019).
This section further extends the range and diversity of narrative film, requiring the study of two
films, each representing a distinct geographical, social, cultural world and a particular expressive
use of film form.
Group 1 offers the opportunity to explore a film with a distinctive European context and theme.
Each film reflects its director and its country of origin. Life is Beautiful is a film about the
Holocaust, using comedy and fantasy in problematic ways in presenting a story of survival. Pan's
Labyrinth mixes elements of surrealism and fantasy in its narrative of civil war Spain. Mustang
explores the lives of five orphaned girls in a remote Turkish village who are growing up in a strict
environment with arranged marriages looming over them. Portrait of a Lady on Fire is a poetic
manifesto about the female gaze, about a love affair between two young women in Eighteenth-
century France. Another Round is a life-affirming and poignant exploration of Danish drinking
culture, midlife crises and the meaning and value we give to our lives.
Group 2 offers the opportunity to study a film from another key cinematic territory. The films are
from South East Asia, The Middle East and South America, and each represents distinctive film
characteristics. City of God is set in the favelas of Rio de Janeiro and contrasts the lives of
different young people growing up in a very violent environment. House of Flying Daggers is both
a spectacular wuxia genre film and an intense love story. Taxi Tehran is similarly concerned with
repression, this time in Iran where filmmaker Jafar Panahi makes a film despite being banned – a
film entirely shot from cameras installed in the dashboard of the taxi he drives. A Fantastic
Woman explores themes of gender and identity, and provoked genuine social and legal change
to transgender rights in Chile. Roma follows Cleo, a Mixtec domestic worker, a live-in maid who
serves an upper middle class white family in Mexico City’s Roma neighbourhood in the early
1970s, exposing the intricacies of a class system based on gender and ethnicity. Parasite is a
biting satire on class hierarchy, through the story of the poor Kim family who ingratiate
themselves into the lives of the wealthy, yet gullible and complacent Park family
Any film from Group 1 may be chosen with any film from Group 2.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL FILM STUDIES 27
Section B: Documentary film
Learners must study one of the following documentary films in relation to:
• the core study areas
• critical debates
• filmmakers' theories.
Films
• Sisters in Law (Ayisi and Longinotto, Cameroon and UK, 2005)
• Exit Through the Gift Shop (Banksy, UK, 2010)
• Stories We Tell (Polley, Canada, 2012)
• Amy (Kapadia, UK, 2015)
• For Sama (Al-Kateab, UK, 2019).
The documentary film in its contemporary form has become a much freer form, utilising
cinematic techniques in ever more creative ways to tell ‘factual’ stories while problematising
the divide between fact and fiction. Each offers much insight into a more creative kind of
contemporary documentary practice - one which is as much concerned with the cinematic as
it is with its subject.
Sisters in Law is the most conventional of the choices. It takes the form of an observational
documentary committed to capturing the reality played out in front of the camera. It is set in
Cameroon and looks at the work of women working in the legal system as judges and
lawyers, focusing on resolving family cases – including wife abuse and child cruelty. In
Stories We Tell the filmmaker engages in an investigation into her family, specifically
seeking the identity of her genetic father. This film too is innovative in its commitment to a
self-reflexive approach to filmmaking. Amy takes a different approach to exploring the life of
a singer; the film is composed almost entirely of home video footage, brought together to
offer a compelling portrait of its subject. In For Sama, Syrian filmmaker Waad al-Kateab
combines performative and observational modes to document her experiences as a young
mother during the Battle of Aleppo. Exit Through the Gift Shop is street artist Bansky’s
provocative statement about the value of art and forces the spectator to question the nature
of documentary film.
All the set documentary films, which frequently make the division between fact and fiction
ambiguous and exploit digital technology, allow learners to explore the debates about the
impact of digital technology on film and filmmaking including understanding and applying
ideas and theories from key documentary filmmakers.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL FILM STUDIES 28
Section C: Film movements – Silent cinema
Learners must study one of the following silent film options in relation to:
• the core study areas
• critical debates.
Films:
• One Week (1920) and The Scarecrow (1920) and The 'High Sign' (1921) and Cops
(1922) (Keaton, US), American Silent Comedy
• Strike (Eisenstein, USSR, 1924), Soviet Montage
• Sunrise (Murnau, US, 1927), German Expressionism
• Spies (Lang, Germany, 1928), German Expressionism
• Man with a Movie Camera (Vertov, USSR, 1928) and A Propos de Nice (Vigo,
France, 1930), Constructivism and modernism.
The films selected for study in this section represent major stylistic movements in silent
cinema.
The silent period saw filmmakers working to develop film narrative and film form and to
communicate ever more effectively through purely visual means. Film during this period is
associated with the wider cultural and artistic movement of Modernism. Film history identifies
two key film movements: German Expressionism and Soviet Montage. The choice available
includes two films representing each of these movements. Sunrise is made by the most
celebrated of German Expressionist directors, F.W.Murnau, but in Hollywood not Berlin. The
film offers an interesting balance between American melodrama and German stylisation in
exploring a dramatic period in a couple’s marriage. Spies made in Germany also mixes
generic elements, here those of a prototype spy film. Strike is a classic Soviet film, made as
propaganda to sustain the revolution of 1917 by telling the story of workers being hurt and
killed by capitalist business and the state. Vertov’s Man with a Movie Camera, by contrast, is
a ‘city symphony’ and a celebration of film technology seen as part of the wonder of
modernity. (This is accompanied by a short film made in the South of France filmed by
Vertov's brother.) A very different contribution to Modernism is represented by the work of
Buster Keaton, the most surreal of the great innovative American silent comedians of the
period. His work adapts vaudeville to confront the problem of living as the incongruous ‘little
man’ in an age of accelerated change.
Learners will be required to explore critical debates about realism and the expressive within
this section.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL FILM STUDIES 29
Section D: Film movements – Experimental film (1960-2001)
Learners must study one of the following film options in relation to:
• the core study areas
• narrative
• auteur.
Films
• Cleo from 5 to 7 (Varda, France, 1962), French New Wave
• Daisies (Chytilova, Czechoslovakia, 1965), and Saute ma ville (Akerman, Belgium,
1968),1960s European avant-garde
• Memento (Nolan, US, 2000), Postmodern film in the 1990s and early 2000s
• Fallen Angels (Wong, Hong Kong, 1995), East Asian new wave
• Mulholland Drive (Lynch, US, 2001), Surrealism and/or Postmoderism in the 1990s and
early 2000s.
Alternatives to mainstream narrative film have been present throughout cinema history. The
choice here is of films from 1960 to 2001. Over this period New Waves have often
challenged the mainstream filmmaking. The French New Wave is represented by Varda’s
Cleo from 5 to 7. It explores the inner life of a woman; here a pop star roams Paris for one
and a half hours while she waits to find out if she has cancer. Writer and Director Agnes
Vada uses this premise to explore gender relations in 1960s France and the themes of
mortality and existentialism. Two 1960s feminist films are linked: Chytilova’s Daisies from the
Czech New Wave offers a surrealist exploration of feminist issues in a politically repressive
society while Akerman’s short film Saute ma ville offers a view of isolation within the
domestic space. Varda, Chytilova and Akerman, together with other new wave and feminist
filmmakers, represent a Europe-wide avant-garde of the 1960s. Fallen Angels exemplifies
the energy of the East Asian New Wave over 30 years later; the relationship of a hitman and
his accomplice and of another couple are presented with great stylistic innovation.
In Mulholland Drive, Lynch combines surrealism with a neo-noir aesthetic to explore the dark
underbelly of Los Angeles. Memento plays with narrative conventions in boldly experimental
ways while remaining accessible. Nolan uses an experimental approach to explore
philosophical questions of human memory and identity. It reflects postmodern American film
of the 1990s and early 2000s, with its non-linear narrative, genre revisionism and focus on
fragmentation and instability.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL FILM STUDIES 30
Assessment
Written examination: 2 hours 30 minutes
100 marks
35% of the qualification
Learners must answer one question from each of the four sections. There will be a choice
of two questions in each section.
Section A: Global film (two-film study), 40 marks
Section B: Documentary film, 20 marks
Section C: Film movements – Silent cinema, 20 marks
Section D: Film movements – Experimental film (1960-2001), 20 marks.
All questions will assess AO1, the demonstration of knowledge and learning, and AO2, the
application of knowledge and learning, in equal measures (see Section 3.1 for assessment
objectives).
The ability to compare films will not be assessed in any part of this component.
For Global film (two-film study), questions will be based on the core study areas as set out
in detail in the introduction to Section 2.
For Documentary film, questions will be based on critical debates about digital technology
and filmmakers' theories as well as the core study areas as set out in detail in the
introduction to Section 2.
For Film movements – Silent cinema, questions will be based on critical debates about
realism and the expressive as well as the core study areas as set out in detail in the
introduction to Section 2.
For Film movements – Experimental film (1960-2001), questions will be based on the
specialist study areas of auteur and narrative as well as the core study areas, as set out in
detail in the introduction to Section 2.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL FILM STUDIES 31
2.3 Component 3
Production
Component at a glance
Production Options Evaluative Analysis
Option 1: Short Film (4 - 5 minutes) Written Evaluation (1600 – 1800
Option 2: Screenplay for a short film words)
(1600-1800 words) with accompanying
digitally photographed storyboard (approx.
20 shots)
40 marks 20 marks
Introduction
Production is a crucial and synoptic part of the specification, giving learners the
opportunity to put into practice the filmmaking ideas they develop throughout their
course of study. The study of film form in particular is intended to enable learners to
produce high quality short films and screenplays as well as provide them with a
filmmaker's perspective on the films they study. For this reason, a selection of
contrasting short films, demonstrating a range of different approaches to the short
film narrative, has been set for study.
The production may take the form of either a short film or a screenplay for a short
film. The screenplay must be accompanied by a digitally photographed storyboard
of a key sequence from the screenplay to demonstrate how the screenplay will be
realised. Learners must also provide an evaluative analysis of the production,
which analyses and evaluates the production in relation to other professionally
produced films or screenplays, including at least three short films totalling a
minimum of 80 minutes from the compilation set by WJEC (see Appendix A of the
specification). A production brief will initially be set for a period of three years.
During this period, the effectiveness of the approach will be reviewed and monitored
and subsequent production briefs may be set for a shorter period. Centres will be
informed of any changes to the assessment period of the brief.
The production brief will offer four options, of which one must be chosen. Options
will include:
• two options based on narrative elements and two options based on character-led
elements of the short film.
The requirements of the evaluative analysis will remain unchanged.
The brief for first assessment in Summer 2023 and last assessment in Summer
2026 is set out below. The brief for first assessment in Summer 2027 will be
published by WJEC on the WJEC Portal (secure site)September 2026, at which point
the date of its final assessment will be confirmed.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL FILM STUDIES 32
Conditions for completing production
It is recommended that learners complete the production within a time-period of
approximately thirteen to fifteen weeks to enable an appropriate balance between
work for the production and for the examination components. As noted above, the
production is intended to provide learners with a filmmaker's perspective on the films
studied, thus enabling them to apply as well as reinforce learning within the course.
All production work, whether filmmaking or screenwriting, must be individual and
demonstrably the candidate's own, unaided work. As a result, conditions for the
completion of the production and its evaluative assessment have been established.
These relate to:
• the degree of teacher support and supervision during the preparation and
production phases of the production
• the measures taken to ensure the authenticity of the production and its evaluative
analysis.
Unassessed participants and assistants are permitted as noted below:
• For the filming option, the individual learner must be responsible for the
camerawork and editing of the short film. Unassessed participants may act in, or
appear in, the film. Performance skills will not, however, be assessed. Although
there is no explicit requirement for independent lighting or independent sound,
unassessed assistants may operate lighting and/or sound equipment, if either is
required, provided this is under the direction of the learner being assessed.
• For the screenplay and storyboard option, unassessed learners may appear in
the shots taken for the storyboard images. The storyboard shots are indicative,
and the quality of the images is not assessed. The storyboard shots must,
however, represent the shots they describe, although lighting requirements
should be detailed in the storyboard's visual instructions.
Learners may also make use of material which is not the learner's own under the
following conditions:
• a soundtrack from existing sources (music or music from a film) may be used
provided it is appropriately acknowledged on the relevant form and used for
education purposes only
• if use outside education purposes is envisaged (e.g. uploading to YouTube or
similar), normal copyright restrictions must be followed
• up to ten seconds (maximum) of found visual material may be used if its use is
integral to the short film(which could either be a shot or shots which would be
impossible to film or found footage such as a news extract)
• if found footage is used, it must be excluded from the specified length of the
production.
All use of material which is not the candidate's own must be acknowledged on the
relevant form accompanying the submission of work for assessment.
It is recommended that learners:
• use copyright-free material where possible
• plan short films or screenplayswhich do not rely on shots impossible to film or
storyboard, or other examples of found footage.
See Section 3.2 for further detail on the conditions for completing production work.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL FILM STUDIES 33
Production brief (first assessment, Summer 2023; last assessment,
Summer 2026)
Production brief
Learners are required to create an individual production consisting of:
EITHER
(i) a short film of between 4 and 5 minutes which includes one of the following:
• a narrative which has a distinct genre
• a narrative which has parallel stories
• a non-linear narrative
• a narrator
OR
(ii) a screenplay for a short film of between 1600 and 1800 words which includes
one of the following:
• a narrative which has a distinct genre
• a narrative which has parallel stories
• a non-linear narrative
• a narrator
The screenplay must be accompanied by a digitally photographed storyboard
of a key section from the screenplay (approximately 2 minutes' screen time,
corresponding to approximately two pages of screenplay and to approximately 20
storyboard shots).
Evaluative analysis
Learners must complete an evaluative analysis of their production of between 1600
and 1800 words and make reference to all short films selected for study from the
compilation set by WJEC (at least three short films totalling a minimum of 80
minutes). The evaluative analysis will include:
• narrative structure of the short film – an analysis of how the narrative
features and dramatic qualities of all short films studied are constructed,
including through dialogue, highlighting key ideas which informed learners' own
production
• cinematic influences – an analysis of how visual/audio elements of other
professionally produced films or screenplays, including short films, influenced
their short film or screenplay.
• creating meaning and effect – an evaluative analysis of how their production
creates meanings and generates responses for the spectator in relation to
other professionally produced films or screenplays, including at least one of the
short films studied.
Learners must submit the evaluative analysis in the form of extended writing
(which may include sub-headings). It must be word-processed and may be
illustrated with screen shots or screenplay extracts. Screenplay extracts used to
illustrate the evaluative analysis are excluded from the word count of 1600 – 1800
words.
See Section 3.2 for the conditions relating to individual production and the
conditions for completing the production and evaluative analysis.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL FILM STUDIES 34
Researching the short film
Learners will be studying a selection of short films for their A level. The selection is
designed to provide learners with the opportunity to develop knowledge and
understanding of the short film form. Learners may supplement this by researching
into additional short films and screenplays in preparation for their production
(research that can inform their evaluative analysis). Learners will also be exploring
examples of key elements of film form and screenplay techniques during their course
of study, which they can apply to their production.
Central to the preparation phase is the study of short films. Learners must study a
selection of short films (at least three short films totalling a minimum of 80 minutes)
from a compilation set by WJEC listed in Appendix A. This study is intended to
provide learners with the opportunity to develop knowledge and understanding of the
short film form, particularly its distinctive narrative. The study should ensure learners
engage with how the dramatic qualities of a short film are constructed, including
through dialogue. The study will also enable learners to evaluate their own short
films. As part of their evaluative analysis, learners will be required to analyse the
narrative features of the short films they have studied (totalling a minimum of 80
minutes), highlighting how they have informed their own production. Learners may
research additional films and screenplays, either short or feature-length, and this may
also contribute to the evaluative analysis.
Throughout their course of study, learners are therefore encouraged to keep an
unassessed portfolio, which could be in electronic form such as a blog or a Pinterest
page consisting of:
• notes on or visuals from the short films studied which could inform their
production work
• character(s) and narrative ideas for their short film
• examples of cinematography, mise-en-scène, editing and sound which could
inform their production
• effective screenplay techniques (for the screenplay option in particular)
• examples of storyboards (if taking the screenplay option).
The short film: filmmaking option
Learners must be responsible for the camerawork and editing of their short film,
therefore it is recommended that learners do not act in their own film. Unassessed
participants may act in, or appear in, the film. Performance skills will not, however,
be assessed in the production. Although there is no explicit requirement for
independent lighting or independent sound, if either of these is required unassessed
assistants may operate lighting and/or sound equipment provided they are under the
direction of the assessed learner. Learners can create either a live action or an
animated short film. If producing an animated film, learners must not use video-game
software or software with pre-populated characters and backgrounds. Please refer to
the ‘Animation Software for NEA’ guidance on the Eduqas A Level Film Studies
website.
Learners are encouraged to put into practice an appropriate range of camera shots
and editing techniques in their production, applying their knowledge and
understanding of cinematography, mise-en-scène, editing and sound.
The short film: screenwriting and digitally photographed storyboard option
Learners must create the screenplay for a live action film, in order to fulfil the
requirements of the digitally photographed storyboard. Learners are required to use
the conventions of a screenplay to produce their screenplay. The standard format for
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL FILM STUDIES 35
a screenplay is generally referred to as the 'master scene script' layout and consists
of:
Format features
• single column with wide margins
• sequential page numbering (top right)
• mf (more follows) (bottom right)
• dialogue centred, with speaker's name in upper case
• slugline and sound in upper case
• character name in upper case on first appearance only
• font – courier, 12 point
Content
• each scene is numbered and accompanied with a slugline
• the slugline consists of:
• an indication of where the action takes place – interior or exterior (INT, or
EXT or INT/EXT)
• location descriptor
• lighting descriptor – DAY or NIGHT or TIME
• scene/action descriptor (with succinct descriptor of character on her/his first
appearance)
• essential camera instructions (in upper case within scene descriptor) or essential
editing instructions (in upper case, range right), which will only be used in
exceptional circumstances (e.g. where SLO-MO is vital)
• action written in present tense.
It should be noted that screenplays do not include camera directions.
In order to demonstrate visualisation skills equivalent to filming ideas for a short film,
learners producing a screenplay are additionally required to create a digitally
photographed storyboard for a key section of the screenplay (up to 2 minutes of
screen time, corresponding to approximately two pages of a screenplay and to
approximately 20 storyboard shots).
Whilst storyboards can and do vary, the generally accepted conventions of a
storyboard must be used as indicated below. The digitally photographed storyboard
images may be indicative and need not employ a realistic mise-en-scène. The
storyboard must therefore include:
• shot number plus indicative image of main shot (e.g. close-up of face)
• the indicative image must incorporate the intended framing (e.g. close-up of face
ranged right)
• duration of shot (or a timeline)
• visual details must include detail of the mise-en-scène as well as account for any
camera movement within the shot
• specific editing techniques (beyond simple cuts) such as DISSOLVE TO and
• sound details, which must include reference to diegetic or non-diegetic sound but
not dialogue.
Whilst digitally photographed images need only be indicative, learners may
Photoshop backgrounds. This is not, however, assessed. In addition, up to five
found shots may be used where a digitally photographed image would not be
possible. The source of these shots must be credited. The images for the storyboard
should be presented in landscape mode.
A template for a storyboard is available on the Eduqas website.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL FILM STUDIES 36
The evaluative analysis
Learners must complete an evaluative analysis of their production of between 1600
and 1800 words and make reference to at least three short films totalling a minimum
of 80 minutes from the set compilation. The evaluative analysis will include:
• narrative structure of the short film – an analysis of how the narrative features
and dramatic qualities of all short films studied are constructed, including through
dialogue, highlighting key ideas which informed learners' own production
• cinematic influences – an analysis of how key visual/audio elements of other
professionally produced films or screenplays, including short films studied,
influenced their short film
• creating meaning and effect – an evaluative analysis of how their production
creates meanings and generates responses for the spectator in relation to other
professionally produced films or screenplays, including short films.
Note at least three short films totalling a minimum of 80 minutes from the set
compliation must be considered in the evaluative analysis and must be listed on the
coversheet submitted to WJEC. As set out in the production brief, learners must
submit the evaluative analysis in the form of extended writing (which may include
sub-headings). It must be word-processed and may be illustrated with screen shots
or screenplay extracts. Screenplay extracts used to illustrate the evaluative analysis
are excluded from the word count of 1600-1800 words.
Assessment
Non-exam assessment
Internally assessed, externally moderated by WJEC
60 marks
30% of qualification (production, 20%, evaluative analysis, 10%)
Learners must submit the following for assessment:
• production (40 marks)
• evaluative analysis (20 marks)
• production coversheet, including the list of short films studied, authenticated by
teacher and learner.
Learners should note that work cannot be assessed without the appropriate
authentication.
See Section 3.2 for details of the conditions for non-exam assessment and its
administration.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL FILM STUDIES 37
3 ASSESSMENT
3.1 Assessment objectives and weightings
Below are the assessment objectives for this specification. Learners must:
AO1
Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of elements of film
AO2
Apply knowledge and understanding of elements of film to:
• analyse and compare films, including through the use of critical approaches
• evaluate the significance of critical approaches
• analyse and evaluate own work in relation to other professionally produced work
AO3
Apply knowledge and understanding of elements of film to the production of a film or
screenplay.
The table below shows the weighting of each assessment objective for each
component and for the qualification as a whole.
AO1 AO2 AO3 Total
Component 1 17.5% 17.5% - 35%
Component 2 17.5% 17.5% - 35%
Component 3 - 10% 20% 30%
Overall Weighting 35% 45% 20% 100%
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL FILM STUDIES 38
3.2 Arrangements for non-exam assessment
Conditions for completing the production and evaluative analysis
Production
In order to ensure the authenticity and comparability of all learners' production work,
teachers are required to establish the following conditions for production (set out
below).
Learners and teachers may carry out the following:
• learners may use any filmmaking or screenwriting ideas they may have learnt
about during their course of study and collected in their portfolio
• teachers may provide general advice about areas of possible improvement for
plans, drafts or, in the case of ashort film, an initial edit provided the learner is
responsible for completing all work
• teachers may also provide general advice about areas of possible improvement
for the production phase of either the film or the screenplay and storyboard.
Teachers must not provide specific or detailed guidance on how to make possible
improvements they advise on, or make any creative decisions for learners.
Learners must complete the following authenticating stages:
• stage 1: learners must submit to the teacher evidence of initial planning (taking
the form of outline ideas and possible examples of work to inform the production)
• stage 2: learners must submit to the teacher evidence of a plan for the short film
(for example, an outline storyboard) or a plan for the screenplay (for example, an
outline draft and a draft storyboard of a key section of the screenplay)
• stage 3: learners must submit to the teacher evidence of the progress of the
production at a suitable point during the production (e.g. an initial edit or draft) so
that the teacher can be assured of the work's authenticity.
• stage 4: learners must confirm that camerawork and editing or the screenplay
and its accompanying storyboard is the learner's own unaided work.
• stage 5: learners must submit to the teacher evidence of instructions to any
unassessed assistants who provide independent sound or lighting for a film
production. The unassessed learners as well as the teacher are also required to
confirm on the relevant coversheet that their unassessed role was under the
direction of the assessed learner.
Note: performance is not assessed. Unassessed participants who act in, or appear
in, the production are not therefore required to confirm their role.
Teachers are not required to supervise directly the production of either a film and its
editing or a screenplay and its shooting script. However, they must be able to
monitor and recognise the continuity between all the authenticating stages of the
production. They should be able to recognise the continuity between:
• evidence of initial planning (stage 1)
• the first plan or draft (stage 2)
• evidence of an initial edit or draft of the production phase (stage 3)
• the completed outcome (stage 4).
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL FILM STUDIES 39
Teachers are required to investigate any significant discrepancy between any of the
stages which might give rise to concern over the authenticity of the learner's work.
There is no restriction on the amount of time learners spend on planning, developing
and creating their production.
Evaluative analysis of the production
In order to ensure the authenticity and comparability of all learners' evaluative
analysis, teachers are required to establish the following conditions for completing
the evaluative analysis:
Learners and teachers may carry out the following:
• learners may refer to any filmmaking or screenwriting notes, ideas and other
relevant resources (such as those collected in the learner's portfolio) in
completing their evaluative analysis
• teachers may provide general advice on areas of possible improvement for one
draft version of the evaluative analysis provided that the learner is responsible for
completing all work.
Teachers must not provide specific or detailed guidance on how to make possible
improvements they advise on or make any creative decisions for learners.
Learners must complete the evaluative analysis under supervised conditions.
Examination conditions are not required.
There is no restriction on the amount of time learners spend on the evaluative
analysis of their production but as guidance, it should be completed within the overall
recommended time-period for the production.
The short films selected for study from the set compilation and analysed in the
evaluative analysis must be listed on the relevant coversheet.
Authenticating individual work and retention of work submitted for
authentication
Both teachers and learners are required to authenticate that each of these conditions
has been met on the production coversheet. Work submitted to the teacher for
authentication is not required for moderation but must be retained in the centre until
December of the academic year following submission to allow for moderation checks
if necessary.
The production coversheet is available on the Eduqas A Level Film Studies website.
Suspected malpractice and plagiarism
Learners should be aware that:
• the initial responsibility for any cases of suspected malpractice or plagiarism is
with the centre
• if either the centre or the moderation process uncovers any cases of malpractice
or suspected plagiarism, a formal investigation, following current Joint Council of
Qualifications procedures, will be undertaken
• marks for either the component or the complete qualification may be withdrawn if
malpractice or plagiarism is established
• misuse of AI (artificial intelligence) is malpractice. Please follow the ‘Misuse of AI
in Assessment’ guidance on the Eduqas A Level Film Studies website.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL FILM STUDIES 40
Assessment procedures
Internally assessed work: assessment and internal standardisation
The production (a short film or screenplay and storyboard of a key sequence) and its
evaluative analysis are internally assessed using the marking criteria set out in
Appendix A. In addition, WJEC will, on a regular basis, make available through its
Eduqas website, sample assessed work to assist teachers in their assessment.
Centres are responsible for standardising the work of all learners if more than one
teacher is responsible for assessment. This must be completed in order to establish
an agreed rank order for all learners.
Adhering to production requirements
A penalty will be applied to work which either does not reach or exceeds the
stipulated length of the short film or screenplay.
Short film (4 minutes to 5 minutes):
• work exceeding the maximum length of the production (5 minutes): only the first
5 minutes will be assessed
• work which is up to 30 seconds short (3 minutes 30 seconds to 3 minutes 59
seconds): 2 marks must be deducted by the teacher assessing work
• work which is less than 3 minutes 30 seconds: a mark between bands 1 and 3
will be awarded depending on how far the evidence indicates the aims of the brief
have been met.
A screenplay for a short film (between 1600 and 1800 words)
• work exceeding the maximum length of the production (1800 words): only the
first 1800 words will be assessed
• work which is up to 180 words short (between 1420 and 1599 words): 2 marks
must be deducted by the teacher assessing work
• work which is less than 1420 words: a mark between bands 1 and 3 will be
awarded depending on how far the evidence indicates the aims of the brief have
been met.
Digitally photographed storyboard (up to 2 minutes' screen time, corresponding to
approximately 2 pages of screenplay and to approximately 20 storyboard shots)
• Work which is significantly shorter or significantly longer than the approximate
length of storyboard indicated: a mark will be awarded depending on how far the
evidence indicates that the screenplay has been appropriately visualised.
• A storyboard is not submitted: Limited marks can be awarded for key elements of
film only if key elements of film are implicitly evident in the screenplay.
Evaluative analysis (1600 to 1800 words)
• work exceeding the maximum length of the evaluative analysis (1800 words):
only the first 1800 words will be assessed.
• work which is up to 180 words short: 2 marks must be deducted by the teacher
assessing work
• work which is less than 1420 words: a mark between bands 1 and 3 will be
awarded depending on how far the evidence indicates the aims of the brief have
been met. work does not reference at least 80 minutes’ worth of the short films:
if work references at 40 minutes or less, cap marks at lower band 3. If work
references between 41 minutes and 79 minutes, cap marks at upper band 3.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL FILM STUDIES 41
Submission of marks to WJEC
Once a rank order of all learners has been established, teachers or their examination
officers are required to submit all marks to WJEC using IAMIS, an online system,
accessed through WJEC's Portal. It is recommended that this is completed by late
April of the assessment year. Once marks have been submitted online, the sample
of work to be submitted to the moderator and the moderator's contact details will be
identified. The sample of work must be received by the moderator by a standard
date in May of the year of assessment.
Submission of moderation sample
For each candidate in the identified sample, the moderator must receive, or be able
to access:
• the production
• its accompanying evaluative analysis
• a completed production coversheet, authenticated by teacher and candidate.
Work will not be accepted for moderation without the relevant authenticated
production coversheet.
The sample of work identified for external moderation must be submitted to the
moderator by uploading as an e-portfolio using WJEC Portal (the secure online
system).
If a moderator is not able to confirm the centre's assessment of their candidates'
work, work for the complete cohort may be requested. Should this be the case,
centres are required to submit the work of all candidates within three days of receipt
of the request to the examination officer, following current Joint Council of
Qualifications procedures.
If the moderation process establishes that a centre's assessment does not conform
to national standards set by WJEC, marks for a centre may be adjusted. Details of
any adjustment, together with the rationale for adjusting centre marks, will be clarified
in a centre's moderation report.
All centres will receive a moderator's report providing feedback on a centre's
assessment of submitted internally assessed work. This is made available online to
centres on the day examination results are published via the WJEC Portal.
Review of moderation process
Centres may request a review of the moderation. As work is initially internally
assessed, the work of all learners included in the original sample submitted for
moderation must be re-submitted for review following current Joint Council of
Qualification procedures.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL FILM STUDIES 42
4 TECHNICAL INFORMATION
4.1 Making entries
This is a linear qualification in which all assessments must be taken at the end of the
course. Assessment opportunities will be available in May/June each year, until the
end of the life of this specification. Summer 2019 will be the first assessment
opportunity.
A qualification may be taken more than once. Candidates must resit all examination
components in the same series.
Marks for NEA may be carried forward for the life of the specification. If a candidate
resits an NEA component (rather than carrying forward the previous NEA mark), it is
the new mark that will count towards the overall grade, even if it is lower than a
previous attempt.
Where a candidate has certificated on two or more previous occasions, the most
recent NEA mark is carried forward, regardless of whether that mark is higher or
lower (unless that mark is absent)
The entry code appears below.
WJEC Eduqas A level Film Studies: A670QS
The current edition of our Entry Procedures and Coding Information gives up-to-date
entry procedures.
4.2 Grading, awarding and reporting
Scaling factors are applied to marks in order for them to achieve their intended
weightings. In the case of WJEC Eduqas A level in Film Studies, a scaling factor of
1.167 is applied to Components 1 and 2, and a scaling factor of 2 to Component 3.
Component Maximum raw Scaling factor Scaled % weighting
mark maximum mark
Component 1 120 1.167 140 35
Component 2 100 1.4 140 35
Component 3 60 2 120 30
A level qualifications are reported as a grade from A* to E. Results not attaining the
minimum standard for the award will be reported as U (unclassified).
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL FILM STUDIES 43
APPENDIX A
Short film study
Learners are required to make a study of at least three short films in preparation for their
production. The total running time of the films selected must be at least 80 minutes.
Meshes of the Afternoon (Deren, US, 1946) 14’
La Jetée (Marker, France, 1962) 28’
La Ricotta (Pasolini, Italy, 1963) 34’
The Grandmother (Lynch, US, 1970) 34’
A Girl’s Own Story (Campion, Australia, 1987) 26’
Elephant (Clarke, UK, 1989) 39’
The Wrong Trousers (Park, UK, 1993) 30'
When the Day Breaks (Forbis/Tilby, Canada, 1999) 09'
About a Girl (Percival, UK, 2001) 09'
Wasp (Arnold, UK, 2003) 24'
Two Cars, One Night (Waititi, NZ, 2004) 11’
High Maintenance (Van, Germany, 2006) 09'
Connect (Abrahams, UK, 2010) 05'
Night Fishing (Park, South Korea, 2011) 33’
Pitch Black Heist (Maclean, UK, 2012) 13’
Curfew (Christensen, US, 2012) 19'
Swimmer (Ramsay, UK, 2012) 18’
Wild Tales Compilation (Szifron, Argentina 2014)*
-Pasternak 10’
-The Rats/Las Ratas 09’
-Road to Hell/ El más fuerte 20’
-Bombita 20’
-The Deal/La Propuesta 20’
-Till Death Do Us Part/ Hasta que la muerte nos separe 22’
The Gunfighter (Kissack, US, 2014) 09'.
Stutterer (Cleary, UK, 2015) 12'
The Silent Child (Overton, UK, 2017) 21’
Hair Love (Cherry, US, 2019) 06’
The Human Voice (Almodovar, Spain, 2020) 30’
*can be studied as separate shorts or as a compilation.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL FILM STUDIES 44
APPENDIX B
COMPONENT 3: Marking grids
Production (filmmaking or screenwriting and storyboard): short film
For each band:
• If work securely meets the criteria for a particular band, award a mark in the centre of the band.
• Award higher or lower marks depending on the degree to which production work meets the criteria for that band.
Production: filmmaking – short film
Marking grid
AO3: Apply knowledge and understanding of elements of film to the production of a film (20%)
Band Filmmaking: application of structural elements Filmmaking: application of key elements
(narrative construction, including mise-en-scène) (cinematography, editing and sound)
21-25 marks 13-15 marks
• Applies an excellent knowledge and understanding of • Excellent application of knowledge and understanding of
elements of film to the production of a short film. cinematography, editing and sound.
• Demonstrates an excellent ability to construct a short film • There is an excellent variety of effective shot types, camera angles,
appropriate to the chosen brief. including close-ups and (where appropriate) establishing shots.
• Incorporates an excellent sense of mise-en-scène, with an • Camera movement, where used, will be resourceful, controlled and
Band 5
excellent use of appropriate and meaningful location(s) purposeful.
which contribute(s) to the short film in a sophisticated way. • Editing will establish meaning very clearly and demonstrate a range
of continuity features.
• Sound is used to excellent effect, very clearly establishing mood to
create an intentional and appropriate audience response.
16-20 marks 10-12 marks
• Applies a good knowledge and understanding of elements of • Good application of knowledge and understanding of
film to the production of a short film. cinematography, editing and sound.
• Demonstrates a good ability to construct a short film • There is a good variety of effective shot types, camera angles,
appropriate to the chosen brief. including close-ups and (where appropriate) establishing shots.
Band 4 • Incorporates a good sense of mise-en-scène, with a good use • Camera movement, where used, will be controlled and purposeful.
of appropriate location(s) which contribute(s) effectively to the • Editing will establish meaning well and demonstrate continuity
short film. features.
• Sound is used to good effect, clearly establishing mood to create
an intentional and appropriate audience response.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL FILM STUDIES 45
11-15 marks 7-9 marks
• Applies a satisfactory knowledge and understanding of • Satisfactory application of knowledge and understanding of
elements of film to the production of a short film. cinematography, editing and sound.
• Demonstrates a satisfactory ability to construct a short film • There is a satisfactory variety of shot types, camera angles,
appropriate to the chosen brief. including close-ups and (where appropriate) establishing shots.
• Incorporates a satisfactory sense of mise-en-scène, with • Camera movement, where used, will be satisfactory and not always
Band 3
appropriate location(s) which contribute(s) reasonably to the controlled or purposeful.
short film. • Editing will establish meaning satisfactorily and demonstrate some
evidence of continuity features.
• Sound is used to satisfactory effect, establishing mood to create an
appropriate audience response.
6-10 marks 4-6 marks
• Applies a basic knowledge and understanding of elements of • Basic application of knowledge and understanding of
film to the production of a short film. cinematography, editing and sound.
• Demonstrates a basic ability to construct a short film • There is a basic range of shot types, camera angles, with a
appropriate to the chosen brief. tendency to repeat shots. Close-ups may be used but not always
• Incorporates a basic sense of mise-en-scène, with some appropriately.
Band 2 attention to appropriate location(s) which makes only a basic • Camera movement, where used, will be basic and not always
contribution to the short film. controlled.
• Editing will be basic, not always able to establish meaning with only
a basic sense of continuity features.
• Sound is used to basic effect, not always able to establish mood to
create an appropriate audience response.
1-5 marks 1-3 marks
• Applies a limited knowledge and understanding of elements • Limited application of knowledge and understanding of
of film to the production of a short film. cinematography, editing and sound.
• Demonstrates a limited ability to construct a short film • There is a limited range of shot types, with many shots repeated.
appropriate to the chosen brief. Close-ups may be used but not always appropriately.
Band 1 • Incorporates a limited sense of mise-en-scène, with little • Camera movement, where used, will be limited and, not controlled.
attention to location(s) and little contribution to the short film. • Editing will be limited, only sporadically able to establish meaning
and with a limited sense of continuity features.
• Sound used has limited effect, is unable to establish mood to create
an appropriate audience response.
0 marks
No production work submitted or not worthy of credit.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL FILM STUDIES 46
Production: screenwriting – short film - and its accompanying digitally photographed storyboard
Marking grid
AO3: Apply knowledge and understanding of elements of film to the production of a film or screenplay and storyboard (20%)
Band Screenwriting (and illustrative storyboard): application Screenwriting (and illustrative storyboard): application of
of structural elements (narrative construction, key elements (cinematography, editing and sound)
including mise-en-scène)
21-25 marks 13-15 marks
• Applies an excellent knowledge and understanding of • Excellent application of knowledge and understanding of
elements of film to the production of a screenplay for a short screenwriting.
film and an illustrative storyboard. • Excellent and consistent use of the 'master scene script' layout.
• Demonstrates an excellent ability to construct a screenplay Dialogue is used purposefully and convincingly.
for a short film and illustrative storyboard appropriate to the • The illustrative storyboard illustrates an excellent variety of
Band 5
chosen brief. effective shot types, camera angles, including close-ups and
• Incorporates an excellent sense of mise-en-scène through (where appropriate) establishing shots, camera movement,
sluglines and scene descriptions, with an excellent use of editing and sound.
appropriate and meaningful location(s) which contribute(s) to • Screenplay and illustrative storyboard indicate that the narrative
the short film in a sophisticated way. is sequenced skilfully and establishes meaning in a clear and
sophisticated way.
16-20 marks 10-12 marks
• Applies a good knowledge and understanding of elements of • Good application of knowledge and understanding of
film to the production of a screenplay for a short film and an screenwriting.
illustrative storyboard. • Good and consistent use of the 'master scene script' layout.
• Demonstrates a good ability to construct a screenplay for a Dialogue is used convincingly.
short film and illustrative storyboard appropriate to the • The illustrative storyboard illustrates a good variety of effective
Band 4
chosen brief. shot types, camera angles, including close-ups and (where
• Incorporates a good sense of mise-en-scène through appropriate) establishing shots, camera movement, editing and
sluglines and scene descriptions, with a good use of sound.
appropriate location(s) which contribute(s) effectively to the • Screenplay and illustrative storyboard indicate that the narrative
short film. is sequenced appropriately and establishes meaning clearly.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL FILM STUDIES 47
Band 3 11-15 marks 7-9 marks
• Applies a satisfactory knowledge and understanding of • Satisfactory application of knowledge and understanding of
elements of film to the production of a screenplay for a short screenwriting.
film and an illustrative storyboard. • Satisfactory and reasonably consistent use of the 'master scene
• Demonstrates a satisfactory ability to construct a screenplay script' layout. Dialogue is convincing in parts.
for a short film and illustrative storyboard appropriate to the • The illustrative storyboard illustrates a satisfactory range of shot
chosen brief. types, camera angles, including close-ups and (where
• Incorporates a satisfactory sense of mise-en-scène through appropriate) establishing shots, camera movement, editing and
sluglines and scene descriptions, with appropriate location(s) sound.
which contribute(s) reasonably to the short film. • Screenplay and illustrative storyboard indicate that the narrative
is sequenced reasonably appropriately and establishes
meaning.
Band 2 6-10 marks 4-6 marks
• Applies a basic knowledge and understanding of elements of • Basic application of knowledge and understanding of
film to the production of a screenplay for a short film and an screenwriting.
illustrative storyboard. • Basic and not always consistent use of the 'master scene script'
• Demonstrates a basic ability to construct a screenplay for a layout. Dialogue is mostly unconvincing.
short film and illustrative storyboard appropriate to the • The illustrative storyboard illustrates a basic range of shot
chosen brief. types, camera angles, with a tendency to repeat shots. Close-
• Incorporates a basic sense of mise-en-scène through ups may be used but not always appropriately. Only a basic
sluglines and scene descriptions, with some attention to sense of camera movement, editing and sound conveyed.
appropriate location(s) which makes only a basic contribution • Screenplay and illustrative storyboard indicate that the narrative
to the short film. is sequenced in a basic way, not always able to establish
meaning.
Band 1 1-5 marks 1-3 marks
• Applies a limited knowledge and understanding of elements • Limited application of knowledge and understanding of
of film to the production of a screenplay for a short film and screenwriting.
an illustrative storyboard. • Limited and inconsistent use of the 'master scene script' layout (if
• Demonstrates a limited ability to construct a screenplay for a used at all). Dialogue is unconvincing.
short film and illustrative storyboard appropriate to the • The illustrative storyboard illustrates a limited range of shot
chosen brief. types, with a tendency to repeat shots. Few, if any, close ups
• Incorporates a limited sense of mise-en-scène through will be used. Little, if any reference to editing and sound.
sluglines and not adequately detailed scene descriptions, • Screenplay and illustrative storyboard indicate that the narrative
with little attention to location(s) and little contribution to the is sequenced in a limited way, only occasionally establishing
short film. meaning.
0 marks
No production work submitted or not worthy of credit.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL FILM STUDIES 48
Production (evaluative analysis)
For each band:
• If work securely meets the criteria for a particular band, award a mark in the centre of the band.
• Award higher or lower marks depending on the degree to which the evaluative analysis meets the criteria for that band.
Evaluative Analysis of the Production: short film or screenplay for a short film and storyboard
Marking grid
AO2: Apply knowledge and understanding of elements of film to analyse and evaluate own work in relation to other professionally
produced work (10%)
Band Filmmaking – short film Screenwriting – short film andstoryboard
17-20 marks 17-20 marks
• Excellent application of knowledge and understanding of how • Excellent application of knowledge and understanding of how
narrative features and dramatic qualities of short film are narrative features and dramatic qualities of short film are
constructed, including through dialogue constructed, including through dialogue
• An excellent consideration of the cinematic influences on the • An excellent consideration of the cinematic influences on the
Band 5 production, including short films. production, including short films.
• An excellent and perceptive evaluative analysis of how • An excellent and perceptive evaluative analysis of how screenplay,
visual/audio and narrative elements are used to create meaning visual/audio and narrative elements are used to create meaning for
for spectators in relation to other professionally-produced films, spectators in relation to other professionally-produced screenplays,
including short films. including screenplays for short films.
13-16 marks 13-16 marks
• Good application of knowledge and understanding of how • Good application of knowledge and understanding of how narrative
narrative features and dramatic qualities of short film are features and dramatic qualities of short film are constructed,
constructed, including through dialogue including through dialogue
• A good consideration of the cinematic influences on the • A good consideration of the cinematic influences on the production,
Band 4 production, including short films. including short films.
• A good evaluative analysis of how visual/audio and narrative • A good evaluative analysis of how screenplay, visual/audio and
elements are used to create meaning for spectators in relation to narrative elements are used to create meaning for spectators in
other professionally-produced films, including short films. relation to other professionally-produced screenplays, including
screenplays for short films.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL FILM STUDIES 49
9-12 marks 9-12 marks
• Satisfactory application of knowledge and understanding of how • Satisfactory application of knowledge and understanding of how
narrative features and dramatic qualities of short film are narrative features and dramatic qualities of short film are
constructed, including through dialogue constructed, including through dialogue
• A satisfactory consideration of the cinematic influences on the • A satisfactory consideration of the cinematic influences on the
Band 3 production, including short films. production, including short films.
• A satisfactory evaluative analysis of how visual/audio and • A satisfactory evaluative analysis of how screenplay, visual/audio
narrative elements are used to create meaning for spectators in and narrative elements are used to create meaning for spectators
relation to other professionally-produced films, including short in relation to other professionally-produced screenplays, including
films. screenplays for short films.
5-8 marks 5-8 marks
• Basic application of knowledge and understanding of how • Basic application of knowledge and understanding of how narrative
narrative features and dramatic qualities of short film are features and dramatic qualities of short film are constructed,
constructed, including through dialogue including through dialogue
• A basic consideration of the cinematic influences on the • A basic consideration of the cinematic influences on the production,
Band 2
production, including short films. including short films.
• A basic evaluative analysis of how visual/audio and narrative • A basic evaluative analysis of how screenplay, visual/audio and
elements are used to create meaning for spectators in relation narrative elements are used to create meaning for spectators in
to other professionally-produced films, including short films. relation to other professionally-produced screenplays, including
screenplays for short films.
1-4 marks 1-4 marks
• Limited application of knowledge and understanding of how • Limited application of knowledge and understanding of how
narrative features and dramatic qualities of short film are narrative features and dramatic qualities of short film are
constructed, including through dialogue constructed, including through dialogue
• A limited consideration of the cinematic influences on the • A limited consideration of the cinematic influences on the
Band 1
production, including short films. production, including short films.
• A limited evaluative analysis of how visual/audio and narrative • A limited evaluative analysis of how screenplay, visual/audio and
elements are used to create meaning for spectators in relation narrative elements are used to create meaning for spectators in
to other professionally-produced films, including short films. relation to other professionally-produced screenplays, including
screenplays for short films.
0 marks
No evaluative analysis submitted or not worthy of credit.
Eduqas A Level Film Studies Specification from 2017
28/10/2024
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
