
1. Context Background to the individual research question or issue; AO1
conceptual framework, including theoretical background;
risk assessment and ethical issues supported by literature
and background material
(Location stated to give context)
2. Methods of Methods used to observe, measure and record phenomena AO3.1
field in the field applied to the data collection methods linked to a
investigation clear and appropriate research question; role undertaken in
data collection (individual and / or group) with justification
3. Data Communicating field (primary) and secondary data / AO3.3
presentation of information collected through appropriate presentation
findings with a techniques, allowing suitable analysis to be made, using
range of quantitative and qualitative skills
techniques
4. Analysis and Analysis, interpretation / justification of findings in the light AO3.2
interpretation of of data / information collected; data presentation techniques
findings
5. Conclusions Drawing well-evidenced conclusions, synthesising findings, AO3.3
and informed by theoretical background underpinning the
research given in the introduction
6. Evaluation A succinct, critical reflection of every stage of the whole AO2.1c
investigation in order to appreciate the strengths and
limitations of the field (primary) and secondary data,
accuracy, degree of reliability and / or errors or misuse of
data, bias, appreciate views and interests of stakeholders,
methods used, findings and conclusions drawn;
suggestions for further improvements and / or further
research
Presentation Bibliography of secondary information and relevant AO3.3
requirements; appendices included. Guidance on references, the word
references, count and appendices can be found in Section 3.2 on page
appendices, 42
structure
Collecting data / information
In collecting field data (primary data), through measurements and observations,
learners should have an adequate amount of field (primary) data collected to allow
them to analyse their findings required in section 4. Details in Section 2a of this
specification give further information on field (primary) data collection, including
sampling techniques.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOGRAPHY 39
Using geographical skills
Learners should demonstrate a range of quantitative and qualitative skills specific to
data / information collection. Appendix A lists skills which relate to examination
requirements, but learners may also use other relevant techniques and statistical
techniques. These techniques could include Mann Whitney U Test, Pearson’s
Product Moment, and Simpson’s diversity correlation.
Learners may use any of these quantitative and qualitative skills as appropriate to
their investigation. For example, quantitative techniques might include measurements
of flow, scale, spatial pattern and temporal change. Qualitative techniques might
include use of questionnaire, bi-polar techniques and annotation of photographs /
sketches.
Some secondary information must also be included in the independent
investigations; for example, from background reading, satellite images, aerial and
oblique photographs, large databases and GIS. Secondary information is data that
has already been processed in written and cartographic form in published materials,
such as text books, journals and online articles and includes material from:
• government materials
• media
• charities, NGOs, civil society organisations and pressure groups
• meteorological, environmental and conservation organisations
• geographical publications including text books and journals
• maps and charts.
Learners should be aware of possible bias in secondary data.
Time allocation
The non-exam assessment is integral to A level Geography and contributes 20% to
the overall final assessment. Time is not prescribed for this work because the
process of the learner's independent investigation including the fieldwork, research
and writing is iterative. Learners should seek guidance from their teachers and
engage as necessary in learner-led discussions.
As a consequence, the overall time given to this independent investigation should be
commensurate with the 20% weighting for this component.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOGRAPHY 40
3 ASSESSMENT
3.1 Assessment objectives and weightings
Below are the assessment objectives for this specification. Learners must:
AO1
Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of places, environments, concepts,
processes, interactions and change, at a variety of scales
AO2
Apply knowledge and understanding in different contexts to interpret, analyse and
evaluate geographical information and issues
AO3
Use a variety of relevant quantitative, qualitative and fieldwork skills to:
• investigate geographical questions and issues
• interpret, analyse and evaluate data and evidence
• construct arguments and draw conclusions
The table below shows the weighting of each assessment objective for each
component and for the qualification as a whole.
AO1 AO2 AO3 Total
Component 1 9% 6.5% 5% 20.5%
Component 2 9.5% 10.5% 7.5% 27.5%
Component 3 13.5% 15% 3.5% 32%
Component 4 2.5% 5% 12.5% 20%
Overall 34.5% 37% 28.5% 100%
weighting
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOGRAPHY 41
3.2 Arrangements for non-exam assessment
A level Geography specifications require each candidate to undertake an
independent investigation which involves, but need not be restricted to, fieldwork.
This investigation must be based on a question or issue defined and developed by
the individual candidate. The investigation is assessed by means of a non-exam
component which accounts for 20% of the total assessment.
Further details on arrangements for non-exam assessment are provided annually by
the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ). Please refer to the JCQ website,
www.jcq.org.uk, for further information.
Preparation for the independent investigation
For candidates to display the skills necessary for attainment at the highest levels,
centres must guide candidates towards appropriate research areas and establish the
fieldwork enquiry process, in preparation for the independent investigation in
Component 4. This fieldwork can be linked to study in Component 1 of either a
coastal or a glaciated landscape and changing places at the local level in the first
instance. These can account for two of at least four days of fieldwork and on these
occasions candidates can begin to develop their understanding of the six stages in
the enquiry process. From these initial two days linked to Component 1, candidates
can progress to develop a greater understanding of the enquiry process in further
fieldwork activities. In total this will enable centres to reach the overall required total
of the equivalent of at least four days of fieldwork. Centres can, if they wish, develop
further fieldwork beyond this requirement. The required four or more days for
fieldwork must involve out-of-classroom activity; these days must not be used for
writing up the investigations.
Overall, from these days of fieldwork, candidates should develop an understanding of
the six stages of the enquiry process that will enable them to undertake research for,
and completion of, their own independent investigation for Component 4. Candidates
must also be made aware of the requirements and assessment objectives. Section
2a details the fieldwork enquiry process and Section 2.4 gives full details of the
independent investigation required in Component 4.
Independence and Teacher Guidance
The following section details the role of the teacher and what independence for the
candidate means in practice.
Guidance permitted at different stages
1. Investigation title stage (guidance and approval)
2. Planning and investigation stage (guidance and approval)
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOGRAPHY 42
The following guidelines indicate the role of the teacher in the process.
Teachers can:
• provide broad parameters for candidates' investigation proposals (including
themes from the specification, locations, availability of equipment, time
constraints)
• explain what independence means (see Appendix D)
• advise on health and safety considerations, the use of equipment and potential
ethical concerns
• discuss with candidates their initial exploratory planning and tentative
investigation titles.
Teachers must:
• confirm the provisional title has the potential to meet the assessment criteria and
offer general guidance on any necessary amendments
• review each candidates' Geography Independent Investigation form (see
Appendix E). Within this review teachers should ensure that the proposed
investigation can suitably access the specification requirements and give
guidance on the methodology and analytical tools that the candidate plans to use.
• promote good practice such as referencing and using a bibliography system
• store work securely once it is handed in for formal assessment.
Teachers must not1
• provide candidates with a choice of titles or tasks from which candidates then
choose
• give detailed specific guidance to individual candidates about how to improve
work to meet the assessment criteria. Teachers cannot provide templates and
model answers for specific candidates work
• mark the work provisionally and share the mark so that the candidate may then
improve it
• return work to candidates after it has been submitted and marked
• give specific guidance on how to make improvements to the draft in order to meet
the assessment criteria so that candidates are no longer engaged in independent
learning.
1This section applies to third party fieldwork providers and teachers must ensure that all times they remain confident
in the authenticity and independence of the candidates' work.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOGRAPHY 43
If teachers give any assistance which goes beyond general advice, for example2
• provide detailed specific guidance on how to improve drafts to meet the
assessment criteria
• give detailed specific guidance on errors and omissions which limits candidates’
opportunities to show initiative themselves
• intervene to improve the presentation or content of work
• provide primary or secondary data not collected by the candidate either
individually or as part of a group.
then they must record this assistance and take it into account when marking the
work.
Annotation should be used to explain how marks were applied in the context of the
additional assistance given. Failure to follow the above constitutes malpractice.
Examples of both specific guidance and general guidance are shown in Appendix F.
Description of the level of independence at each stage of the investigation
Teachers must refer to the descriptions of the level of independence in Appendix D
and clarify this information with candidates. These descriptions do not infer anything
in the way of marks allocated for each stage of the investigation; they are to specify
the level of independence required at different stages.
Note that the level of independence at each stage is the minimum required (i.e.
where collaboration is allowed it is not mandatory and candidates may work alone).
Levels of independence:
• Collaboration allowed - candidates may work as a class / group / pair
• Independent work - candidates must work alone.
If candidates collaborate (where independence is expected) and/or are given
assistance beyond the parameters indicated in Appendix D, then the teacher must
record this on the Geography Independent Investigation Form and take into account
when marking the work. Failure to do so will be considered as malpractice. If
malpractice is suspected the Awarding Organisation will investigate. If malpractice is
found to have taken place a penalty will be given dependent on the circumstances
and severity of the malpractice.
For full information regarding malpractice please see the JCQ document 'Suspected
Malpractice in Examination and Assessments'.
Word length and guidance
The focus of the investigation must be derived from the specification the candidate is
studying.
The guidance for word length is 3000 to 4000 words. This includes all the text, text
boxes, and supplementary material such as photographs and data presentation
techniques. It does not include appendices and abstract. It is helpful when attaching
appendices that these contain examples of raw data only, such as data sheets and
questionnaires, rather than every questionnaire used. If candidates produce an
investigation that is significantly above or below this word count, they reduce their
ability to achieve higher level marks.
2 First three bullet points as per the JCQ Instructions for conducting non-examination assessment, section 4.2
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOGRAPHY 44
References
References to all secondary information used in the written independent investigation
must be acknowledged. This can be through an appended bibliography using a
conventional in-text referencing system, such as the Harvard system, or through
footnotes, although footnotes should be used to refer to the text. The Harvard system
of referencing includes the use of title, author and date for publication. All sources
and digital material taken from the internet must also be referenced with titles and
URL addresses or screen shots.
Format for the written independent investigation
The report must:
• be word processed in Arial, Calibri or Times New Roman
• be font size 11 point
• have text set out in 1.5 spacing
• have all pages numbered
• have candidate number and centre number in either the header of footer on all
pages
• have headings and labels for such items as photographs, tables and maps, with
scales and keys / legends on maps.
Geography Independent Investigation form
All sections of this form must be completed by candidate and teacher and the form
must be attached to the work submitted for moderation. The form is comprised of
three sections, as follows.
1. Candidate / teacher authentication section
Centres must ensure that the candidate authentication section is completed for each
candidate by both the candidate and teacher. The Geography Independent
Investigation form requires the following details.
Candidates must sign a declaration to confirm that, apart from collaboration with
other candidates and general guidance from the teacher, where these are acceptable
within the parameters of the specification, the work they submit for final assessment
is their own unaided work.
Teachers must sign a declaration of authentication after the work has been
completed confirming that:
• any assistance which goes beyond general guidance has been recorded and
taken into account when marking the work
• otherwise, apart from general guidance given in line with the parameters set out
in the specification the work is solely that of the candidate concerned
• the work was completed under the required conditions
• signed candidate declarations are kept on file.
Teachers should be sufficiently familiar with the candidate's general standard to
judge whether the piece of work submitted is within his/her capabilities, and there
should be sufficient supervision of every candidate to enable the work to be
authenticated with confidence. Work may be completed outside the centre, without
supervision, provided that the centre is confident that the work produced is the
candidate's own.
The forms containing the signed candidate declarations must be kept on file until the
deadline for an enquiry about results has passed or until any appeal, malpractice or
other results enquiry has been completed, whichever is later.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOGRAPHY 45
2. Investigation proposal section
Candidates use this section to detail their title, hypothesis and/or questions and/or
sub-questions, enquiry route and suggested methods of data collection and
suggestions of analytical tools.
3. The WJEC Eduqas Independent Investigation Mark Sheet
Teacher must complete this section of the form when they mark the work, providing a
mark breakdown and any supporting information.
The Geography Independent Investigation form is included in Appendix E and will
be available to be downloaded from the Geography homepage on the public website,
together with instructions on completing the mark sheet.
Assessment grids and teacher annotations
Candidates' investigations must be internally assessed by centres, annotated to
indicate how and why marks have been awarded and, if applicable, internally
standardised (see below), following the procedures specified in the JCQ Instructions
for conducting non-examination assessment. When assessing the written reports
teachers should study the non-exam assessment mark bands in Appendix B, which
are designed to present a system that links the assessment objectives to marks, and
to discriminate clearly between the varying levels of achievement.
Teachers must make specific reference to the assessment objectives in the
annotations that they write on the work and on the marking grid included with the
Geography Independent Investigation form. Teachers are required to record
separate marks for each assessment objective in the spaces provided on the
marking grid, to total the overall mark in the box provided and to make an overall
summative comment about the work. Teacher annotations on the body text of the
written investigation are also very useful to show how and why the marks have been
awarded. All annotations and marks must be made in ink.
The assessment grids will be of most value when used in conjunction with examples
of non-exam assessment, which will be issued by WJEC to help centres identify the
quality of the work associated with various mark bands. Details about the examples
will be found on the Geography homepage on the public website.
Submission of marks, samples and administration
Centres need to submit marks for non-exam assessed work online by a date
specified in March of the year when the work is to be submitted for moderation.
When the marks have been submitted to WJEC, the online system will identify the
sample of candidates whose work is selected for moderation. The samples should
be submitted by the end of March. Centres must submit the Geography Independent
Investigation form with the sampled candidates' work
• Only the candidates selected for the sample should be sent to the moderator in
rank order.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOGRAPHY 46
• The authentication statement on the Geography Independent Investigation
form must be signed by both the candidate and the teacher.
• The Independent investigation forms are not awarded marks. However the
moderator will use them alongside the inspection of the sample of candidates
work, to judge whether the requirements have been met.
• The pages of the written report must be held together securely. The study
should not be placed in any form of plastic folder or ring binder.
N.B. Please remember that all candidates' work, not just the sample, must be
authenticated internally by signing the Geography Independent Investigation
form.
If a Geography Independent Investigation form is found to be missing WJEC will
in the first instance contact the centre to rectify the matter. If this request is not
addressed satisfactorily WJEC will take further action which may lead to a
malpractice investigation.
The moderation sample of candidates' work should be sent to the external
moderator by the end of March in the final spring term of the A level course.
Details of the submission of samples will be available on the Geography
homepage on the public website. Sample sizes are based on the following:
No. of candidates at centre Sample size
Up to 15 All
16-100 15
101-200 20
Over 200 25
All centres will receive detailed feedback on the work and, if appropriate, the
proposals, from the moderation process in the form of reports to centres.
Internal standardisation and moderation
Where there is more than one teacher in a centre, work from all teaching groups
must be standardised internally. This is designed to ensure that the final assessment
reflects a single agreed standard for all teaching groups involved. Standardising
material will be issued by WJEC to assist with this process.
For moderation to take place and to be standardised fairly, each centre is assigned
an external moderator by WJEC. It is essential that the moderator understands the
nature of the independent investigation submitted and the way that criteria have been
used to make a final assessment. The required details on the Geography
Independent Investigation form and the annotations made on the body of the text are
therefore very important.
Please refer to details on the JCQ website for further arrangements on non-exam
assessment.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOGRAPHY 47
3.3 Arrangements for fieldwork
Each centre must provide a Fieldwork Declaration to WJEC by the end of March in
the year in which the assessment is taking place, which details that the four days of
fieldwork, including a focus on both physical and human geography, has been carried
out by each learner. This is required in each assessment cycle. Failure to provide a
fieldwork declaration will be treated as malpractice and / or maladministration.
Centre Number:
Name of Head of Centre:
A level Geography Fieldwork Statement
I, the head of Centre, confirm that all students who have been entered for an A Level
Geography qualification have undertaken the minimum requirement of four days of
fieldwork, including fieldwork in relation to both physical and human geography
processes.
Centres will be able to complete the Fieldwork Declaration by downloading the
appropriate form from the Geography homepage on the public website. Centres must
use this form to confirm that each learner listed has undertaken geographical
fieldwork on four days in both physical and human geography processes.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOGRAPHY 48
4 TECHNICAL INFORMATION
4.1 Making entries
This is a linear qualification in which all assessments must be taken at the end of the
course. Assessment opportunities will be available in the summer series each year,
until the end of the life of this specification. Summer 2018 will be the first assessment
opportunity.
A qualification may be taken more than once. Candidates must resit all examination
components in the same series.
Marks for NEA may be carried forward for the life of the specification. If a candidate
resits an NEA component (rather than carrying forward the previous NEA mark), it is
the new mark that will count towards the overall grade, even if it is lower than a
previous attempt.
Where a candidate has certificated on two or more previous occasions, the most
recent NEA mark is carried forward, regardless of whether that mark is higher or
lower (unless that mark is absent)
The entry code appears below.
WJEC Eduqas A level Geography: A110QS
The current edition of our Entry Procedures and Coding Information gives up-to-date
entry procedures.
4.2 Grading, awarding and reporting
A level qualifications are reported as a grade from A* to E. Results not attaining the
minimum standard for the award will be reported as U (unclassified).
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOGRAPHY 49
APPENDIX A
Geographical skills
Geographical skills in relation to both an equal weighting of quantitative and qualitative
skills are required for A level learners and the following list indicates those selected for
study for all components in this specification. All the skills need to be addressed within these
components but not all will apply to fieldwork. The four required days of fieldwork should
contribute to learners building a holistic and balanced understanding of quantitative and
qualitative skills related to fieldwork and the six-stage enquiry process.
Quantitative skills to collect data through numerical measurements. Ref. No.
1. Cartographical information:
• longitude and latitude 1.1
• map coordinates including grid references and area references 1.2
• distance and area 1.3
• direction 1.4
• scale 1.5
2. Number and statistical calculations:
• sampling, including random, stratified, systematic and the ability to 2.1
identify sources of error in data, measurement errors and misuse of
data 2.2
• totals 2.3
• percentages 2.4
• fractions, proportions and ratios 2.5
• data sets (small to large) including crowd-sourced and big data
(characterised by volume, velocity and variety) 2.6
• frequencies 2.7
• densities 2.8
• scales of measurement 2.9
• measures of central tendency (mean, median, mode) 2.10
• measures of dispersion (range, standard deviation, inter-quartile range) 2.11
• measurements of concentration, including location quotient 2.12
• ratios including dependency ratio and Gini-coefficient 2.13
• indices including ecological footprint, HDI 2.14
• measures of correlation, including a scatter plot, lines of best fit and
Spearman Rank 2.15
• inferential statistics, including Chi-square
3. Cartographic and graphical material:
• isoline and isopleth maps 3.1
• choropleth maps 3.2
• dot maps 3.3
• flow diagrams and maps 3.4
• proportional symbols 3.5
• graphs, including scatter, line, bar, triangular, logarithmic, bipolar 3.6
• pie charts 3.7
• population pyramids 3.8
• cross-sections and long profiles 3.9
• rose / star / radial diagrams 3.10
• kite diagrams 3.11
• Lorenz curve 3.12
4. Digital and geo-located data:
• geospatial technologies including aerial photographs, digital images,
satellite images, geographic information systems (GIS), global
positioning systems (GPS), databases 4.1
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOGRAPHY 50
Qualitative skills to collect data through non-numerical techniques
5. Cartographical information for:
• landscape system identification 5.1
• land-use identification 5.2
• risk assessment 5.3
6. Cartographic and graphical material:
• mental maps 6.1
• GOAD plans 6.2
• Ordnance Survey maps (1:25000 and 1:50000) 6.3
7. Digital and geo-located data:
• geospatial technologies including aerial photographs, digital images,
satellite images, geographic information systems (GIS), global positioning
systems (GPS), databases 7.1
• field sketches 7.2
8. Textual and visual sources:
• interview material including coding 8.1
• images 8.2
• factual text 8.3
• discursive / creative material 8.4
• oral histories 8.5
Integrating geographical skills in delivery of the core themes
Learners need to develop competence in using the geographical skills specified in the DfE
Geography GCE AS and A Level Subject Content (December 2014) shown in the tables
below in italics for each Component. The tables illustrate how the skills can be integrated
into the delivery of the core themes in Components 1 and 2. These skills are not exclusive to
Components 1 and 2; learners will need to be able to apply these skills across the selected
non-core optional themes in Component 3 and also in the Independent Investigation in
Component 4.
Component 1: Changing Landscapes (Coastal or Glaciated)
The following geographical skills referred to in the table above (using reference numbers)
are linked to the study of Changing Landscapes and cover both Coastal Landscapes and
Glaciated Landscapes (centres choose from either Coastal Landscapes or Glaciated
Landscapes). These skills are not exclusive to Component 1; learners will need to be able
to apply these skills across any suitable focus area throughout their course of study.
Quantitative skills to collect data through numerical measurements
Measurement, data manipulation and statistical skills applied to field measurement
Appendix Geographical Skill Focus area
A in
Reference specification
Number
1. Cartographical information
1.2 • map coordinates including grid references and area references opportunities
throughout
1.3 • distance and area - calculate the maximum fetch using an atlas 1.1.4
comparison of past and present distribution of glaciated landscapes 1.2.4
using global and regional maps
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOGRAPHY 51
1.4 • direction - prevailing wind and wave direction 1.1.4
cirque orientation 1.2.5
1.5 • scale - trace a 30-40 km coastline at a range of scales (1: 1000 000, 1.1.3
1: 50 000 and 1:25 000 and comment on the influence of scale on the
plan of the coastline
types of ice mass at a range of scales 1.2.4
2. Number and statistical calculations
2.1 • sampling - including random, stratified, systematic - samples of beach 1.1.6
pebbles, including the ability to identify sources of error in data,
measurement errors and misuse of data
samples of glacial clasts, including the ability to identify sources of 1.2.6
error in data, measurement errors and misuse of data
2.2 • totals - use of numerical data to calculate sediment budgets and 1.1.1
glacier mass balance 1.2.1
2.5 • data sets (small to large) - samples of beach pebbles 1.1.6
samples of glacial clasts 1.2.6
2.6 • frequencies - record frequencies of roundness of beach pebbles 1.1.6
record frequencies of roundness of glacial clasts 1.2.6
using Power's scale
2.9 • measures of central tendency (mean, mode) - mean wave frequency 1.1.4
or mean rate of cliff retreat per year by rock type 1.1.5
modal Power's scale of beach pebbles 1.1.6
mean rates of glacial recession in different global regions 1.2.1
modal Power's scale of glacial clasts 1.2.6
2.10 • measures of dispersion (range, standard deviation, inter-quartile range) 1.1.6
- calculate the range, standard deviation and interquartile range from a
sample of beach pebbles
calculate the range, standard deviation and interquartile range from a 1.2.6
sample of glacial clasts
2.14 • measures of correlation, including scatter plot, lines of best fit and 1.1.6
Spearman Rank - use scatter plot, lines of best fit and Spearman Rank
to investigate changes in pebble size and shape along a drift aligned
beach
use scatter plot, lines of best fit and Spearman Rank to investigate 1.2.8
changes in [scree] size along a transect from the top to the base of a
scree data
2.15 • inferential statistics, including Chi-square to test the hypothesis that the 1.1.6
distribution of observed pebble shapes between foreshore and storm
ridge
or size of scree deposits between the upper and lower parts of the 1.2.8
scree is no different from an expected even distribution
3. Cartographic and graphical material
measurement and geo-spatial mapping skills
3.6 • graphs, including scatter - relationship between wind speed and wave
height 1.1.4
relationship between slope angle/ice velocity/thickness and glacial 1.2.5
erosion
3.9 • cross-sections and long profiles - cross-section of sand dune/salt 1.1.7
marsh 1.1.6
longshore beach profile 1.2.5
cross-section of cirque 1.2.5
long profile of glacial trough
3.10 • rose/star/radial diagrams - prevailing wind direction 1.1.4
till fabric analysis using radial diagrams 1.2.6
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOGRAPHY 52
4. Digital and geo-located data
4.1 • geospatial technologies including aerial photographs, digital images,
satellite images, geographic information systems (GIS), databases -
use of GIS and aerial photo interpretation to measure rates of coastal 1.1.5
retreat 1.2.1
use of GIS and aerial photo interpretation to measure rate of glacial
retreat
Qualitative skills to collect data through non-numerical techniques
developing observation skills
5. Cartographical information for:
5.1 • landscape system identification - classification of coastal 1.1.3
and glacial landscapes according to landscape character type (LCT) 1.2.7
5.3 • risk assessment - for Coastal Landscapes 1.1
or Glaciated Landscapes 1.2
6. Cartographic and graphical material
6.3 • Ordnance Survey maps (1:25,000 and 1:50,000 - map interpretation
of a distinctive landform indicating past sea level [change] 1.1.8
cirque orientation analysis using OS maps 1.2.5
7. Digital and geo-located data
7.1 • geospatial technologies including aerial photographs, digital images,
satellite images, geographic information systems (GIS), global
positioning systems (GPS), database - GIS mapping of the variety of
coastal (rocky, sandy and estuarine) landscapes both for and beyond 1.1.3
the UK
GIS mapping of landscapes shaped by valley glaciers and ice sheets 1.2.4
both for and beyond the UK
7.2 • Field sketches - field sketches of cliff profiles 1.1.5
field sketches of glacial landforms of erosion 1.2.5
8. Textual and visual sources:
8.2 • images - photographic interpretation of coastal landforms 1.1
photo interpretation of glacial landforms 1.2
Component 1: Changing Places
The following geographical skills referred to in the table at the beginning of Appendix A
(using reference numbers) are linked to the study of Changing Places. These skills are not
exclusive to Component 1; learners will need to be able to apply these skills across any
suitable focus area throughout their course of study.
Quantitative skills to collect data through numerical measurements
use of geo-spatial data used to present place characteristics
Appendix Geographical Skill Focus area in
A specification
Reference
Number
1. Cartographical information
1.2 • map coordinates including grid references and area references opportunities
throughout
2. Number and statistical calculations:
2.3 • percentages - percentage employed in primary, secondary and 1.3.3
tertiary sectors 1.3.4
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOGRAPHY 53
3. Cartographic and graphical material
4. Digital and geo-located data
4.1 • geospatial technologies including aerial photographs, digital images, 1.3.9
satellite images, geographic information systems (GIS), global
positioning systems (GPS), database - use of GIS and aerial photo
interpretation to measure land use changes in regenerated urban
places
Qualitative skills to collect data through non-numerical techniques
give particular weight to qualitative approaches involved in representing place and to
analysing critically the impacts of different media on place meanings and perceptions
5. Cartographical information for:
5.2 • land-use identification - land use changes in regenerated urban 1.3.9
places
6. Cartographic and graphical material
6.1 • mental maps - characteristics of the 'home' place 1.3.1
6.2 • GOAD plans - land uses in central urban places 1.3.9
7. Digital and geo-located data
7.1 • geospatial technologies including aerial photographs, digital images, 1.3.9
satellite images, geographic information systems (GIS), global
positioning systems (GPS), databases - use of GIS and aerial photo
interpretation to identify land use changes in regenerated urban
areas
8. Textual and visual sources:
8.1 • interview material - research how people engage with and attach to 1.3.10
the new identities of urban places, including understanding the use
of social media to obtain crowd-sourced data and coding (classifying
information in preparation for computer processing – such as
inputting data using Excel)
8.2 • images - research how media images (photographs, film, music, 1.3.9
poetry, art, literature and graffiti) actively create particular place
representations
8.3 • factual text - compare advertising copy and tourist agency material 1.3.9
with census data
8.4 • discursive/creative material - analysing the impacts of different media 1.3.1
on place meanings and perceptions
8.5 • oral histories - interpretations of oral accounts of how people's lives 1.3.10
are/have been affected by continuity and change in the nature of
places
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOGRAPHY 54
Component 2: Water and Carbon Cycles
The following geographical skills referred to in the table at the beginning of Appendix A
(using reference numbers) are linked to the study of Water and Carbon Cycles. These skills
are not exclusive to Component 2; learners will need to be able to apply these skills across
any suitable focus area throughout their course of study.
Quantitative skills to collect data through numerical measurements
Understanding of simple mass balance, unit conversions, and the analysis and
presentation of field data
Appendix Geographical Skill Focus area in
A specification
Reference
Number
1. Cartographical information:
1.2 • map coordinates including grid references and area references opportunities
throughout
2. Number and statistical calculations:
2.2 • totals - use of numerical data to calculate simple mass balance of 2.1.2
inputs and outputs of a drainage system
2.4 • fractions, proportions and ratios - distribution and size of carbon 2.1.7
stores
2.5 • understand use of big data for statistics on climate change 2.1.9
2.7 • densities - calculation of drainage densities 2.1.3
2.8 • unit conversions convert drainage basin from km2 to m2
3. Cartographic and graphical material
3.1 • isoline and isopleth maps - construction of isohyets from 2.1.4
precipitation data
3.2 • Choropleth maps - analysis of water stress/water scarcity by 2.1.5
country
3.5 • proportional symbols - proportional circles to show size of carbon 2.1.7
stores in different biomes
3.6 • graphs, including scatter, line, bar, triangular, logarithmic, bipolar -
analysis of river regime annual discharges (bar graph) 2.1.3
labelling features of storm hydrographs (line graph) 2.1.3
analysis of climate graphs to identify excess runoff and deficit within 2.1.4/5
the water cycle
3.11 • Kite diagrams - analysis of vegetation distribution along a peatland 2.1.8
transect
Qualitative approaches may be used if appropriate
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOGRAPHY 55
Component 2: Global Governance: Change and Challenges
The following geographical skills referred to in the table at the beginning of Appendix A
(using reference numbers) are linked to the study of Global Governance; Change and
Challenges. These skills are not exclusive to Component 2; learners will need to be able to
apply these skills across any suitable focus area throughout their course of study.
Quantitative skills to collect data through numerical measurements
Use both quantitative and qualitative approaches across the theme as a whole
Appendix Geographical Skill Focus area in
A specification
Reference
Number
1. Cartographical information:
1.2 • map coordinates including grid references and area references opportunities
throughout
2. Number and statistical calculations:
2.11 • measurements of concentration - location quotient - to show 2.2.2
differences in functions from place to place (global hubs)
2.12 • ratios including dependency ratio and Gini coefficient - altered
dependency ratio as a consequence of rural - urban migration in the 2.2.5
developing world 2.2.3
Gini coefficient to analyse global income inequalities
2.13 • indices including ecological footprint, HDI - analysis of global 2.2.2
variation in HDI as one of the factors driving international out-
migration
3. Cartographic and graphical material
3.3 • dot maps - to show distribution of piracy hotspots 2.2.6
3.4 • flow diagrams and maps - proportional flow lines showing direction 2.2.1
and volume of global patterns of migration
3.7 • pie charts - to show sources of ocean pollution 2.2.10
3.8 • population pyramids - changes in population structure as a
consequence of rural-urban migration in the developing world 2.2.5
3.12 • Lorenz curve - to analyse global income inequalities 2.2.3
4. Digital and geo-located data
Qualitative skills to collect data through non-numerical techniques
8. Textual and visual sources:
8.5 • oral histories - interpretation of oral accounts of the lived 2.2.4
experiences of refugees
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOGRAPHY 56
APPENDIX B
Non-exam assessment grids
The following assessment grid is to be applied to marking Component 4 (non-exam assessment), the independent investigation.
Band Context Methods of field investigation Data presentation of findings
10 marks 15 marks 10 marks
AO1 (10 marks) AO3.1 (15 marks) AO3.3 (10 marks)
5 9-10 marks 13-15 marks 9-10 marks
• Wide ranging, and thorough use of • Strong evidence of wide ranging and good quality data collection approaches • Wide ranging and accurate use of appropriate
literature sources with a confident (quantitative, qualitative method and fieldwork skills) relevant to the topic linked to a well- qualitative and / or quantitative data
theoretical and / or contextual defined, individual research question presentation methods / techniques
background • Practical individual and group approaches taken in the field are accurate and well • Well selected, applied and wholly appropriate
• Confident and informed explained and justified cartographic and graphical techniques to
understanding of risk / ethical • Sampling strategy is well designed, explained and justified. The strategy is wholly support the analysis of findings
issues appropriate to the investigation
4 7-8 marks 10-12 marks 7-8 marks
• Appropriate use of a range of • Secure evidence of appropriate data collection approaches (quantitative, qualitative • Uses a range of suitable qualitative and / or
literature sources with a secure methods and fieldwork skills) relevant to the topic linked to a clear, individual research quantitative data presentation methods /
theoretical and / or contextual question techniques
background • Practical individual and group approaches taken in the field are mostly accurate and • Mostly well selected, applied and appropriate
• Secure understanding of risk / explained with reasonable justification cartographic and graphical techniques
ethical issues • Sampling strategy is well designed, with explanation and some justification. The strategy included to support the analysis of findings
is mostly appropriate to the investigation
3 5-6 marks 7-9 marks 5-6 marks
• Some use of literature sources • Some appropriate data collection approaches are evident (quantitative, qualitative • Some relevant qualitative and / or quantitative
with a reasonable theoretical methods and fieldwork skills) and are of partial relevance to the topic linked to an data presentation methods / techniques
background adequate, individual research question • Mostly well selected and mostly well applied
• Partial understanding of risk / • Practical individual and group approaches taken in field show partial accuracy with cartographic and graphical techniques to
ethical issues detailed description and some explanation support the analysis of findings
• Sampling strategy has been considered and described. The strategy is partially
appropriate to the investigation
2 3-4 marks 4-6 marks 3-4 marks
• Limited use of literature sources • Limited data collection approaches (quantitative, qualitative method and fieldwork skills) • Limited use of appropriate qualitative and / or
with a generalised account of the linked to an ill-defined, individual research question quantitative data presentation methods /
theoretical background • Limited practical individual and group approaches taken in the field, with limited accuracy techniques
• Limited understanding of risk / and description, but lacking explanation • Limited use of cartographic and graphical
ethical issues • Sampling strategy has been described. The appropriateness of the strategy to the techniques to support the analysis of findings
investigation is limited
1 1-2 marks 1-3 marks 1-2 marks
• Minimal use of literature sources • Minimal data collection approaches (quantitative, qualitative methods and fieldwork skills) • Superficial use of appropriate qualitative and /
and a very poor theoretical with unconvincing research and/or individual question or quantitative data presentation methods /
background; • Very little evidence of practical individual and group approaches taken in the field with techniques
• Very little limited consideration of some description of the approaches taken • Very little cartographic and graphical
risk / ethical issues techniques to support the analysis of findings
0 marks 0 marks 0 marks
Response not creditworthy or not Response not creditworthy or not attempted Response not creditworthy or not attempted
attempted
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOGRAPHY 57
Band Analysis and Interpretation of Conclusions and Presentation requirements Evaluation
findings
15 marks 10 marks 20 marks
AO3.2 (15 marks) AO3.3 (10 marks) AO2.1c (20 marks)
5 13-15 marks 9-10 marks 17-20 marks
• Sophisticated analysis and • Sophisticated and confident summary, drawing convincing and thorough individual • Highly effective evaluation of the knowledge
interpretation of findings, clearly conclusions that address the research question and substantiate the analysis and and understanding gained from field
showing why they were interpretation observation
appropriate and relevant to the • A well-structured, concise and logical report; accurately references secondary information • Perceptive evaluation of each stage of the
research question fieldwork investigation including the ethical
• Demonstrates some individuality dimensions of the field research
and / or insights into links between • Perceptive and well considered reflections for
the study and other aspects of further research and extension of their
geography geographical understanding
• Considered improvements suggested
pertinent to the investigation
4 10-12 marks 7-8 marks 13-16 marks
• Well-developed analysis and • Effective summary, drawing competent individual conclusions that address the research • Effective evaluation of the knowledge and
interpretation of findings, showing question and substantiate the analysis and interpretation understanding gained from field observation
why they were appropriate and • A structured, clear and concise report; accurately references secondary information • Competent evaluation of each stage of the
relevant to the research question fieldwork investigation including the ethical
• Demonstrates partial insights into dimensions of the field research
links between the study and other • Valid reflections for further research and
aspects of geography extension of their geographical understanding
• Valid improvements suggested pertinent to
the investigation
3 7-9 marks 5-6 marks 9-12 marks
• Straightforward analysis and • Summarises, drawing individual conclusions that mainly address the research question • Attempts to evaluate the knowledge and
interpretation of findings, largely and largely substantiate the analysis and interpretation understanding gained from field observation
showing why they were • A structured and clear report with some lack of focus; some references of secondary • Intermittent evaluation of each stage of the
appropriate and relevant to the information fieldwork investigation occasionally including
research question the ethical dimensions of the field research
• Implied insights into links between • Some reflections for further research and
the study and other aspects of extension of their geographical understanding
geography • Some improvements suggested pertinent to
the investigation
2 4-6 marks 3-4 marks 5-8 marks
• Limited analysis and interpretation • Provides rudimentary conclusions that are occasionally linked back to the research • Limited evaluation of the knowledge gained
of findings, occasionally showing question from field observation
why they were appropriate to the • A structured and imprecise report; a few superficial references to secondary information • Evaluation of some stages of the fieldwork
research question investigation
• Limited insights into links between • Some random improvements suggested to the
the study and other aspects of investigation
geography
1 1-3 marks 1-2 marks 1-4 marks
• Very superficial and / or biased • An inadequate summary of findings rarely linked to the research question • Unjustified evaluation of the knowledge gained
analysis and interpretation of • Produces written report that lacks structure; references are missing or disorganised from field observation
findings, lacking appropriateness • Unsupported evaluation of some stages of the
to the research question fieldwork investigation
• No insight into links between the • Very limited suggested improvements to the
study and other aspects of investigation
geography
0 marks 0 marks 0 marks
Response not creditworthy or not Response not creditworthy or not attempted Response not creditworthy or not attempted
attempted
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOGRAPHY 58
APPENDIX C
Opportunities for fieldwork
Opportunities for fieldwork
The following list provides suggestions of fieldwork opportunities that may be carried out in relation to
each theme; these suggestions are designed as guidance in order to provide starting points and are
neither comprehensive nor mandatory.
Suggestions where the field element is in brackets may be studied using either primary or secondary
data.
Component 1: Changing Landscapes and Changing Places
Coastal Landscapes
• Field survey of wave characteristics (wave height, frequency, wavelength) along a stretch of coast
• Field survey of changing erosion and deposition on a stretch of coast before and after a storm to
look at the impact of processes on coastal features (possibly using previous field work records)
• Field survey of raised beaches to look at their distribution, height and post-glacial modifications
• Mapping areas of weathering and mass movement and their relationship to geology maps
• Field survey of coastal erosion features: cliff height and profiles (hard rock / soft rock contrasts),
mapping of incidence of faults, joints, and bedding planes to study the distribution of micro
features e.g. caves, arches and stacks and the relationship between erosional features and
geology maps
• Field survey of beach profiles: long and cross transects to map changes in beach material,
gradient, pebble length (long axis) and pebble roundness along a transect from low to high tide
and across the width of the beach (linking to the process of longshore drift)
• Field survey of a single or double spit using a range of transects to study shape, size and type of
deposits on windward and lee sides (linking to the process of longshore drift)
• Field survey of sand dunes using transects to show dune topography, plant zonation and
succession
• Field survey of a salt marsh using transects to show salt marsh topography, plant zonation and
succession
• Field survey of impact of humans on coastal environments - foot path erosion, trampling of dunes,
beach litter (in and out of season, before or after each clean up)
• Field survey of coastal management schemes along a stretch of coast threatened by either
erosion or flooding to investigate the impact of management structures on sediment transfer e.g.
groynes; undertake cost benefit analysis or study shoreline management plans
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOGRAPHY 59
Glaciated Landscapes
• Field survey of size (height of back wall etc.) shape, orientation and distribution of corries in a
defined area
• Field survey of distribution and characteristic features of a glaciated valley (long and cross
sections, occurrence of striations, distribution of erosional and depositional features, post glacial
modifications)
• Field survey of distribution and formation of depositional features (glacial v fluvio-glacial deposit
analysis – size, shape, stratification) in an area of lowland ice sheet glaciation
• Field survey of size, distribution, shape and stoss end orientation of a drumlin swarm (‘basket of
eggs’ topography)
• Field survey of scree to measure slope, degree of sorting, mapping of source and extent of scree
and vegetation colonisation to assess if scree is an active or fossil feature
• Field survey of glacial till: till fabric analysis (situation, orientation and shape) to map provenance
and movement of ice in a defined area
• Field survey of kettle holes / lakes to investigate succession (hydrosere)
• Field survey of vegetation succession on moraines (lithosere in an area of glacier retreat)
• Field survey of discharge from meltwater streams (currently glaciated environment)
• Survey of glacier mass balance (currently glaciated environment)
Changing Places
• Visual survey of variations in townscape / landscape
• Internet perception survey of place / region e.g. contrasts in safety (day and night)
• Field survey of changing service provision in villages
• Field survey of changes in or characteristics of suburbanised villages: population size and
structure, employment characteristics, housing and community spirit
• Field survey of changes in rural areas associated with rural change: holiday homes, language
issues, population size and structure, employment and house prices and problems of service
provision
• Field survey of building age, type and quality for evidence of gentrification
• Field survey of the social characteristics and service structure of inner cities
• Field survey of employment changes (quality and number of jobs) in Development Area /
Enterprise zones
• Field survey of central areas of a city to look at changes in land use, quality of the environment,
footfall and characteristics of cultural quarters
• Field survey of central areas of a city to identify the ‘core’ and ‘frame’, zones of assimilation and
discard
• Field survey of student districts in urban areas: population characteristics, service provision,
attitudes of local residents and housing quality/tenure
• Field survey of variations in ethnicity within urban areas
• Field survey of variations in levels of deprivation in urban areas: environmental quality,
unemployment rates, crime levels, housing tenure, council tax bands, benefit uptake
• Field survey of the environmental quality of purpose built business parks
• Field survey of the environmental, social and economic impacts of a single, large tertiary
employers e.g. a hospital complex
• Field survey of impact of tourism on honey pot sites
• For urban or rural re-branding – assessment of the success of flagship projects e.g. sports sites,
festival sites, tourism projects to assess environmental, economic, social and cultural impacts
• For any rebranding / regeneration projects – assessment of their sustainability in terms of linkage
and involvement to local community, conflicts, economic success, quality of jobs, impact on poor
people in an area and likelihood of being value for money and a permanent success
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOGRAPHY 60
Component 2: Global Systems
Water and Carbon Cycles
• Field measurements of infiltration rate variations due to soil type, vegetation, relief and
antecedent conditions
• Field measurements of river discharge
• Field measurements of throughfall
• Field survey of drainage basin characteristics: land use, vegetation, slope, soil permeability /
infiltration and their impact on river discharge
• Field survey to compare the characteristics of two drainage basins
• Field measurements of discharge over selected times in a year to look at river regimes in relation
to season
• Field measurements of a minor storm event and its impact on discharge in a small stream
catchment
• (Field) survey to investigate flooding recurrence levels and areas of flood risk/ vulnerability (GIS)
• (Field) survey of the impact of a sustained period of drought on water supply and water use,
vegetation, sales of summer products (ice creams, salads) and summer activities
• Field survey of the impact of a single extreme weather event
• Phenology studies to look at climate change on natural and human activities (appearance of
catkins or snowdrops, first and last marking of lambs, putting sheep inside / lambing etc.)
• (Field) survey of the impact of human activity (urbanisation, agriculture and
deforestation/afforestation) in drainage basins
• Field survey to investigate biomass and leaf litter (organic carbon) loss from a drainage basin in
relation to rainfall runoff
• Field measurements of dissolved (solute) and / or particulate organic carbon carried by water
(using filters or making observations about water colour, etc.)
Global Governance: Change and Challenges
• (Field) survey of the impact of migration on a particular community: provision of shops, services,
schools, places of worship, distribution of groups, housing types, employment, official services
(language), index of segregation
• (Field) survey of the distribution of ethnic food outlets and restaurants in a designated area
• (Field) survey of variations in ethnicity within urban areas
• Field survey of variations in levels of deprivation in an urban with a high proportion of immigrants:
environmental quality, unemployment rates, crime levels, housing tenure, council tax bands,
benefit uptake
• Survey of how people use social networks to maintain contact with families
• Field survey of beach to look at distribution and type of sea borne materials (after a storm and
post clean up) as well as land supplied litter and waste
• (Field) survey of impact of EU fishing policies on the fishing industry of a designated port
(numbers employed, catch levels, fishing related industries)
• (Field) survey of water quality and management of water quality in coastal areas (blue flag
beaches)
• (Field) survey of threatened coastal environments (e.g. sea horse breeding grounds at Studland)
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOGRAPHY 61
Component 3: Contemporary Themes in Geography
Optional Themes
Ecosystems
• Field survey of local nature reserves such as SSSI, RSPB reserves to research reasons for
designation, viability, sustainability issues or on the quality and biodiversity of the reserve
• Investigation of Biological Action Plans to assess success of work of local conservation
organisations such as wildlife trusts
• Field survey of the threats to and impacts on ecosystems from tourism
• Field survey of sand dunes using transects to show dune topography, plant zonation and
succession studying changes in physical features (infiltration, pH, wind speed, % of bare ground)
and associated changes in biotic characteristics (% plant cover, species diversity, plant height)
(psammosere)
• Field survey of impact of trampling on vegetation (% plant cover, species diversity, plant height)
• Field survey of salt marsh using transects to show salt marsh topography, plant zonation and
succession studying changes in physical features (soil type, pH) and associated changes in biotic
characteristics (% plant cover, species diversity, plant height) (halosere)
• Field survey of succession on margins of a small lake (hydrosere)
• Field survey of the effects of burning on heathland / moorland ecosystems
• Field survey of woodland management
• Field survey of conflicts associated with urban development on fragile environments
• Field survey of ecosystem management schemes including cost benefit analysis
Economic Growth and Challenge: either India or China or Development in an African Context
Economic Growth and Challenge: either India or China
• Survey of impact of FDI eg Tata in W Midlands, Chinese development around Manchester airport
• Survey of impact of Chinese or Indian diaspora in a named area
Development in an African Context
• Investigation of the characteristics and effectiveness of a strategy designed to address the causes
of desertification
• Investigation of the characteristics and effectiveness of a strategy designed to manage the
consequences of desertification
• Investigation of the impact of a micro-finance scheme on a local community
Energy Challenges and Dilemmas
• Survey of impact of thermal power station (oil and coal fired) on local microclimate , water air
pollution levels, transport movements and employment
• Survey of social, environmental and economic impact of nuclear power station on designated
area
• Survey of impact of energy efficiency measures on a named community, to include recycling, use
of solar panels
• Survey of impact / potential impact of solar energy farm on neighbourhood
• Investigation of potential sites for location of wind farms
• Survey of impact of coalmining on a former mining area, exploring image, culture, health issues
and environment, socio-economic impact and measures to rebrand
• Survey of environmental impacts of alternative energy schemes, e.g. wind farms, solar energy
farms
• Survey of potential impact of a new power station
Weather and Climate
• Field survey of urban microclimate – measuring temperature, relative humidity, wind strength,
light intensity along a transect from the inner-city to the suburbs recording building height and
land use changes
• Field survey of perception of the characteristics and impacts of a climatic hazard (drought, storm)
• Field survey of changing weather in a selected area over time
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOGRAPHY 62
APPENDIX D
Independence in the Independent Investigation
The table below gives describes the level of independence that candidates must follow in every stage of
the Independent Investigation.
Investigation What is the What does this level of What are the What controls are in place to
stage level of independence mean in potential risks? mitigate these risks?
independence practice at this stage? (The
expected? following is not exhaustive)
Exploring Collaboration Centres may want to give The parameters The instructions that
focus allowed candidates a free choice of that the centre teachers give must ensure
investigations focusing on provides may that scope is sufficient for
any of the compulsory or not allow candidates to arrive at their
optional content or they sufficient scope titles independently.
may wish to provide for candidates
The viability of a candidate’s
candidates with a theme or to
potential title can be
a range of themes. independently
discussed with the teacher.
However, it is not derive their
acceptable for candidates titles. Training as to good practice
to choose from a list of with regard to investigation
The title which
titles or investigations titles and teacher feedback.
a candidate
provided by the centre. chooses may Any guidance that goes
*(see endnote). not provide beyond general guidance
Candidates may discuss sufficient scope must be recorded by the
together, and with their for candidates teacher on the Geography
teacher, ideas and to access the Independent Investigation
research for appropriate full range of Form and taken into account
geographical questions. marks available when the work is marked.
for the NEA.
Task, title of Independent Following the first stage The Teacher approval of
the work candidates must finalise investigation investigation proposals to
investigation the draft title of their proposal may ensure that each candidate
focus of investigation. This must be not provide has independently devised
investigation done by each candidate, sufficient scope his/her own hypothesis,
(sub- on his/her own. for candidates and/or questions and/or sub-
questions), to access the questions even though the
On the Geography
purpose of full range of title may be the same
independent investigation
investigation marks available as/similar to another
form and final written report
for the non- candidate’s
candidates must provide a
exam
clear justification and If candidates do not fully
assessment.
contextualisation of how justify and contextualise their
their enquiry will help them There is enquiry they may limit
to address their title and plagiarism of access to marks.
explore their theme in titles.
Teacher and candidate
relation to the chosen
declaration that the work is
geographical location.
the candidate’s own.
Any guidance that goes
beyond general guidance
must be recorded by the
teacher on the Geography
Independent Investigation
Form and taken into account
when the work is marked.
Moderators will be instructed
to report any suspected
instances of plagiarism or
candidates not working
independently for further
investigation.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOGRAPHY 63
Investigation What is the What does this level of What are the What controls are in place to
stage level of independence mean in potential mitigate these risks?
independence practice at this stage? risks?
expected? (The following is not
exhaustive)
Devising Collaboration Candidates may Plagiarism of Teacher approval of investigation
methodology allowed collaborate when planning methodology proposal to ensure that candidates
and sampling and selecting sampling have appropriate methodology
framework methodologies/sampling framework. and sampling strategies.
strategies.
Candidate If candidates do not fully justify
plans and their methodology and sampling
selects a they may limit access to marks.
methodology
Teacher assessment of candidate
that is
work, which takes into account
inappropriate.
any guidance that goes beyond
This may
general guidance.
include a
methodology Teacher and candidate declaration
that is not that the work is the candidate’s
achievable, own.
that the Any guidance that goes beyond
candidate does general guidance must be
not understand recorded by teacher on the
or carries Geography Independent
potential health Investigation form and taken into
and safety or account when the work is marked.
ethical risks.
Primary data Collaboration Primary data collection A candidate No evidence of candidate's own
collection allowed may be carried out does not collection of data in the
individually or in groups. collect any investigation and is therefore
primary data. taken into account when the work
is marked by the teacher.
The data is
plagiarised Teacher assessment of candidate
from another work. Teacher and candidate
candidate. declaration that the work is the
candidate’s own.
Any guidance that goes beyond
general guidance must be
recorded by the teacher on the
Geography Independent
Investigation Form and taken into
account when the work is marked.
Secondary Independent Must be carried out Candidates Teacher assessment of candidate
data work independently. plagiarise their work, which takes into account
collection (if Candidates select work from work that has not been completed
relevant) secondary sources of others using independently.
data on their own. resources
Teacher and candidate declaration
given to them
that the work is the candidate’s
by others such
own.
as peers,
parents or Any guidance that goes beyond
teachers. general guidance must be
recorded by the teacher on the
Candidates
Geography Independent
attempt to
Investigation Form and taken into
obscure
account where the work is
plagiarism by
marked.
failing to
reference. Moderators will be instructed to
report any suspected instances of
plagiarism or candidates not
working independently for further
investigation.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOGRAPHY 64
Investigation What is the What does this level of What are the What controls are in place to
stage level of independence mean in potential mitigate these risks?
independence practice at this stage? risks?
expected? (The following is not
exhaustive)
Data / Independent Candidates select and use Candidates Teacher assessment of candidate
information work appropriate data plagiarise work, which takes into account
presentation presentation methods on their work work that has not been completed
their own. from others. independently.
Teacher and candidate declaration
that the work is the candidate’s
own.
Any guidance that goes beyond
general guidance must be
recorded by the teacher on the
Geography Independent
Investigation Form and taken into
account when the work is marked.
Moderators will be instructed to
report any suspected instances of
plagiarism or candidates not
working independently for further
investigation.
Data Independent Candidates select and use Candidates Teacher assessment of candidate
analysis and work appropriate data analysis plagiarise work, which takes into account
explanation / techniques and their work work that has not been completed
interpretation independently interpret and from others. independently.
analyse the results on their
Teacher and candidate declaration
own.
that the work is the candidate’s
own.
Any guidance that goes beyond
general guidance must be
recorded by the teacher on the
Geography Independent
Investigation Form and taken into
account when the work is marked.
Moderators will be instructed to
report any suspected instances of
plagiarism or candidates not
working independently for further
investigation.
Conclusions Independent Candidates evaluate the Candidates Teacher assessment of candidate
and work findings of their plagiarise work, which takes into account
evaluation investigation and reach a their work work that has not been completed
balanced and supported from others. independently.
conclusion on their own.
Teacher and candidate declaration
that the work is the candidate’s
own.
Any guidance that goes beyond
general guidance must be
recorded by the teacher on the
Geography Independent
Investigation Form and taken into
account when the work is marked.
Moderators will be instructed
report any suspected instances of
plagiarism or candidates not
working independently for further
investigation.
* This applies also to third party fieldwork providers and teachers must ensure that at all times they remain confident in the authenticity and independence of the
candidates work.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOGRAPHY 65
Further clarification about assuring authenticity and permissible levels of guidance
Steps include the following:
1. Teachers must explain that group collection of data is permissible but that data must be written up and
analysed individually by the candidate in his/her own words. Group, in this instance, is defined as pairs
of candidates or small groups of candidates. It is not appropriate for a whole class to collect data as a
single group.
2. Teachers should also advise candidates that they can share resources but these must be treated
individually by candidates; that is candidates must not copy each other’s work in any way.
3. Candidates must provide a bibliography of all sources used, including secondary and those from the
internet - this should follow an acknowledged system of referencing such as the Harvard system of
author, title, publisher and date. Details from the internet must include the date it was downloaded,
and the URL details of the precise web page (not search engine) used or screen shots.
4. Candidates must also reference their sources in the text to avoid passing off the work of others as
their own. This can be either by in-text referencing or footnotes (e.g. Warn, 2010, p29).
5. Teachers must provide the date on which each independent investigation was marked and should give
annotations to show how the work was credited in relation to the marking criteria.
6. Teachers should also comment on any planning and processing not done individually.
7. Teachers should indicate on the candidate authentication section if a candidate required extra
assistance, what this entailed and mark the work at the level that represents unaided work.
8. Once the work is handed in, it should be kept under secure conditions. Those required in moderation
samples should be the only ones removed. Other work should be kept secure until the end of the
enquiry about results procedures are completed.
Detecting malpractice
Malpractice may be suspected by teachers in work as follows:
• the style of writing is not typical of the candidate; it might be from published material, be the style of
another person
• there are instances of the same errors in the work of two or more candidates
• there are passages quoted from publications or the internet which are not acknowledged in the
bibliography or by in-text referencing
• there are passages copied from examples of good practice which were distributed to the whole class
• the work of one candidate is copied from another.
Dealing with malpractice
• If the centre / teacher suspects some form of malpractice, the centre must take action to investigate
internally. The centre should have in place procedures to deal with these issues across qualifications.
• The candidate and teacher should only complete the authentication section of the Geography
Independent Investigation form once it is clear which parts of the work are the candidate's own. If the
matter is not resolved the candidate should be awarded zero.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOGRAPHY 66
APPENDIX E
Geography Independent Investigation form
A LEVEL GEOGRAPHY INDEPENDENT INVESTIGATION FORM
Section 1: Candidate/teacher authentication
Please attach the form to your candidate's work and keep it at the centre or send it to the moderator as
required. The declarations should be completed by the candidate and teacher as indicated
Centre Number: Centre Name:
Candidate Number: Candidates full name:
Work submitted for assessment must be the candidate's own. If candidates copy work, allow
candidate to copy from them, or cheat in any way, they may be disqualified.
Candidate declaration
Have you read the JCQ regulations ‒ information for candidates?
No Yes
Have you received help / information from anyone other than subject teacher(s) to produce this work?
No Yes (give details below or on a separate sheet, if necessary)
Please list below any books, leaflets or other materials (e.g. DVDs, software packages, Internet
information) used to complete this work not acknowledged in the work itself. Presenting materials
copied from other sources without acknowledgement is regarded as deliberate deception.
I declare that, apart from collaboration with other candidates and general guidance from the teacher,
where these are acceptable within the parameters of the specification, this is my own unaided work.
Candidate signature: Date:
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOGRAPHY 67
Teacher declaration:
I declare that:
• any assistance which goes beyond general guidance has been recorded and taken into account
when marking the work;
• otherwise, apart from general guidance given in line with the parameters set out in the
specification, the work is solely that of the candidate concerned;
• the work was completed under the required conditions;
• singed candidate declarations will be kept on file.
Teacher signature: Date:
Candidate's full name: Candidate Number:
Details of additional assistance given
Record here details of any assistance given to this candidate which is beyond that given to the class as
a whole and beyond that described in the specification (continue on a separate sheet if necessary).
Any additional support must be taken into account when marking the candidates work. You must
indicate via your annotations where you have taken into account the additional support provided. If
any additional support was provided during the planning stage this must be indicated on the candidate
proposal form.
Concluding comments:
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOGRAPHY 68
SECTION 2: INDEPENDENT INVESTIGATION PROPOSAL
Candidate Name: Candidate Number: Examination
series:
Centre Name: Centre Number:
Investigation Title: How the title links to the specification
content.
Planned investigation hypothesis or question /sub-questions:
Investigation focus - indication of how the enquiry will enable the Individual/Group
candidate to address their investigation title and explore their theme in data collection
relation to the chosen geographical area (delete as
appropriate):
Proposed methodology ‒ indication of quantitative and/or quantitative techniques including
primary and, if relevant, secondary data collection techniques, indication of the planned
sampling strategy or strategies:
Teacher signature: Date:
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOGRAPHY 69
SECTION 3 INDEPENDENT INVESTIGATION MARK SHEET
Total mark
80
The following assessment grid is to be applied to marking Component 4 (non-exam assessment), the independent investigation.
Context Mark Methods of field investigation Mark Data presentation of findings Mark
10 marks 15 marks 10 marks
AO1 (10 marks) AO3.1 (15 marks) AO3.3 (10 marks)
5 9-10 marks 13-15 marks 9-10 marks
• Wide ranging, and thorough use of • Strong evidence of wide ranging and good quality data collection • Wide ranging and accurate use of
literature sources with a confident approaches (quantitative, qualitative method and fieldwork skills) appropriate qualitative and / or quantitative
theoretical and / or contextual relevant to the topic linked to a well-defined, individual research question data presentation methods / techniques
background leading to a well-defined • Practical individual and group approaches taken in the field are accurate • Well selected, applied and wholly
research question and well explained and justified appropriate cartographic and graphical
• Confident and informed • Sampling strategy is well designed, explained and justified. The strategy techniques to support the analysis of
understanding of risk / ethical issues is wholly appropriate to the investigation findings
4 7-8 marks 10-12 marks 7-8 marks
• Appropriate use of a range of • Secure evidence of appropriate data collection approaches (quantitative, • Uses a range of suitable qualitative and / or
literature sources with a secure qualitative methods and fieldwork skills) relevant to the topic linked to a quantitative data presentation methods /
theoretical and / or contextual clear, individual research question techniques
background leading to defined • Practical individual and group approaches taken in the field are mostly • Mostly well selected, applied and
research question accurate and explained with reasonable justification appropriate cartographic and graphical
• Secure understanding of risk / • Sampling strategy is well designed, with explanation and some techniques included to support the analysis
ethical issues justification. The strategy is mostly appropriate to the investigation of findings
3 5-6 marks 7-9 marks 5-6 marks
• Some use of literature sources with • Some appropriate data collection approaches are evident (quantitative, • Some relevant qualitative and / or
a reasonable theoretical background qualitative methods and fieldwork skills) and are of partial relevance to quantitative data presentation methods /
• Partial understanding of risk / ethical the topic linked to an adequate, individual research question techniques
issues • Practical individual and group approaches taken in field show partial • Mostly well selected and mostly well
accuracy with detailed description and some explanation applied cartographic and graphical
• Sampling strategy has been considered and described. The strategy is techniques to support the analysis of
partially appropriate to the investigation findings
2 3-4 marks 4-6 marks 3-4 marks
• Limited use of literature sources with • Limited data collection approaches (quantitative, qualitative method and • Limited use of appropriate qualitative and /
a generalised account of the fieldwork skills) linked to an ill-defined, individual research question or quantitative data presentation methods /
theoretical background; no reference • Limited record of practical individual and group approaches taken in the techniques
to research question field, with limited accuracy and description, but lacking explanation • Limited use of cartographic and graphical
• Limited understanding of risk / • Sampling strategy has been described. The appropriateness of the techniques to support the analysis of
ethical issues strategy to the investigation is limited findings
1 1-2 marks 1-3 marks 1-2 marks
• Minimal use of literature sources • Minimal data collection approaches (quantitative, qualitative methods • Superficial use of appropriate qualitative
and a very poor theoretical and fieldwork skills) with an unconvincing research and/or individual and / or quantitative data presentation
background; no reference to question methods / techniques
research question • Very little evidence of practical individual and group approaches taken in • Very little cartographic and graphical
• Very little limited consideration of the field with some description of the approaches taken techniques to support the analysis of
risk / ethical issues findings
0 marks 0 marks 0 marks
Response not creditworthy or not Response not creditworthy or not attempted Response not creditworthy or not attempted
attempted
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOGRAPHY 70
Analysis and Interpretation of findings Mark Conclusions and Presentation requirements Mark Evaluation Mark
15 marks 10 marks 20 marks
AO3.2 (15 marks) AO3.3 (10 marks) AO2.1c (20 marks)
5 13-15 marks 9-10 marks 17-20 marks
• Sophisticated analysis and interpretation of • Sophisticated and confident summary, • Highly effective evaluation of the knowledge and
findings, clearly showing why they were drawing convincing and thorough individual understanding gained from field observation
appropriate and relevant to the research conclusions that address the research • Perceptive evaluation of each stage of the fieldwork
question question and substantiate the analysis and investigation including the ethical dimensions of the
• Demonstrates some individuality and / or interpretation field research
insights into links between the study and other • A well-structured, concise and logical report; • Perceptive and well considered reflections for further
aspects of geography accurately references secondary information research and extension of their geographical
understanding
• Considered improvements suggested pertinent to the
investigation
4 10-12 marks 7-8 marks 13-16 marks
• Well-developed analysis and interpretation of • Effective summary, drawing competent • Effective evaluation of the knowledge and
findings, showing why they were appropriate individual conclusions that address the understanding gained from field observation
and relevant to the research question research question and substantiate the • Competent evaluation of each stage of the fieldwork
• Demonstrates partial insights into links analysis and interpretation investigation including the ethical dimensions of the
between the study and other aspects of • A structured, clear and concise report; field research
geography accurately references secondary information • Valid reflections for further research and extension
of their geographical understanding
• Valid improvements suggested pertinent to the
investigation
3 7-9 marks 5-6 marks 9-12 marks
• Straightforward analysis and interpretation of • Summarises, drawing individual conclusions • Attempts to evaluate the knowledge and
findings, largely showing why they were that mainly address the research question understanding gained from field observation
appropriate and relevant to the research and largely substantiate the analysis and • Intermittent evaluation of each stage of the fieldwork
question interpretation investigation occasionally including the ethical
• Implied insights into links between the study • A structured and clear report with some lack dimensions of the field research
and other aspects of geography of focus; some references of secondary • Some reflections for further research and extension
information of their geographical understanding
• Some improvements suggested pertinent to the
investigation
2 4-6 marks 3-4 marks 5-8 marks
• Limited analysis and interpretation of findings, • Provides rudimentary conclusions that are • Limited evaluation of the knowledge gained from field
occasionally showing why they were occasionally linked back to the research observation
appropriate to the research question question • Evaluation of some stages of the fieldwork
• Limited insights into links between the study • A structured and imprecise report; a few investigation
and other aspects of geography superficial references to secondary • Some random improvements suggested to the
information investigation
1 1-3 marks 1-2 marks 1-4 marks
• Very superficial and / or biased analysis and • An inadequate summary of findings rarely • Unjustified evaluation of the knowledge gained from
interpretation of findings, lacking linked to the research question field observation
appropriateness to the research question • Produces written report that lacks structure; • Unsupported evaluation of some stages of the
• No insight into links between the study and references are missing or disorganised fieldwork investigation
other aspects of geography • Very limited suggested improvements to the
investigation
0 marks 0 marks 0 marks
Response not creditworthy or not attempted Response not creditworthy or not attempted Response not creditworthy or not attempted
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOGRAPHY 71
APPENDIX F
A level Geography NEA teacher guidance
This table is about demonstrating what is considered to be specific guidance and what is considered to be general guidance. Specific guidance can
constitute malpractice in certain circumstances and must always be recorded and taken into account when marking candidates' investigations.
Investigation stage Specific guidance General guidance Reasoning
Exploring focus • Give candidates a list of titles from which to • Discuss specification content to • Teaches will need to provide an
choose find potential themes and introduction to candidates. This
• Give candidates an area of specification relevance for an investigation could include detailing the equipment
content they must focus on in their • Broadly outline the stages of the available from the school and/or
investigation. investigation, mark scheme describing expectations of the NEA
expectations and the Geography through the mark scheme
Independent Investigation form. • The investigation must be an
independent piece of work by the
candidate so teachers shouldn't be
giving candidates direct information
such as titles.
Title of the investigation, • Give candidates a list of titles from which • Explore and discuss with • The teacher acts as the facilitator,
focus of investigation (sub- to choose candidates what makes a good encouraging candidates to plan their
questions), purpose of • Make significant changes to a candidates title for an investigation and the investigations and to 'read around' to
investigation title so it is re-written value / importance of breaking this get to grips with their title and sub-
• Give candidates or make strong down into sub-questions questions
suggestions about the sub-questions • Direct candidates to material • The teacher provides opportunities
• Tell candidates what the purpose of the produced by exam boards on what for candidates to set themselves up
investigation is so they all have similar makes a good title as independent learners through
approach / idea and this is reflected in • Give candidates an example title general discussions around the title,
their draft / final investigation write up to critique and amend which is sub-questions, choosing a
• Suggest that groups of candidates work unrelated to any investigations a geographical area of study.
on the same title but with minor changes candidate may be interested in
such as an area reference pursuing.
• Suggest that candidates use the same title
but with different sub-questions.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOGRAPHY 72
Devising methodology and • Give candidates individual data collection • Outline a range of fieldwork / data • Teachers should not be giving
sampling framework technique suggestions relevant to their own collection techniques relevant to candidates suggestions for their
investigation human and physical investigations methodology or giving them sampling
• Tell candidates which sampling technique • Provide opportunities for techniques to try as this takes
to use for their individual investigation. candidates to explore through ownership of the investigation away
literature and online resources a from the candidate and discourages
variety of data collection them from being independent
techniques • The teacher acts as facilitator,
• Provide opportunities for encouraging candidates to plan their
candidates to research and reflect data collection and find out about
on sampling techniques techniques relevant to their own
appropriate to their investigation individual investigation.
• Encourage candidates to plan
their methodology thinking about
why particular techniques for data
collection / sampling have been
chosen and what they want /
expect to find out.
Primary data collection • Teach and guide candidates through each • Outline and discuss with • The teacher acts as the facilitator,
data collection technique relevant to their candidates what makes ‘good’ / encouraging candidates to plan their
individual investigation valuable primary data data collection and find out about
• Take a whole class/es on a fieldtrip and • Provide opportunities for techniques relevant to their own
teach them all the same primary data candidates to explore a range of individual investigation
collection techniques specific to an data collection techniques, • Teachers as facilitators encourage
investigation or narrow range of suggesting candidates use candidates to ‘read around’ and
investigations (such as coasts fieldwork several techniques in their discuss data collection techniques so
where candidates may be taught the same investigation, in order to ascertain that candidates can independently
data collection techniques for longshore what works well / doesn’t as part justify their choices of primary data
drift, beach profiles and sediment sampling of their evaluation collection and evaluate the success
whereby ownership is taken away from • Suggest candidates work in small of those choices
candidates as they all have access to the groups with similar topic areas to • Teachers can suggest candidates
same information and data sets) collect primary data as a larger work collaboratively in small groups
• Produce fieldwork information on primary sample of data can potentially be with similar topic areas to collect
data collection techniques specific to collected. primary data. This does not however
individual candidate titles (such as coasts prevent candidates from collecting
working through a narrow range of primary additional data pertinent to their
data collection techniques specific to individual investigations.
individual titles, as outlined in the
preceding bullet point)
WJEC Eduqas A level Geography specification from 2016/ED/HT/GH/DD – 25/04/16
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
