
Component 1: Geological Investigations
Written examination: 2 hours 15 minutes
35% of qualification
Section A: Two stimulus response questions requiring short and structured answers.
Section B: An investigation of the geology of an area shown on an accompanying
simplified geological map, involving
• the interpretation of hand specimens and photographs of minerals, rocks and fossils
• map interpretation and cross-section construction
• the completion of questions using short, structured and extended answers.
Component 2: Geological Principles and Processes
Written examination: 1 hour 45 minutes
30% of qualification
Six stimulus response questions requiring short, structured and extended answers.
Component 3: Geological Applications
Written examination: 2 hours
35% of qualification
Section A: Geohazards. Two stimulus response questions requiring short and structured
answers.
Section B: Geological map applications. An investigation of the geology of an area
shown on a Geological Survey map extract using stimulus response questions requiring
short, structured and extended answers.
Section C: Learners answer questions on one option from a choice of three. Each
comprises three questions requiring short, structured and extended answers.
• Quaternary Geology
• Geological Evolution of Britain
• Geology of the Lithosphere
Practical Endorsement
Non-exam assessment
Assessment of practical competency.
Reported separately and not contributing to final grade.
This linear qualification will be available for assessment in May/June each year. It will be
awarded for the first time in summer 2019.
Ofqual Qualification Number (listed on The Register): 603/0859/X
Qualifications Wales Designation Number (listed on QiW): C00/1174/5
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 3
GCE A LEVEL GEOLOGY
1 INTRODUCTION
1.1 Aims and objectives
The WJEC Eduqas A level in Geology provides a comprehensive coverage of the
knowledge and understanding required for the study of the Earth, its structures,
evolution and dynamics. The core aspects of this specification introduce eight
geological concepts:
• elements, minerals and rocks
• surface and internal processes of the rock cycle
• time and change
• Earth structure and global tectonics
• rock forming processes
• rock deformation
• past life and past climates
• Earth materials and natural resources.
There are five themes which develop and apply the knowledge and understanding of
the core content. These are:
• geohazards
• geological map applications
• Quaternary geology
• geological evolution of Britain
• geology of the lithosphere.
Learners following this specification are introduced to Key Ideas which provide a
framework for study.
This specification encourages learners to:
• develop essential knowledge and understanding of different areas of geology and
how they relate to each other, to include civil engineering, engineering geology,
hydrogeology, mining geology and petroleum geology
• develop through critical practice the skills, knowledge and understanding of
scientific methods as applied in geology through a practical endorsement
• develop competence and confidence in selecting, using and evaluating a range of
quantitative and qualitative skills and approaches, (including observing, collecting
and analysing geo-located field data, and investigative, mathematical and
problem solving skills) and applying them as an integral part of their geological
studies
• understand how society makes decisions about geological issues and how
geology contributes to the success of the economy and society.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 4
This specification contains both core and non-core content as specified by the
Department for Education (DfE) GCE A level subject content for geology. The
purpose of the non-core content is for learners to:
• develop and apply their core knowledge and understanding
• use their core and non-core knowledge and understanding synoptically
• enrich their understanding of core concepts through an exploration of the chosen
non-core areas
• be introduced to the wider context of geoscience in preparation for progression to
higher education
• be exposed to current areas of research where new discoveries may revise our
understanding of geological phenomena.
The WJEC Eduqas A level in Geology places problem solving at the heart of
learning. Learners are encouraged to respond to geological information in both
familiar and novel situations in the laboratory and in the field. Learners should be
able to apply their knowledge and understanding of the contents of this specification
by exploring contexts and situations that are not explicitly indicated in the
specification, reflecting the skills demanded by those engaged in the study of
geology, and other disciplines, beyond A level.
The specification lends itself to a variety of teaching and learning styles and offers
learners of all abilities an enjoyable and positive learning experience. Practical work
within the specification is vitally important in developing a conceptual understanding
of many topics and it enhances the experience and enjoyment of geology.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 5
1.2 Prior learning and progression
Any requirements set for entry to a course following this specification are at the
discretion of centres. It is reasonable to assume that many learners will have
achieved qualifications equivalent to Level 2 at KS4. Skills in
Numeracy/Mathematics, Literacy/English and Information Communication
Technology will provide a good basis for progression to this Level 3 qualification.
This specification builds on the knowledge, understanding and skills established at
GCSE. Some learners may have already gained knowledge, understanding and
skills through their study of geology at AS.
This specification provides a suitable foundation for the study of geology or a related
area through a range of higher education courses. It also provides a good basis for
many vocations, not just geological, which require initiative in thought and problem
solving. In addition, the specification provides a coherent, satisfying and worthwhile
course of study for learners who do not progress to further study in this subject.
This specification is not age specific and, as such, provides opportunities for learners
to extend their life-long learning.
1.3 Equality and fair access
This specification may be followed by any learner, irrespective of gender, ethnic,
religious or cultural background. It has been designed to avoid, where possible,
features that could, without justification, make it more difficult for a learner to achieve
because they have a particular protected characteristic.
The protected characteristics under the Equality Act 2010 are age, disability, gender
reassignment, pregnancy and maternity, race, religion or belief, sex and sexual
orientation.
The specification has been discussed with groups who represent the interests of a
diverse range of learners, and the specification will be kept under review.
Reasonable adjustments are made for certain learners in order to enable them to
access the assessments (e.g. candidates are allowed access to a Sign Language
Interpreter, using British Sign Language). Information on reasonable adjustments is
found in the following document from the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ):
Access Arrangements and Reasonable Adjustments: General and Vocational
Qualifications.
This document is available on the JCQ website (www.jcq.org.uk). As a consequence
of provision for reasonable adjustments, very few learners will have a complete
barrier to any part of the assessment.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 6
2 SUBJECT CONTENT
Integrated Study
The WJEC Eduqas A level in Geology promotes the integrated study of geology. It
enables learners to develop a broad range of skills and techniques in the areas of
analysis and interpretation of data, problem-solving and drawing conclusions. In
addition it enables learners to acquire data collection and interpretation skills in the
field.
This specification provides knowledge of the main aspects of geology as a science
through three overarching concepts which link all topics studied:
• a scientific understanding of the Earth, its evolution and its sustainable
development
• the central paradigms in geology: uniformitarianism (“the present is the key to
the past”); the extent of geological time; and plate tectonics
• the cycling of matter and the flows of energy into, between and within the
solid Earth, the Earth's surface, the hydrosphere, the atmosphere and the
biosphere.
Fieldwork
Fieldwork has long been an attractive aspect of the study of geology and has been
incorporated at the heart of this specification. Learners are required to undertake a
minimum of four days of work in the field in order to develop field observation and
practical skills.
Each centre must provide a fieldwork statement to WJEC that details the fieldwork
carried out by learners from the centre in each assessment cycle. Centres will be
able to make their fieldwork statement by completing the form that will be available to
download from the AS/A level Geology subject page of the Eduqas website. The
fieldwork statement must be submitted to WJEC by 15 May of the year of the award.
Centres will be able to use the form to:
• confirm that each learner has been provided with opportunities to undertake
geological fieldwork on at least four occasions and in respect of each of those
opportunities:
• the date on which it was provided
• the number of learners who participated
• the location at which it was provided
• a brief description of the fieldwork undertaken
• confirm that each learner has been provided with the opportunity to undertake the
compulsory fieldwork skills and techniques indicated in Appendix A, part 3.
It is recommended that centres adopt an investigative approach to fieldwork involving
learners answering geological questions during their field days. Examples of suitable
geological questions include:
• What does the evidence from these localities reveal about the relative time
sequence of geological events in this area?
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 7
• What do the sedimentological evidence and palaeontological evidence indicate
about the changes in the environments of deposition of the sedimentary rocks at
this locality?
• What does the evidence of rock deformation reveal about the tectonic history of
this area?
These examples are by no means the only geological questions that could be asked
and centres should feel able to devise other examples of geological questions
relevant to the field locations which are used. Centres must ensure that learners have
been given the opportunity to complete all of the specified practical activities,
including those involving fieldwork, listed in Appendix B.
Safety is paramount in the field and it is essential that all centres adhere to
‘The Geological Code of Conduct’ and the regulations of their centre
concerning off-site activities.
This specification requires learners to:
• undertake fieldwork in different contexts: virtual fieldwork, local fieldwork
outside the classroom and fieldwork on unfamiliar outcrop geology
• experience and develop competency in the skills and techniques contained
in Appendix A
• apply knowledge and concepts to identify and understand field observations
• be given opportunities to develop increasing independence in their
application of the investigative and practical skills and techniques in
Appendix A over the A level course through progression from scaffolded to
unscaffolded tasks and from familiar contexts to unfamiliar outcrop geology.
Practical work
Practical work is an intrinsic part of this specification. The practical skills developed
are also fundamentally important to learners going on to further study in geology and
related subjects, and are transferable to many careers.
Learners who follow this specification will develop a wide range of mathematical skills
as outlined in Appendix C. Calculators may be used in all components. Candidates
are responsible for making sure that their calculators meet the relevant regulations
for use in written examinations: information is found in the JCQ publications
Instructions for conducting examinations and Information for candidates for written
examinations.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 8
The column featuring geological techniques and skills of the subject content includes
activities that must be undertaken by learners in order to ensure that they are suitably
prepared for the written examinations. Items labelled SP in the column headed
'Geological techniques and skills' of the subject content, represent specified practical
activities to fulfil the practical endorsement (see Appendix B).
Learners must complete the specified practical activities listed in Appendix B, which
will develop the practical skills listed in Appendix A, in order to meet the requirements
of the practical endorsement. These requirements are detailed in Section 3.2.
For each assessment series each centre is required to submit the Annual Head of
Centre Declaration to confirm that all reasonable steps have been or will be taken to
provide all candidates with the opportunity to undertake the prescribed practical
activities for A Level Sciences designed for use in England.
Scientific skills
All content in the specification should be introduced in such a way that it develops
learners' ability to apply the following scientific skills:
• use theories, models and ideas to develop geological explanations
• use knowledge and understanding to pose scientific questions, define
geological problems, present scientific arguments and geological ideas
 use appropriate methodology, including information and communication
technology (ICT), to answer geological questions and solve geological
problems
 carry out fieldwork, experimental and investigative activities in a range of
contexts to include the collection, compilation and analysis of Earth science
data from the field and subsurface, and appropriate risk management
 manipulate and extrapolate these sometimes incomplete data sets in both two
and three-dimensions
 evaluate methodology, evidence and partial data sets, and resolve
conflicting evidence
 communicate information and ideas in appropriate ways (including geological
maps and cross-sections) using appropriate terminology, SI units and their
prefixes and the ability to express in standard form
 know that scientific knowledge and understanding develops over time,
consider applications and implications of science in geology, and evaluate
their associated benefits and risks
 evaluate the role of geology within the scientific community in validating
new knowledge and ensuring integrity.
Areas of the specification which exemplify the scientific skills are shown in
Appendix D.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 9
Summary of content
This specification covers all the requirements of A level Geology as specified by the
DfE. The knowledge, understanding, skills and techniques are set out in the two
columns in the pages that follow. Learners should expect to be assessed on the
details of both columns and also to answer questions that set the content in novel
situations not explicit in the specification.
The specification is structured in three sections:
• Fundamentals of Geology
F1 Elements, minerals and rocks
F2 Surface and internal processes
F3 Time and change
F4 Earth structure and global tectonics
• Interpreting the Geological Record
G1 Rock forming processes
G2 Rock deformation
G3 Past life and past climates
G4 Earth materials and natural resources
• Geological Themes
T1 Geohazards
T2 Geological map applications
T3 Quaternary geology*
T4 Geological evolution of Britain*
T5 Geology of the lithosphere*
Learners study one of the options T3, T4 and T5, indicated with an asterisk.
Items labelled SP in the column headed 'Geological techniques and skills' of the
subject content, represent specified practical activities to fulfil the practical
endorsement (see Appendix B).
Items in italics in the geological techniques and skills column represent opportunities
for the development of required mathematical skills (see Appendix C which lists the
mathematical requirements with exemplification in the context of A level Geology).
This A level specification is designed to be co-teachable with the specification for the
WJEC Eduqas AS in Geology. The content within the Fundamentals of Geology
section forms the entire content required in the AS specification, with the exception of
some additional exemplification of mathematical skills required at A level but not at
AS.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 10
Details of the components
The subject content for A level Geology is assessed across three components. The
context in which the content is assessed across the three components differs.
Component 1: Geological Investigations
Written examination: 2 hours 15 minutes
35% of the qualification
105 marks
Questions in Component 1 are based on knowledge and understanding outlined in
the sections Fundamentals of Geology and Interpreting the Geological Record.
Section A: Two stimulus response questions requiring short and structured answers.
Section B: A practical investigation confined to the geology of an area on a simplified
geological map given on a resource sheet. The component involves the
interpretation of hand specimens (sent to centres by WJEC) and photographs of
minerals, rocks and fossils. In addition this assessment includes the interpretation of
the simplified geological map and the construction of a geological cross-section.
A mineral data sheet accompanies Component 1. Learners should become familiar
with the use of this during their study of A level Geology.
Component 2: Geological Principles and Processes
Written examination: 1 hour 45 minutes
30% of the qualification
90 marks
Questions in Component 2 are based on knowledge and understanding outlined in
the sections Fundamentals of Geology and Interpreting the Geological Record.
This component involves questions which require learners to respond to aspects of
geology shown in photographs, maps, diagrams and graphs. Learners are required
to complete compulsory data and stimulus response questions using short,
structured and extended answers.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 11
Component 3: Geological Applications
Written examination: 2 hours
35% of the qualification
105 marks
Section A: Geohazards: Two stimulus response questions requiring short and
structured answers. Questions are based on knowledge and understanding outlined
in topic T1 within the section Geological Themes in addition to an understanding of
the content within Fundamentals of Geology and Interpreting the Geological Record.
Section B: Geological map applications. An investigation of the geology of an area
shown on a Geological Survey map extract, using stimulus response questions
requiring short, structured and extended answers. Questions are based on content
from the topics T1 and T2 within the section Geological Themes in addition to an
understanding of the content within Fundamentals of Geology and Interpreting the
Geological Record.
Section C: Learners answer questions on one option from a choice of three:
• T3 Quaternary geology
• T4 Geological evolution of Britain
• T5 Geology of the lithosphere
Each option comprises three questions requiring short, structured and extended
answers. Questions are based on content from the relevant option topic T3, T4 or T5
within the section Geological Themes, and also require an understanding of the
content within Fundamentals of Geology and Interpreting the Geological Record.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 12
FUNDAMENTALS OF GEOLOGY
This section comprises four compulsory topics
F1 Elements, minerals and rocks
F2 Surface and internal processes of the rock cycle
F3 Time and change
F4 Earth structure and global tectonics
Topic F1: ELEMENTS, MINERALS AND ROCKS
Key Idea 1: The Earth is composed of rocks which have
distinctive mineralogies and textures
Geological techniques and
Knowledge and understanding
skills
a. The Earth’s elements may be classified
according to the Goldschmidt system
(lithophile, siderophile, chalcophile,
atmophile) which aids subdivision of the
Earth on the basis of geochemistry
(atmosphere, hydrosphere, crust, mantle
and core).
b. The bulk composition of the Earth is
comparable with that of undifferentiated
meteorites (chondrites).
c. The Earth's crust is composed of eight Recognition of the relative abundance of O,
main elements. Si, Al, Fe, Ca, Na, K and Mg in the crust
and the role of the silicates as rock-forming
minerals.
d. Silicates are the commonest rock-
Simple analysis of silicate mineral
forming minerals and are built from
structures from models and diagrams.
silicon-oxygen tetrahedra (single, chain,
sheet and framework silicates).
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 13
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
e. Minerals are naturally occurring SP1: Investigation of diagnostic properties of
inorganic chemical compounds or minerals: colour, crystal shape, cleavage,
fracture, hardness, relative density, streak,
elements with compositions that may
lustre, reaction with cold dilute (0.5 mol dm-3)
be expressed as chemical formulae.
hydrochloric acid.
Minerals have distinct chemical
compositions, atomic structures and
SP2: Measurement of the density of
physical properties by which they may minerals.
be identified.
Recognition, using appropriate tests, of the
following rock-forming minerals (as specified
on the mineral data sheet available for use
in the examination) from their diagnostic
properties: quartz, calcite, feldspars
(orthoclase, plagioclase), augite,
hornblende, olivine, micas (biotite,
muscovite), haematite, galena, pyrite,
chalcopyrite, fluorite, barite, halite, gypsum,
garnet, chiastolite/andalusite.
SP3: Application of classification systems
using distinguishing characteristics to
identify unknown minerals.
f. Rocks are composed of aggregates of
minerals, pre-existing rocks or fossils.
g. Igneous, sedimentary and
Observation and investigation of hand
metamorphic rocks display differences
specimens of a variety of rocks (including
of composition and texture that reflect sampling in the field) in order to:
their mode of origin. • identify and interpret component
composition
• interpret colour and textures
(crystalline/clastic; crystal or grain
size/shape; sorting; foliation; mineral
alignment/bedding/crystalline banding)
and hence
• deduce the mode of origin of the rock as
igneous, metamorphic or sedimentary.
SP4: Production of scaled annotated
scientific drawings of rock samples from
hand samples using a light microscope, or
hand lens observation.
• Use and manipulation of the
magnification formula
magnification = size of image
size of real object
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 14
Topic F2: SURFACE AND INTERNAL PROCESSES OF THE
ROCK CYCLE
Key Idea 1: The mineralogy and texture of sedimentary rocks are the
result of the surface process part of the rock cycle, driven
by external energy sources
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
a. External energy: solar heating of the Earth's
surface drives the water cycle and
influences weathering and erosional
processes.
b. Physical and chemical weathering of rocks
occurs at the Earth's surface and provides
the raw materials for new sedimentary
rocks:
• physical weathering, (insolation,
freeze/thaw) breaks rock down into
smaller fragments
• chemical weathering of silicate and
carbonate rocks (hydrolysis,
carbonation, solution and oxidation)
produces a range of new minerals and
solutions together with residual,
resistant minerals
• biological weathering involves physical
and chemical changes.
Recognition and use of appropriate units in
c. Surface materials are transported by a calculations.
range of erosional agents and are
deposited as sediments: Construction and interpretation of frequency
tables and diagrams, bar charts and
• erosion (abrasion, attrition)
histograms.
• transport (traction, saltation,
suspension, solution)
Finding of arithmetic means.
• deposition selectively concentrates
products in particular environments -
Understanding of the principles of sampling as
grain size related to energy of
applied to scientific data.
depositional environment; dominance of
quartz and muscovite in coarse fraction
Understanding of the measures of dispersion,
and clay minerals in fine fraction;
including standard deviation and interquartile
flocculation; precipitation.
range.
Selection and use of a statistical test.
Description of sedimentary rocks in hand
d. Different sedimentary environments may be
specimen, rock exposures and
identified by diagnostic sedimentary
diagrams/photographs from observation of their
structures, rock textures, mineralogy and
colour, texture (use of sediment comparators to
fossil content.
determine grain size, shape and sphericity),
(coarse >2 mm, fine <1/16 mm), reaction with
0.5 mol dm-3 hydrochloric acid, mineralogy and
other diagnostic features.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 15
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
e. A study of fluvial, marine, and aeolian Investigation of textures of sediments from
sediments demonstrates these differences. different depositional environments.
SP5: Production of full rock description of macro
and micro features from hand specimens and
unfamiliar field exposures of sedimentary rocks in
order to interpret component composition, colour
and textures, to identify rock types and to deduce
their environment of deposition.
SP6: Construction of graphic logs using
appropriate scale and symbol sets for unfamiliar
geological sequences and exposures to record
data relevant to an investigation.
SP7: Use of photomicrographs to identify minerals
and rock textures of sedimentary rocks in order to
identify rock types and to deduce their
environment of deposition.
Interpretation of maps, photographs and graphic
logs showing the following sedimentary features:
bedding, cross-bedding, graded bedding,
laminations, desiccation features, ripple marks
(symmetrical and asymmetrical), sole structures
(load/flame, flute cast).
Identification in hand specimen of the following
sedimentary rocks from their composition, texture
and other diagnostic features: sandstones
(orthoquartzite, arkose, greywacke),
shale/mudstone, limestones (shelly, oolitic, chalk),
conglomerate, breccia.
Investigation of contrasts between fluvial, marine
and aeolian sediments.
Use of logarithms in relation to quantities that
range over several orders of magnitude.
Construction and interpretation of frequency
tables and diagrams, bar charts and histograms.
Knowledge of the characteristics of normal and
skewed distribution.
Plotting of variables from experimental or other
circular data.
Understanding of the terms mean, median and
mode.
Selection and use of a statistical test.
Plotting of two variables from experimental or
other linear data.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 16
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
f. Sedimentary rocks may result from the Analysis of biogenic components in sedimentary
accumulation of organic material rocks.
(limestone, coal) or by precipitation of solid
material from solution (evaporites).
g. Sedimentary rocks exhibit differences in Investigation of the concept of ‘sediment
texture which influences porosity and maturity’. Immature sedimentary rocks
permeability: grain angularity, sphericity, characterised by a wide range of mineral
size, sorting, which reflects: compositions and/or lithic clasts; mature
• the nature of rocks from which they sedimentary rocks with restricted mineralogies
were derived dominated by mineral species resistant to
weathering and erosional processes.
• conditions of climate, weathering,
erosion and deposition operating during
Understanding that y = mx + c represents a linear
their formation
relationship.
• post-depositional factors as sediments
are formed into sedimentary rocks:
diagenesis and lithification (compaction,
recrystallisation, cementation, pressure
solution).
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 17
Topic F2: SURFACE AND INTERNAL PROCESSES OF THE
ROCK CYCLE
Key Idea 2: The formation and alteration of igneous and
metamorphic rocks result from the Earth’s internal
energy
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
a. Internal energy: The Earth’s internal Interpretation of evidence for surface heat
geological processes result from the flow and temperature variation with depth
transfer of energy derived from through simple analysis of the geothermal
radiogenic and primordial heat sources. gradient (geotherm).
Heat is transferred from the mantle to the
surface by conduction and convection, Solving of algebraic equations.
with temperatures of rocks remaining
below melting point (except locally). Calculation of the rate of change from a
graph showing a linear relationship.
b. Igneous rocks are the products of cooling The recognition of plutons, dykes, sills, lava
of magma in bodies of various sizes and flows and pyroclastic deposits by
shapes and pyroclastic events. interpretation of maps, sections and
photographs. Observation and investigation
of igneous rocks to deduce the cooling
history:
• crystal size: coarse (>3 mm), medium (1-
3 mm), fine (<1 mm)
• crystal shape: euhedral, subhedral,
anhedral
• texture: equicrystalline, porphyritic,
vesicular, glassy, fragmental (tuff)
• structure: pillow structure, aa/pahoehoe
surfaces, columnar joints.
SP8: Production of full rock description of
macro and micro features from hand
specimens and/or unfamiliar field exposures of
igneous rocks in order to interpret component
composition, colour and textures, to identify
rock type and to deduce their cooling history.
Identification in hand specimen of the
following igneous rocks from their
composition, texture and other diagnostic
features:
• Silicic: granite
• Mafic: gabbro, dolerite, basalt
• Ultramafic: peridotite.
SP9: Use of photomicrographs to identify
minerals and rock textures of igneous rocks
to identify rock type and to deduce their
cooling history.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 18
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
Use of ratios, fractions and percentages.
Calculation of the circumferences, surface
areas and volumes of regular shapes.
Construction and interpretation of frequency
tables and diagrams, bar charts and
histogram.
Knowledge of the characteristics of normal
and skewed distributions.
c. Partial melting of rock at depth to form
magma occurs in a number of different
interplate and intraplate tectonic settings:
• beneath divergent plate margins - Investigation of the role of rising convection
partial melting of mantle rocks cells in decompression melting.
generates basaltic magma
• near to convergent plate margins -
partial melting of subducted oceanic
lithosphere and overlying lithospheric
wedge generates andesitic magma
• in mantle plumes (hotspots) - partial Investigation of global distribution of mantle
melting of mantle rocks generates plumes from maps.
basaltic magma
• in deeply buried lower continental
crust during orogeny – melting and
assimilation of crustal material
generates granitic magma.
d. Volcanic hazards result from: Investigation, using geological data from a
wide variety of volcanic monitoring
• blast/explosion
techniques (including ground deformation,
• ash fall, pyroclastic flows (nuées
gravity and thermal anomalies, gas emissions
ardentes) and gases
and seismic activity), of the risk of volcanic
• lava flows
hazards and the extent to which they can be
• debris flows and mudflows (lahars).
managed and controlled in order to reduce
risk.
e. The nature of the volcanic hazard is
linked to the composition, viscosity and
gas content of the magma.
f. Metamorphism involves mineralogical Interpretation of the following metamorphic
and/or textural change of pre-existing features using simplified geological maps and
rocks in response to changes in photographs: contact aureoles, metamorphic
temperature and/or pressure. foliations.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 19
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
g. Contact (thermal) and regional Understanding that y = mx + c represents a
metamorphism produce distinctive linear relationship.
mineralogical and textural changes:
• non-foliated in contact metamorphism SP10: Production of full rock description of
• foliation (slaty cleavage, schistosity macro and micro features from hand
and gneissose banding) in regional specimens and/or unfamiliar field exposures of
metamorphism. metamorphic rocks in order to interpret
component composition, colour and textures,
to identify rock type and to deduce the
temperature and pressure conditions of their
formation.
SP11: Use of photomicrographs to identify
minerals and rock textures of metamorphic
rocks to identify rock type and to deduce the
temperature and pressure conditions of their
formation.
Identification in hand specimen of the
following metamorphic rocks from their
composition, texture and other diagnostic
features: marble, metaquartzite, spotted rock,
hornfels, slate, schist, gneiss.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 20
Topic F2: SURFACE AND INTERNAL PROCESSES OF THE
ROCK CYCLE
Key Idea 3: Deformation results when rocks undergo permanent
strain in response to applied tectonic stresses and can
be interpreted using geological maps
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
a. Rock deformation can be interpreted by
reference to Hooke’s Law: Simple stress
- strain curves showing elastic/brittle and
ductile/plastic behaviour; elastic limit,
permanent strain and fracture point.
b. Evidence of rock deformation includes Measurement and description of evidence
dipping beds, folding, faulting and obtained by sampling of rock deformation in
unconformities. the field (or from photographs). Use of simple
calculations to establish the amount of
deformation (percentage of crustal
shortening).
Use of sin, cos and tan in physical problems.
Recognition and interpretation of structural
features through study of photographs,
diagrams, sections, geological maps and in
the field.
SP12: Location of geological features onto a
base map.
SP13: Identification of the location of
geological features in the field using six figure
grid references on maps.
SP14: Production of scaled, annotated field
sketches at unfamiliar field exposures to
record data relevant to an investigation.
SP15: Measurement of dip and strike
elements: dip angle, dip and strike directions
of planar surfaces, including valid sampling,
relevant to an investigation.
c. Dipping beds are the results of
tectonic/gravity induced stresses, caused
by plate movement, that distort beds from
the horizontal.
d. Folding results when compressional Recognition of fold elements: limb, hinge,
stresses exceed the yield strength of a axis, axial plane trace, fold symmetry (as a
rock. function of limb length), antiform, synform,
anticline, syncline.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 21
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
e. Faulting results when applied Recognition of fault characteristics:
compressional, tensional or shear • dip-slip: normal, reverse, thrust; throw -
tectonic stresses, caused by plate amount, relative movement of
movement, exceed the fracture strength
footwall/hanging wall
of a rock.
• strike-slip: left/ sinistral, right/dextral
• fault displacement (= net slip).
Recognition of unconformities and their use
f. Unconformities represent a hiatus in the
in relative dating.
geological record resulting from a
combination of Earth movements, erosion
and sea level changes.
Use of geological maps, block diagrams,
g. The nature of outcrop patterns formed by
boreholes, cross-sections and photographs to
the intersection of geological structures
interpret the geology of an area.
with a topographic surface are displayed
on geological maps.
Construction of geological cross-sections
from simplified geological maps.
Ordering the geological sequence of events
in an area from the study of a simplified
geological map and/or section.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 22
Topic F3: TIME AND CHANGE
Key Idea 1: Study of present day processes and organisms enables
understanding of changes in the geological past
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
a. Much of the rock record can be Investigation of the development of
interpreted in terms of geological uniformitarianism and the rock cycle model
processes that are operating today by over time and the contributions of James
applying the Principle of Hutton and William Smith.
Uniformitarianism: the present is the key
to the past.
b. The study of modern environments
enables an interpretation of the
sedimentary rock record within the rock
cycle model.
c. The basic unit of sedimentary geology is
the facies which reflects the depositional
environment: lithofacies, biofacies.
d. Fossils are evidence of former life Appreciation of the basic distinctions between
preserved in rocks. They provide the following fossil groups based on their
information on the nature of ancient hard parts:
organisms and palaeoenvironmental • brachiopods (marine): shell shape and
conditions. symmetry, pedicle and brachial valves,
foramen, hinge line, muscle scars
• bivalves (marine/freshwater): shape
and symmetry of valves, number and size
of muscle scars, hinge line, teeth and
sockets, gape, pallial line and sinus,
umbones
• cephalopods (marine): suture line,
coiled and chambered shell
• corals (marine): colonial, solitary, septa
• trilobites (marine): cephalon, glabella,
genal spines, eyes, thorax, number of
thoracic segments, pygidium
• graptolites (marine): stipes, thecae
• plants (terrestrial): leaf, stem, root
• trace fossils (tracks and trails, burrows,
coprolites).
SP16: Application of classification systems
using distinguishing characteristics to identify
unknown fossils.
SP17: Production of scaled, annotated
scientific drawings of fossils, using a light
microscope, or hand lens observation.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 23
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
e. Fossil morphology is used to interpret
function/mode of life:
• bivalves (burrowers/non burrowers)
• trilobites (benthonic/pelagic).
f. Preservation can give rise to a wide
range of fossil materials: actual remains,
hard parts, petrification by mineral
replacement (calcification, silicification,
pyritisation), carbonisation, moulds/casts.
g. Fossils accumulations may be preserved Analysis of modern and fossil assemblages
without appreciable transportation (life to interpret the degree of transportation prior
assemblages) or preserved after to burial.
transportation (death assemblages), or
as derived fossils re-deposited in later
sediment.
h. The fossil record is:
• biased, in favour of marine
organisms, with body parts resistant
to decay, that lived in low energy
environments, and suffered rapid
burial
• incomplete, as natural processes can
distort or destroy fossil evidence
(predation, scavenging, diagenesis,
bacterial decay, weathering, erosion,
metamorphism)
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 24
Topic F3: TIME AND CHANGE
Key Idea 2: Geological events can be placed in relative and
absolute time scales
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
a. Geological events can be placed in relative Interpretation of age relations of rocks and rock
time scales using criteria of relative age: sequences using maps, cross-sections and in
evolutionary change in fossils, the field.
superposition of strata, unconformities,
cross-cutting relationships, included
fragments, 'way-up' criteria.
b. Some rocks and minerals can be dated Simple use of the principles of radiometric
radiometrically to give an absolute age. dating (decay rates and the half-life concept) to
This involves radioactive decay and the calculate the absolute age of a sample.
principles of radiometric dating; radioactive
series and radioactive half-life; radiometric Evaluation of the assumptions, accuracy and
dating as exemplified by Potassium – limitations inherent in the radiometric dating
Argon (40K– 40Ar), Samarium – Neodymium method.
(147Sm –143Nd).
c. Fossils are used in relative dating. Observation and identification of appropriate
morphological features and their changes
through time:
• graptolites - number and position of stipes,
thecal shape in the Early Palaeozoic.
• cephalopods - suture lines in the Late
Palaeozoic and Mesozoic (goniatite,
ceratite and ammonite).
d. The factors contributing to good zone
fossils for relative dating/correlation are:
wide and plentiful distribution, ready
preservation, rapid evolutionary change, a
high degree of facies independence, easy
identification of index fossils.
• the utility of graptolites and
cephalopods as zone fossils assessed
in relation to the above factors.
e. The geological column provides a means
Interpretation of the ages of geological events
of:
using the geological column.
• placing geological events in their
correct time sequence
• defining the absolute age of some
events.
f. The rock record indicates changing
conditions and rates of processes with long
periods of slow change interrupted by
sudden catastrophism causing mass
extinctions through geological time.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 25
Topic F4: EARTH STRUCTURE AND GLOBAL TECTONICS
Key Idea 1: The Earth has a concentrically zoned structure and
composition
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
a. The Earth has a layered structure: crust, Analysis of seismological evidence for the
mantle, outer and inner core. Each layer internal structure of Earth: P and S body
has a distinctive composition and/or waves, surface waves, time-distance curves,
rheological properties. Direct and indirect shadow zones, velocity-depth models of
evidence is derived from meteorite Earth structure, density distribution with
(stony, iron) compositions, mantle depth.
xenoliths, mean density calculations and
geophysical measurements (seismology, Translation of information between graphical,
geomagnetism, gravity, conductivity). numerical and algebraic forms.
SP18: Measurement of the densities of
representative samples of Earth layers (e.g.
granite, basalt).
Simple analysis of geomagnetic evidence for
core composition and processes.
b. The crust is a thin layer of distinctive Interpretation of geophysical data on crustal
composition overlying the mantle; structure (seismic, gravity, magnetic) from
continental and oceanic crust can be continental and oceanic areas.
recognised and distinguished by their
differing thicknesses, composition and Analysis of ocean drilling data to re-interpret
structure. the Mohorovičić discontinuity
(Moho) at the base of the crust (e.g. Joides
Resolution 360).
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 26
Topic F4: EARTH STRUCTURE AND GLOBAL TECTONICS
Key Idea 2: The Earth’s internal heat is the underlying cause of
lithospheric plate motions that control global geological
processes
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
a. The uppermost part of the mantle and the Investigation of how the plate tectonics
overlying crust form a rigid outer shell of paradigm developed over time, from
the Earth known as the lithosphere, continental drift, through active mantle
forming tectonic plates, underlain by a convection carrying passive tectonic plates,
weaker upper mantle zone known as the to modern theories of the causes of plate
asthenosphere. The asthenosphere is movement (slab pull and ridge push).
evidenced by the seismological low
velocity zone (LVZ).
b. The lithosphere consists of several plates Interpretation of the evidence for plate
in relative motion. Three types of plate tectonic theory from:
boundary are recognised; divergent, • direct measurement – ocean floor drilling,
convergent (involving subduction) and relative movement using GPS
conservative. There is a relationship • global maps of the distribution of
between seismicity, volcanicity and plate continents, volcanoes, earthquake
boundaries. epicentres/foci, ocean trenches and
ridges, orogenic belts and
palaeoecological /palaeoenvironmental
zones.
• seismic tomography
• an investigation of the
geomagnetic/geoelectrial properties of
rocks and minerals.
• geothermal data (hot spots, heat flow).
SP19: Investigation of the relationships
between earthquake data (focal depth,
magnitude and distance from plate
boundaries) using data on Google EarthTM.
Use of a scatter diagram to identify a
correlation between two variables.
Evaluation of the possible mechanisms for
c. Forces driving plates are a matter of
plate movement (role of mantle convection,
current debate involving thermal
slab pull, ridge push).
convection of the mantle together with
gravitational forces and ocean
lithosphere density differences at
subduction zones.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 27
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
d. Some rocks contain a record of the
direction of the Earth's magnetic field at
the time of their formation, known as
remanent magnetism. This is linked to
ferromagnetism in some iron minerals
and their Curie temperatures.
e. Palaeomagnetism can be used to
determine changes of latitude as different
continents moved through geological
time, indicating continental drift. Ocean
floor magnetic anomalies indicate sea
floor spreading.
f. The various elements of the rock cycle
may be linked directly to plate tectonic
processes:
• igneous - basaltic magmatism at
oceanic spreading centres; basaltic
and andesitic magmatism at
convergent margins; granitic magmas
in orogenic belts
• sedimentary - erosional processes
and depositional environments
influenced by tectonic movements
• regional metamorphism in subduction
zones and orogenic belts at plate
boundaries.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 28
INTERPRETING THE GEOLOGICAL RECORD
This section comprises four compulsory topics
G1 Rock forming processes
G2 Rock deformation
G3 Past life and past climates
G4 Earth materials and natural resources
Topic G1 : ROCK FORMING PROCESSES
Key Idea 1: The generation and evolution of magma involves
different processes
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
a. Igneous rock composition at interplate Evaluation of the role of temperature,
and intraplate settings depends on: pressure and water content in determining
• origin of the parent magma (mantle or the melting points of rocks.
crust)
• magma evolution: Differentiation and Simple calculation of depth of formation of
fractionation (continuous and granite magma by crustal melting through
discontinuous reaction series - interpretation of graphs showing continental
Bowen); gravity settling to give geotherm and melting temperatures of wet
cumulates and dry lower crustal material.
• magma contamination: incorporation
of rock material (xenoliths); magma Calculation of the age of a mineral sample
mixing, during rise and emplacement, using the decay rate equation
leading to change of composition and -λt
N = N0e
physical properties (enclaves).
Use of logarithms in relation to quantities
that range over several orders of magnitude.
Interpretation of logarithmic plots.
Calculation of percentage error in
radiometric dating results.
Investigation of magma crystallisation and
b. The substitution of one element for
differentiation processes using phase
another in the crystal structure of a
diagrams (plagioclase feldspar, olivine).
mineral depends upon atomic radius and
valency; solid solution as exemplified by
olivine and plagioclase feldspar.
Analysis of ocean survey data to investigate
c. The formation of magma chambers under
current models of how oceanic ridges
ocean ridges and rises can be interpreted
(particularly mid ocean ridges - MORs) are
from models.
formed (e.g. RRS James Cook -2016).
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 29
Topic G1 : ROCK FORMING PROCESSES
Key Idea 2: The mineralogy and texture of metamorphic rocks are
determined by the composition of the parent rock and
the conditions of metamorphism
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
a. Igneous and sedimentary rocks contain Analysis of simple pressure - temperature -
minerals that are stable or metastable at time paths involved in contact and regional
the temperature and pressure of their metamorphism.
formation. Changes in temperature
and/or directed stress over time lead to Simple analysis of phase diagrams showing
the growth of new minerals with different stability fields of selected metamorphic
stability fields. minerals: kyanite/ sillimanite/andalusite.
b. Mineralogical changes during SP20: Investigation of contact
metamorphism depend on the metamorphism using the 'Metamorphic
composition of the parent rock and the Aureole' simulation experiment.
temperature/pressure field.
c. Contact and regional metamorphism of
mudstone/shale lead to the growth of
new minerals indicative of the type and
grade of metamorphism: low to high
grade metamorphism.
d. Contact, regional and dynamic Study of diagrams/photomicrographs to
metamorphism result from different identify and analyse the following
pressure/temperature conditions and metamorphic textures: granoblastic;
produce characteristic textural changes porphyroblastic; mylonitic.
associated with recrystallization, ductile
flow and shear deformation.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 30
Topic G1: ROCK FORMING PROCESSES
Key Idea 3: Sedimentary processes can be understood using
scientific modelling
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
a. Sedimentary processes which are Application of the Hjulstrom graph.
infrequent and/or difficult to observe (e.g.
turbidity currents) can be understood and Determination of the slope and intercept of a
explained using scientific models. linear graph.
Application of Walther’s Law to extend
b. The distribution of environments
interpretation from two-dimensional data
represented by rocks in a vertical
(borehole logs, cliff sections, graphic logs) to
stratigraphic column is related to the
three-dimensions.
distribution of those environments
laterally (Walther's Law); marine
transgressions and regressions,
diachronous stratigraphic boundaries.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 31
Topic G2: ROCK DEFORMATION
Key Idea 1: Geological structures are formed when rock material
undergoes deformation
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
a. The nature of rock deformation is Recognition of the differences in deformation
determined by the competence of the of competent and incompetent rocks.
parent rock and conditions during
deformation (temperature, confining
pressure, strain rate).
b. Fold characteristics; amplitude, Identification of plunge direction (of axis) and
wavelength, interlimb angle (open, tight, axial planar cleavage.
isoclinal), axial plane attitude (upright,
inclined, overturned, recumbent), Represent limb dip and strike data on a polar
plunging folds. equal area stereonet (polar plots only not
projections or great circles).
Plotting of variables from experimental or
other circular data.
c. Fault type is determined by the Analysis of the relationship between fault
orientation of the principal stresses. type (normal, reverse/thrust, strike-slip) and
Technical terms to describe fault the orientation of the principal stress
elements: slickensides, fault gouge, fault components ( max,  int,  min).
breccia.
d. Structural reactivation: earlier-formed Recognition of evidence for fault reactivation
faults can be reactivated during later on geological maps, cross-sections, diagrams
tectonism; folds may be refolded. and photographs.
Structural inversion: reactivation of
normal faults in compression or reverse
faults/thrusts in extension.
e. The nature of outcrop patterns formed by Calculations involving measurements of:
the intersection of geological structures • true bed thickness
with a topographic surface are displayed
• vertical bed thickness
on geological maps.
• width of outcrop
• angle of dip.
Use of sin, cos and tan in physical problems.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 32
Topic G3: PAST LIFE AND PAST CLIMATES
Key Idea 1: Fossils provide evidence for the increasing diversity of
life through geological time
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
a. The fossil record provides evidence of Interpretation of evolutionary diagrams.
changes in floras and faunas through
geological time and the development of
higher life forms:
• Precambrian life: life possibly evolved
early in Earth history (3.8 billion years
ago). The Ediacaran fauna represents
the oldest diverse set of multicellular,
soft bodied organisms (565 Ma)
• The Cambrian Explosion: the Analysis of the possible causes of faunal
development of mineralised skeletons diversification at the Precambrian-Cambrian
led to a wide variety of advanced boundary.
marine invertebrates by the early
Cambrian
• Life in the ocean diversified in stages Interpretation of simple diversity curves
identified by separate fauna: a basic (Sepkoski’s curves).
understanding of the difference
between Cambrian, Palaeozoic and
modern faunas
• The Phanerozoic was marked by the Analysis of the morphology of fossil
migration of organisms onto the land vertebrates (including dinosaurs) to interpret
during the Palaeozoic. Vertebrate function/mode of life.
development of amphibians from fish,
reptiles from amphibians and
mammals and birds from reptiles.
Colonisation by of the land by plants.
b. Diversity increased through the Evaluation of contrasting hypotheses
Phanerozoic punctuated by many regarding mass extinctions.
declines caused by mass extinction
events. Mass extinctions may result from
a variety of causes including:
• asteroid impact (Alvarez)
• large scale volcanicity (flood basalts)
• changes in land/sea levels
• rapid climate change.
c. Mass extinctions are exemplified by the
end-Permian (P-T) and Cretaceous-
Paleogene (K-Pg) boundary events.
d. There are alternative interpretations of Evaluation of alternative interpretations of
evolutionary patterns based on the fossil evolutionary patterns.
record. Gradual change (gradualism) vs
stability interrupted by sudden change
(punctuated equilibrium).
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 33
Topic G3: PAST LIFE AND PAST CLIMATES
Key Idea 2: A combination of global factors contributes to climate
change through geological time
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
a. Long-term changes to the global climate, Analysis of present day oceanic and
composition of the atmosphere, sea level atmospheric circulation in relation to climatic
and distribution of the continents are effects.
recorded in the Phanerozoic rock record.
The J. Tuzo Wilson Cycle provides a
framework for understanding these long Analysis of data used to determine past
term changes. climatic regimes.
b. Changes in the atmospheric composition Evaluation of the contribution of naturally
of greenhouse gases (especially CO
2
and produced CO
2
and methane to climate
methane) result from natural processes change with time.
(volcanic activity, rock weathering,
warming of methane hydrates)
throughout geological time.
c. There have been climate changes Analyses of graphs showing different rates
throughout geological time. The current of climate change.
rate of change appears to differ from
those in the past.
d. The Anthropocene is a proposed epoch Evaluation of the arguments in the debate
that began when human activities for the inclusion of the Anthropocene as a
changed the Earth’s surface environment new epoch.
on a scale comparable with the major
events of the geological past. There is
currently a lack of consensus for the
proposed epoch.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 34
Topic G3: PAST LIFE AND PAST CLIMATES
Key Idea 3: Evidence for global climate change is interpreted from
the geological record and the geochemistry of rocks
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
a. Evidence for global climate changes can Investigation of the evidence for climatic
be interpreted from both the geological extremes in the rock record.
record and the isotope geochemistry of
ocean-floor sediments.
b. The fossil record provides evidence of
different climatic zones, as exemplified
by:
• land plants
• corals.
c. Sedimentary sequences provide evidence
of palaeoenvironments related to
particular climatic zones.
• Ancient icehouse deposits (e.g
Carboniferous).
• Tropical greenhouse deposits (e.g.
Cretaceous).
d. Oxygen isotope ratios (18O/16O) in fossil Simple analysis of oxygen isotope curves.
shells are indicative of the temperature of
ancient ocean waters.
e. The “Snowball Earth” hypothesis Assessment of the validity of the evidence
proposes that the Earth's surface became for the “Snowball Earth” hypothesis in
entirely or nearly entirely frozen at least Neoproterozoic rocks.
once, sometime earlier than 650 Ma.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 35
Topic G4 : EARTH MATERIALS AND NATURAL RESOURCES
Key Idea1: Geological processes lead to the concentration and
accumulation of natural resources in deposits that can
be exploited; economic deposits can be concentrated
by igneous and sedimentary processes
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
a. Processes of formation of metalliferous Geological map interpretation (ore body
ores. geometry, field relations); section-drawing
• Igneous associations of ores - through ore bodies.
magmatic segregation, hydrothermal
activity. Calculation of the circumferences, surface
• Sedimentary associations of ores - areas and volumes of regular shapes.
placer deposits; residual deposits;
precipitated deposits. Recognition and making use of appropriate
units in calculations.
Use of ratios, fractions and percentages.
Geological map interpretation; section
drawing through industrial mineral deposits.
b. Processes of formation of non-metallic
minerals of economic importance: china
clay.
c. Formation of sedimentary deposits of
economic importance as "bulk minerals"
for aggregate: sand and gravel.
d. Origin of hydrocarbons and coals: Simple analysis of maturity: depth
hydrocarbons and coals result from the (temperature) graphs showing oil and
thermal alteration of organic material due natural gas windows.
to burial.
• Hydrocarbons: source rocks; Identification of coal types.
sediment burial and the temperature Simple assessment of reserves (e.g.
and pressure conditions of oil and tonnage of coal in a given area).
natural gas formation.
Calculation of the circumferences, surface
• Coal-forming environments; peat,
areas and volumes of regular shapes.
lignite, bituminous coal, anthracite;
coal rank.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 36
Topic G4 : EARTH MATERIALS AND NATURAL RESOURCES
Key Idea 2: Permeable rocks offer pathways for oil and gas
migration; highly porous rocks can act as natural
reservoirs for underground supplies of oil and gas
Geological techniques and
Knowledge and understanding
skills
a. Porosity and permeability of rock and Analysis of rock textures in terms of
sediments affects the presence, porosity and permeability (grain size,
distribution and migration of fluids (water shape, packing, sorting; cementation);
oil and natural gas): primary/secondary primary and secondary porosity.
porosity in rock; factors that affect
porosity and permeability.
b. Fluid flows in rocks and sediment can be Application of Darcy’s Law to model fluid
modelled using Darcy’s Law. flow:
h −h 
Q = −kA 2 1
 L 
Analysis of geological cross-sections
c. Oil and gas migration are controlled by
through oil and natural gas bearing
geological factors: migration paths -
structures.
relative buoyancy of oil and natural gas;
structural and stratigraphic traps for
hydrocarbons; reservoir rocks and cap
rocks.
Analysis of the controls on groundwater
d. The characteristics of subsurface
quality which result from geochemistry
geology which control the flow of
(carbonates and sulfates), aquifer filtration,
groundwater (hydrogeology) include
residence time and sources of pollution.
confined and unconfined aquifers,
aquicludes, aquitards, the water table,
piezometric surfaces, cones of
depression and recharge zones.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 37
Topic G4 : EARTH MATERIALS AND NATURAL RESOURCES
Key Idea 3: A wide range of prospecting techniques can be
employed to explore for mineral resources
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
a. Techniques used to prospect for Geological map interpretation; simple
mineral resources. analysis of geophysical and geochemical
• geophysical surveying - gravity data related to mineral exploration.
(Bouguer), seismic, magnetic,
electrical. Selection of appropriate geophysical
• geochemical prospecting - river methods for different mineral searches,
water, river sediment and soil depending upon the geometry and physical
sampling. properties of the target body.
Each method has particular Interpretation of seismic reflection sections
applications and limitations. to identify potential oil and natural gas-
bearing structures.
Construction of geological cross-sections
b. Microfossils are used for correlation in from borehole data, including dating and
prospecting for oil and natural gas. correlation using microfossils.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 38
GEOLOGICAL THEMES
This section comprises two compulsory topics
T1 Geohazards
T2 Geological map applications
and one option topic from
T3 Quaternary geology
T4 Geological evolution of Britain
T5 Geology of the lithosphere
Topic T1 : GEOHAZARDS
Key Idea 1: Natural geohazards have a worldwide impact on
human populations including in the British Isles
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
a. Seismic hazards. Analysis of geological data from appropriate
• There is a relationship between case studies of each the following:
earthquakes and active fault zones. • a major earthquake
• The magnitude of an earthquake • a mass movement event
event is measured on the Moment to compare and contrast the nature of the
Magnitude scale (M ). The intensity geological hazards.
W
of earthquake damage around an
event is measured on the modified
Mercalli scale and is related to
earthquake size, depth, distance,
local ground conditions and building
standards.
• Seismic hazards include ground
shaking, liquefaction.
• Tsunamis can cause devastation in
coastal areas following an undersea
earthquake (landslide or volcanic Investigation of the factors that affect the
eruption). impact of earthquakes and mass movements
b. Mass movement hazards.
• The mechanism and triggering of
rock avalanches, landslides and
debris flows are linked to angle of
slope, lithology, weathering, load,
groundwater regime, rainfall, ground
vibration, vegetation cover.
c. The British Isles is prone to local natural
Analysis of the causes and effects of
geohazards at different scales
geohazards in the British Isles from
associated with: earthquakes, landslides,
appropriate data sets.
shrinking and swelling clays and
subsidence (including sink holes).
d. There is evidence that significant
tsunamis have affected the British coast
in the recent geological past.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 39
Topic T1 : GEOHAZARDS
Key Idea 2: Geohazard management attempts to predict and
manage hazardous geological events with only limited
success
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
a. Geohazard and risk are intimately linked.
• Geohazard: the probability of a change
in the geological environment of a given
magnitude within a specific time period
in a given area.
• Risk: the consequent threat of loss of
life or damage to property and
infrastructure.
Understanding of simple probability.
b. The risk assessment of geohazards
involves an analysis of:
• the nature of the hazard
• the probability of occurrence and the
return period of the hazard
• communication of the risk to the
vulnerable population.
An investigation of the monitoring of:
c. Attempts to predict earthquakes include • a major earthquake
monitoring changes in: seismic activity, • a mass movement event
groundwater levels and pressure, ground evaluating the level of success in hazard
deformation (creep meters, strain meters, tilt prediction.
meters), radon gas emissions and electrical
resistivity.
d. Sites of potential slope failure can be
monitored by:
• ground levelling and surveying;
monitoring of micro-seismic events and
borehole distortion; ground deformation
(creep, strain, tilt) and groundwater
pressures
• Use of electronic distance
measurement (EDM), satellite and GPS
techniques.
e. The destructive effects of earthquakes and
mass movements can, to some extent, be
managed and controlled by engineering
geology applications.
• Earthquakes: reducing of the impact of
ground accelerations; aseismic building
design; tsunamis defences.
• Mass movement: slope stabilisation
methods, drainage control, retaining
structures.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 40
Topic T1 : GEOHAZARDS
Key Idea 3: Engineering activities can have a major impact on the
natural environment
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
a. Extraction of geological raw materials
and economic storage of waste products
involves interference with the surface
and/or subsurface environment.
• Quarrying and mining. Problems Analysis of the methods of extraction of
associated with the extraction of rock geological raw materials to identify potential
and minerals – stability of working environmental problems and the ways by
faces, rock falls, ground subsidence, which these may be minimised.
flooding, surface/groundwater
pollution and waste tipping.
• Waste disposal. Problems of ground Analysis of landfill engineering data for the
contamination, including groundwater disposal of domestic waste or underground
pollution and methane gas sites for the disposal of highly toxic chemical
production, can be ameliorated by and radioactive waste.
good geological site selection and
engineering practice. There are
special problems with the disposal of
highly toxic chemical and radioactive
waste.
• Contaminated land. Problems with Analysis of the issues associated with the
the management and remediation of remediation of one industrial brownfield site.
industrial brownfield sites associated
with toxic chemical materials, ground
instability, subsidence and
groundwater pollution.
b. Civil engineering work should take
account of geological factors to avoid: Simple analysis of rock slope stability
• problems of ground instability involving friction angle and orientation of rock
associated with weathering, dip of discontinuities.
strata, folding, faulting, rock cleavage,
joint patterns and fracture density Analysis of the suitability of sites using a
variety of geological and geotechnical data.
• interference with the hydrological
system: pore water pressure, surface
and underground drainage (porosity,
permeability, water table, aquifers)
• radon gas - sources and pathways to
surface, surface geology of high-risk
areas.
c. In building major structures geological
factors and geological rock properties
must be taken into account (e.g. dams
and reservoirs, cuttings and tunnels,
buildings).
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 41
Topic T2 : GEOLOGICAL MAP APPLICATIONS
Key Idea 1: Outcrop patterns on geological maps can be used to
identify and interpret structural elements
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
a. Outcrop patterns of dipping strata and Interpretation of relationships between
faults in relation to topography: structural features, outcrops and topography
direction of closure of V-shaped on geological maps.
outcrops in valleys as an indication of
dip direction; close parallelism of Identification of fold types using outcrop
geological boundaries and topographic patterns on geological maps.
contours as a sign of near horizontal
dip; linear geological boundaries Identification of fault types and
crossing topographic relief as an measurement of displacements using offsets
indication of steep dip. of geological boundaries across faults.
Identification of unconformities based on
field relationships displayed on geological
maps.
Analysis of the 3D nature of geological maps
and cross-sections using block diagrams
and/or GIS systems (including Google
EarthTM).
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 42
Topic T2 : GEOLOGICAL MAP APPLICATIONS
Key Idea 2: Geological maps contain information relevant to a
wide range of geological applications
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
a. Geological maps provide an essential Use of geological maps at various scales to
database of detailed information about identify from outcrop patterns and other data
the distribution of rocks at the surface on geological maps:
that can be used to interpret or predict • conformable and unconformable
subsurface geological conditions. sedimentary formations
• metamorphic sequences and igneous
bodies (and any associated
metamorphic effects)
• structural features.
b. Geological maps provide an essential
Use of geological maps at various scales to:
database for geological applications:
assess the potential of surface sites for a
• design of construction projects range of engineering projects on the basis of
the prevailing geology
identify geological hazards (landslides,
• identification of geological hazards subsidence) at defined surface sites on the
basis of the prevailing geology
interpret subsurface geology in connection
• location of resources - with groundwater (water table, springs,
groundwater, fossil fuels; aquifers, artesian wells), coal, oil, natural
alternative energy sources
gas and geothermal energy
identify the environmental issues specific to
• identification of environmental
extraction of resources from the map area
issues from extraction of these
resources
assess the suitability for sustainable waste
disposal/contaminated land remediation in a
• assessment of suitability for given area.
sustainable waste disposal or
brownfield remediation.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 43
Option T3: QUATERNARY GEOLOGY
Key Idea 1: A combination of global factors contributes to climate
change through geological time
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
a. Milankovitch cycles are regarded as a
contributory cause of climatic
fluctuations during the Quaternary.
b. The distribution of continents and Analysis of present day oceanic and
mountain belts affects oceanic and atmospheric circulation in relation to climatic
atmospheric circulation, influencing effects.
past and present global climate.
c. The switch from a global greenhouse to
icehouse climate is moderated by the
efficiency of heat transfer from
equatorial to polar latitudes; possible
influence of the opening of the Drake
Passage and rise of the Himalayan
mountains.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 44
Option T3: QUATERNARY GEOLOGY
Key Idea 2: The wide range of Quaternary deposits and
landforms provides a fragmentary record of former
glacial and interglacial stages in Britain
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
a. The wide range of glacial, periglacial,
fluvioglacial and interglacial deposits
and landforms in Britain provides an
incomplete record of climatic
fluctuations and varying sedimentary
environments. Information may be
deduced on ice sheet dimensions and
ice movement patterns.
b. There is geological evidence for glacial
and interglacial stages, and for shorter-
term climatic cycles superimposed on
the dominant pattern of glacial and
interglacial stages.
c. There is a link between continental ice Analysis of evidence for Quaternary sea
sheets and sea level: low sea levels level changes (e.g. raised beaches, drowned
during glacials, high sea levels during valleys).
interglacials. Isostatic response to ice
loading and unloading. Simple calculations of amount of rebound
caused by ice unloading. Analysis of
evidence for relative changes in sea level
caused by ice loading.
d. The fragmentary terrestrial record of
climate change contrasts with a near
complete oceanic record: oxygen
isotope evidence (18O/16O) from ocean
sediments provides evidence of climate
fluctuations through the Quaternary.
e. Ice core evidence for atmospheric
change.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 45
Option T3: QUATERNARY GEOLOGY
Key Idea 3: Fossils provide evidence of environmental and climate
changes in the Quaternary to which dating techniques
can be applied
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
a. Fossils provide evidence for climatic Analysis of pollen diagrams. Analysis of the
fluctuations in Britain during the vertebrate /invertebrate record. (e.g. woolly
Quaternary period. mammoths, beetles).
b. Environmental change and climate Evaluation of fossil evidence for hominin
instability over the past six million years evolution (up to Homo sapiens) compared to
may have been responsible for shaping the evidence for environmental and climatic
human evolution and the ability to change.
adapt to changing conditions.
c. A variety of techniques are available to
date Quaternary events including:
• Radiocarbon (14C) dating (organic
material)
• Incremental dating (varves, tree
rings)
• Isochronous marker beds (volcanic
ash layers).
Each method has particular applications
and limitations.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 46
Option T4: GEOLOGICAL EVOLUTION OF BRITAIN
Key Idea 1: The Neoproterozoic and Phanerozoic stratigraphy of the
British area has been determined largely by the
assembly of lithotectonic terranes during three orogenic
events
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
a. Rocks from all the major subdivisions of Study of geological maps at various scales
geological time occur in Britain and including maps linking onshore and offshore
surrounding shelf areas: Precambrian, areas.
Early and Late Palaeozoic, Mesozoic,
Cenozoic. Use of maps and related data to investigate
major geological processes operating in
different parts of the British area from the
Precambrian to the Quaternary.
b. Information used to investigate the Application of remote sensing and subsurface
geological history of the British Isles also data collection to help interpret the
includes remote sensing techniques that Palaeozoic and Neoproterozoic geology of
provide an indirect way to investigate the the British area.
subsurface geology. The principles
associated with:
• potential field measurements gravity
(Bouguer anomaly) and magnetic
surveys
• borehole analysis; as exemplified by
the Mochras Borehole.
• seismic reflection surveys; onshore
and offshore.
c. A number of orogenic events have Interpretation of geological maps to identify
affected the British area: location and outcrop patterns associated with large-scale
large-scale geology. Ages, main geological features of orogenic belts; fold
structures and dominant trends of the shapes and descriptors, plunging folds; fault
Caledonian and Variscan orogenic belts; descriptors; regional structural trends as
Alpine orogenic influences in Britain. displayed by major folds and faults.
d. Study of the geology (plutonic/volcanic Collation and evaluation of geological
and metamorphic rocks) of these evidence to interpret the Caledonian and
orogenic belts aids the reconstruction of Variscan orogenic belts and Palaeogene
the plate tectonic regimes in which they Igneous Province in plate tectonic terms.
developed.
e. The Palaeogene Igneous Province of NW Interpretation of the geological characteristics
Britain provides evidence of the early of the Palaeogene Igneous Province in plate
history of the opening of the North tectonic terms.
Atlantic Ocean, with associated basaltic
volcanicity.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 47
Option T4: GEOLOGICAL EVOLUTION OF BRITAIN
Key Idea 2: The evidence for the northward drift of the British area
through the Neoproterozoic and Phanerozoic
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
a. The palaeomagnetic field direction in The use of palaeomagnetic data to calculate
some British rocks provides evidence of palaeolatitudes for the British area, and
latitude at the time of magnetisation. interpretation of apparent polar wandering
curves to determine palaeolatitude changes
through time.
b. Rocks in Britain show evidence of major
climatic change through Phanerozoic
time as a result of the northward drift of
the British area, exemplified by:
• Devonian and Permo-Triassic - semi-
arid and desert terrestrial and
hypersaline marine deposits.
• Carboniferous, Jurassic and
Cretaceous - tropical, shallow marine
and terrestrial (coal) deposits.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 48
Option T4: GEOLOGICAL EVOLUTION OF BRITAIN
Key Idea 3: The northward drift of the British area as controlled by
plate tectonic motions has resulted in the deposition of
a wide range of sedimentary facies during the
Neoproterozoic and Phanerozoic (from 1000Ma to
2.6Ma)
NB: This key idea is intended to provide "snapshots" of the geological past to
develop an appreciation of the global plate tectonic controls underlying regional
geology and to increase understanding of changing plate environments within and
beyond the British area. Detailed stratigraphical development is not required.
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
a. Sedimentary rocks deposited in Britain Interpretation of maps, fossils, sedimentary
are related to the interplay of global rocks and structures to evaluate the evidence
plate tectonics and associated climatic for changing depositional with particular
changes: reference to:
1. Neoproterozoic. The break-up of 1. an evaluation of the “Snowball Earth”
the super-continent, Rodinia. Link to hypothesis with evidence from Britain:
the cooling of the global climate diamictites of the Port Askaig
around 700 Ma. formation; rapid evolution of primitive
2. Early Palaeozoic. Northern and life in the Ediacaran fauna – Charnia.
southern parts of Britain in different 2. shallow seas: Cambrian and Silurian
continents separated by the Iapetus sandstones, shales and limestones
Ocean. Deep and shallow marine with shallow water fossil assemblages
environments. including corals, brachiopods,
3. Mid Palaeozoic. Caledonian trilobites; deep seas: Ordovician black
Orogeny and fusion of Euramerica. graptolitic shales and turbidites.
4. Late Palaeozoic. Britain drifted 3. continental red beds: Devonian
north across the equator with sandstones; breccias; conglomerates;
possible destruction of a tract of mudstones.
oceanic lithosphere during the 4. equatorial rain forest conditions:
Variscan Orogeny. Carboniferous coal measures with
5. Early Mesozoic. Separation of sandstones, shale, freshwater
Laurasia and Gondwana by the bivalves and plant remains. Coal
Tethys ocean in southern Europe. seams and seat-earths with rootlets.
Rifting and subsidence in the North 5. continental red beds and evaporites.
Sea area related to the opening of Permo-Triassic - semi-arid and desert
the Atlantic Ocean. terrestrial; hypersaline marine
6. Late Mesozoic. During the deposits; Jurassic shallow marine
Cretaceous, continued opening of shelf deposits.
the Atlantic and continued 6. open marine Cretaceous chalk
subsidence of the North Sea area. deposits recording a period of high
7. Cenozoic. Formation of the Alps global temperatures and sea levels.
with related tectonic uplift in the 7. shallow and non-marine Paleogene
British area. Ongoing subsidence in deposits recording transgressive-
North Sea area. regressive cycles.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 49
Option T5: GEOLOGY OF THE LITHOSPHERE
Key Idea 1: The Earth’s heat loss leads to cooling and the
development of a strong outer shell (lithosphere)
underlain by a layer of lower strength
(asthenosphere)
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
a. The Earth loses heat through its Graphical comparison of continental and
surface, leading to the formation of a oceanic geotherms with the mantle solidus
cold, rigid outer layer known as the curve to explain lithosphere/asthenosphere
lithosphere: surface heat flow and distinction.
temperature variation with depth, rock
strength related to temperature.
b. The base of the lithosphere is defined
as the 1300 oC isotherm; lithospheric
thickness differs between continents
and oceans.
c. Global seismology provides evidence Ray path modelling to show refraction of
for the distinction between lithosphere earthquake body waves through low velocity
and asthenosphere: seismic low zone.
velocity zone in upper mantle.
Interpretation of P- and S- wave velocity-
depth curves and identification of low
velocity zone.
d. The crust is a surface layer of Simple interpretation of seismic refraction
distinctive composition at the top of the data to define crustal layering and reflection
lithosphere: seismological estimates of data to investigate the internal structure of
crustal thickness; Mohorovičić the crust.
discontinuity (Moho).
e. The generation of magma in different Interpretation of heat flow variation across
geological settings results in a range of an ocean basin.
igneous bodies and products: oceanic
ridge systems (including mid-ocean Evaluation of the evidence for the existence
ridge basalts (MORBs)), large igneous of mantle plumes.
provinces (LIPs), island arcs and
cordilleran mountain belts.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 50
Option T5: GEOLOGY OF THE LITHOSPHERE
Key Idea 2: Oceanic lithosphere is formed at divergent plate
boundaries and reabsorbed by subduction at
convergent plate boundaries
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
a. The ocean crust has a layered Geological interpretation of seismic layers 1,
structure: seismic layers 1, 2 and 3. 2 and 3 (sediments, pillow lavas, sheeted
dykes and gabbro) using evidence from
ophiolites and ocean drilling.
b. Ophiolites and ocean drilling provide Investigation of an ophiolite complex.
evidence for the origin and composition
of the oceanic crust and upper mantle.
c. Ocean basin evolution can be traced Analysis of the evidence for ocean growth
from continental rifts through narrow and destruction as a cyclic event.
seas to mature ocean basins: the J.
Tuzo Wilson cycle.
d. Rates and directions of seafloor Interpretation of ocean magnetic anomaly
spreading may be calculated from the profiles and maps and ocean floor age
dating of oceanic crust and from the distribution maps; calculation of rates of
patterns of ocean magnetic anomalies seafloor spreading from magnetic anomaly
caused by field reversals: use of and mantle plume (hotspot) data – plumes
radiometric dating and ocean drilling to as frames of reference for absolute plate
date magnetic anomalies. movements.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 51
Option T5: GEOLOGY OF THE LITHOSPHERE
Key Idea 3: A wide range of lithospheric processes contributes to
the formation of continental crust
Knowledge and understanding Geological techniques and skills
a. Supercontinents have assembled and Investigation of the concept of a
dispersed multiple times in the geologic supercontinent and the limitation in evidence
past and takes place in cycles on a beyond 200 Ma.
global scale: e.g. Rodinia, Pangea.
b. Being of relatively low density, Investigation of the age distribution of rocks
continental lithosphere resists in continental areas using geological maps.
subduction and tends to avoid
destruction during plate tectonic cycles,
hence the Earth's oldest crustal rocks
are found in continental areas.
c. Orogenic belts are sites of major Identification of large scale features of
lithospheric thickening. continental geology and interpretation of
• continent- continent collision. their origin and tectonic setting.
• continent-island arc collision.
• cordilleran mountain belts. Investigation of isostasy in continental and
• incorporation of oceanic lithosphere oceanic lithosphere.
into orogenic belts; ophiolites and
accretionary prisms.
• partial melting and granite.
• magmatism; delamination.
• isostatic uplift and gravitational
collapse.
d. Forces acting on the continental crust Field interpretation of folds and faults in
(plate boundary forces and terms of applied stresses, and their
gravitational spreading) give rise to relationship to the regional structural setting.
tectonic stresses that cause brittle and
ductile deformation on all scales in
crustal rocks.
e. Regional structures.
• fold and thrust belts.
• nappe structures occur in
compressive tectonic settings and
may include large-scale
recumbent folds together with
shearing along low angle, thrust
faults.
f. Major sedimentary basins are Investigation of the origin and structural
controlled by lithospheric extension control of major sedimentary basins using
(extensional basins) and lithospheric maps and sections.
loading (foreland basins).
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL GEOLOGY 52