
1. abortion
2. voluntary euthanasia
Issues for analysis and evaluation will be drawn from any aspect of the content above, such as:
• The degree to which human law should be influenced by Aquinas’ Natural Law.
• The extent to which the absolutist and/or deontological nature of Aquinas’ Natural Law works in
contemporary society.
• The strengths and weaknesses of Aquinas’ Natural Law.
• A consideration of whether Aquinas’ Natural Law promotes injustice.
• The effectiveness of Aquinas’ Natural Law in dealing with ethical issues.
• The extent to which Aquinas’ Natural Law is meaningless without a belief in a creator God.
A LEVEL RELIGIOUS STUDIES 68
Component 3: Religion and Ethics
Theme 2: Deontological Ethics
This theme considers how the study of ethics has, over time, influenced and been influenced
by developments in religious beliefs and practices and the philosophy of religion.
Knowledge and understanding of religion and belief
D. John Finnis’ development of Natural Law:
Development of the seven basic human goods (life, knowledge, friendship, play, aesthetic
experience, practical reasonableness and religion); distinction between theoretical / practical
reason; Nine Requirements of Practical Reason (view life as a whole, no arbitrary preference
amongst values (goods), basic goods apply equally to all, do not become obsessed with a
particular project, use effort to improve, plan your actions to do the most good, never harm a basic
good, foster common good in the community and act in your own conscience and authority); the
common good and the need for authority.
E. Bernard Hoose's overview of the Proportionalist debate:
As a hybrid of Natural Law, a deontological / teleological ethic; a Proportionalist maxim (‘it is never
right to go against a principle unless there is a proportionate reason which would justify it’);
distinction between an evil moral act (an immoral act) and pre-moral/ontic evil; distinction between
a good act (an act that follows the moral rule) and a right act (an act that is not necessarily a good
act, but creates the lesser of two evils); proportionality based on agape.
F. Finnis’ Natural Law and Proportionalism: application of the theory:
The application of Finnis’ Natural Law and Proportionalism to both of the issues listed below:
1. immigration
2. capital punishment
Issues for analysis and evaluation will be drawn from any aspect of the content above, such as:
• Whether Finnis’ Natural Law is acceptable in contemporary society.
• The extent to which Proportionalism promotes immoral behaviour.
• Whether Finnis and/or Proportionalism provide a basis for moral decision making for believers
and/or non-believers.
• The strengths and weaknesses of Finnis’ Natural Law and/or Proportionalism.
• The effectiveness of Finnis’ Natural Law and/or Proportionalism in dealing with ethical issues.
• The extent to which Finnis’ Natural Law is a better ethic than Proportionalism or vice versa.
A LEVEL RELIGIOUS STUDIES 69
Component 3: Religion and Ethics
Theme 3: Teleological ethics
This theme considers how the study of ethics has, over time, influenced and been influenced
by developments in religious beliefs and practices and the philosophy of religion.
Knowledge and understanding of religion and belief
A. Joseph Fletcher’s Situation Ethics - his rejection of other forms of ethics and his
acceptance of agape as the basis of morality:
Fletcher’s rejection of other approaches within ethics: legalism, antinomianism and the role of
conscience; Fletcher’s rationale for using the religious concept of 'agape' (selfless love) as the
'middle way' between the extremes of legalism and antinomianism; the biblical evidence used to
support this approach: the teachings of Jesus (Luke 10:25:37) and St Paul (1 Corinthians 13).
Situation Ethics as a form of moral relativism, a consequentialist and teleological theory.
B. Fletcher's Situation Ethics - the principles as a means of assessing morality:
The boss principle of Situation Ethics (following the concept of agape); the four working principles
(pragmatism, relativism, positivism and personalism); the six fundamental principles (love is the
only good, love is the ruling norm of Christianity, love equals justice, love for all, loving ends justify
the means and love decides situationally).
C. Fletcher’s Situation Ethics - application of theory:
The application of Fletcher’s Situation Ethics to both of the issues listed below:
1. homosexual relationships
2. polyamorous relationships
Issues for analysis and evaluation will be drawn from any aspect of the content above, such as:
• The degree to which agape is the only intrinsic good.
• Whether Fletchers’ Situation Ethics promotes immoral behaviour.
• The extent to which Situation Ethics promotes justice.
• The effectiveness of Situation Ethics in dealing with ethical issues.
• Whether agape should replace religious rules.
• The extent to which Situation Ethics provides a practical basis for making moral decisions for
both religious believers and non-believers.
A LEVEL RELIGIOUS STUDIES 70
Component 3: Religion and Ethics
Theme 3: Teleological ethics
Knowledge and understanding of religion and belief
D. Classical Utilitarianism - Jeremy Bentham’s Act Utilitarianism: happiness as the basis of
morality:
Bentham's theory of 'utility' or 'usefulness'; ultimate aim is to pursue pleasure and avoid pain;
principle of utility ('the greatest happiness for the greatest number'). The hedonic calculus as a
means of measuring pleasure in each unique moral situation; by considering seven factors:
intensity, duration, certainty, remoteness, fecundity, purity and extent. Act Utilitarianism as a form
of moral relativism, a consequentialist and teleological theory.
E. John Stuart Mill's development of Utilitarianism: types of pleasure, the harm principle and
the use of rules:
Mill's idea that not all pleasure is the same: ‘higher pleasures’ (intellectual) are superior to ‘lower
pleasures’ (basic physical pleasure); the ‘Harm Principle’: the actions of individuals should be
limited to prevent harm to other individuals; not all actions need to be morally assessed as actions
are morally right if they conform to a historical rule that has demonstrated that it fulfils the principle
of utility (now known as ‘Rule’ Utilitarianism). Mill’s Utilitarianism as a teleological/deontological
hybrid.
F. Bentham’s Act Utilitarianism and Mill’s Rule Utilitarianism - application of the theory:
The application of Bentham’s Act Utilitarianism and Mill’s Rule Utilitarianism to both of the issues
listed below:
1. animal experimentation for medical research
2. the use of nuclear weapons as a deterrent
Issues for analysis and evaluation will be drawn from any aspect of the content above, such as:
• The degree to which pleasure can be seen as the sole intrinsic good.
• The extent to which Act and/or Rule Utilitarianism works in contemporary society.
• The extent to which Rule Utilitarianism provides a better basis for making moral decisions than
Act Utilitarianism.
• Whether Utilitarianism promotes immoral behaviour.
• The extent to which Utilitarianism promotes justice.
• The extent to which Utilitarianism provides a practical basis for making moral decisions for both
religious believers and non-believers.
A LEVEL RELIGIOUS STUDIES 71
Component 3: Religion and Ethics
Theme 4: Determinism and Free will – Determinism
This theme considers how the study of ethics has, over time, influenced and been influenced
by developments in religious beliefs and practices and the philosophy of religion.
Knowledge and understanding of religion and belief
A. Religious concepts of predestination, with reference to the teachings of:
St Augustine:
Doctrine of Original Sin: role of concupiscence, humanity as "a lump of sin" (massa peccati), an
essentially 'free' human nature (liberum abitrium), the loss of human liberty (libertas) to our sinful
nature, God's grace and atonement for the Elect / Saints.
John Calvin:
Doctrine of Election: the absolute power of God, the corrupted nature of humans, the Elect and the
Reprobates, unconditional election, limited atonement, irresistible grace and perseverance of the
elect.
B. Concepts of determinism:
Hard determinism: philosophical (John Locke - free will is an illusion, man in bedroom illustration),
scientific (biological determinism - human behaviour is controlled by an individual's genes),
psychological (Ivan Pavlov - classical conditioning).
Soft determinism: Thomas Hobbes (internal and external causes), A.J. Ayer (caused acts v forced
acts).
C. The implications of predestination / determinism:
The implications of determinism (hard and soft) on moral responsibility: the worth of human ideas of
rightness, wrongness and moral value, the value in blaming moral agents for immoral acts, the
usefulness of normative ethics.
The implications of predestination on religious belief: the link between God and evil, the implications
for God’s omnipotence and omnibenevolence, the use of prayer and the existence of miracles.
Issues for analysis and evaluation will be drawn from any aspect of the content above, such as:
• A consideration of whether religious believers should accept predestination.
• The extent to which God predestines humanity.
• The extent to which philosophical, scientific and/or psychological determinism illustrate that
humanity has no free will.
• Strengths and weaknesses of Hard and/or Soft Determinism.
• Whether moral responsibility is an illusion.
• The extent to which predestination influences our understanding of God.
A LEVEL RELIGIOUS STUDIES 72
Component 3: Religion and Ethics
Theme 4: Determinism and Free will – Free will
This theme considers how the study of ethics has, over time, influenced and been influenced
by developments in religious beliefs and practices and the philosophy of religion.
Knowledge and understanding of religion and belief
D. Religious concepts of free will, with reference to the teachings of:
Pelagius:
The role of original sin, humanity maturing in God’s image and accepting the responsibility of free
will, free will as used to follow God’s laws, the role of grace in salvation.
Arminius:
Denial of the Calvinist view of predestination, the effect of original sin on free will, God's
'prevenient' grace (the Holy Spirit) in allowing humans to exercise free will, the Elect and the
possibility of rejecting God's grace, the election of believers being conditional on faith.
E. Concepts of libertarianism:
Philosophical (Jean Paul Sartre: man is not free not to be free, waiter illustration), scientific
(Angela Sirigu's research evidence that the brain allows for free will), psychological (Carl Rogers:
humanist approach, self-actualisation).
F. The implications of libertarianism and free will:
The implications of libertarianism on moral responsibility: the worth of human ideas of rightness,
wrongness and moral value, the value in blaming moral agents for immoral acts, the usefulness of
normative ethics.
The implications of free will on religious belief: the link between God and evil, the implications for
God’s omnipotence and omnibenevolence, the use of prayer and the existence of miracles.
Issues for analysis and evaluation will be drawn from any aspect of the content above, such as:
• How convincing are religious views on free will.
• The extent to which an individual has free choice.
• The extent to which philosophical, scientific and/or psychological views on libertarianism
inevitably lead people to accept libertarianism.
• The extent to which free moral agents should follow a normative ethic.
• The degree to which free will makes the use of prayer irrelevant.
• The degree to which beliefs about free will can be reconciled with beliefs about predestination.
A LEVEL RELIGIOUS STUDIES 73
3 ASSESSMENT
3.1 Assessment objectives and weightings
Below are the assessment objectives for this specification. Learners must
demonstrate their ability to:
AO1
Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of religion and belief, including:
• religious, philosophical and/or ethical thought and teaching
• influence of beliefs, teachings and practices on individuals, communities and
societies
• cause and significance of similarities and differences in belief, teaching and
practice
• approaches to the study of religion and belief.
AO2
Analyse and evaluate aspects of, and approaches to, religion and belief, including
their significance, influence and study.
The table below shows the weighting of each assessment objective for each
component and for the qualification as a whole.
AO1 AO2
Component 1 13⅓% 20%
Component 2 13⅓% 20%
Component 3 13⅓% 20%
Overall weighting 40% 60%
A LEVEL RELIGIOUS STUDIES 74
4 TECHNICAL INFORMATION
4.1 Making entries
This is a linear qualification in which all assessments must be taken at the end of the
course. Assessment opportunities will be available in May/June each year, until the
end of the life of this specification. Summer 2018 will be the first assessment
opportunity.
A qualification may be taken more than once. Candidates must resit all examination
components in the same series.
The entry codes appear below.
Qualification title Route Entry codes
Route A - including Component 1 Option A: Christianity A120PA
Route B - including Component 1 Option B: Islam A120PB
WJEC Eduqas
Route C - including Component 1 Option C: Judaism A120PC
A level Religious
Route D - including Component 1 Option D: Buddhism A120PD
Studies
Route E - including Component 1 Option E: Hinduism A120PE
Route F - including Component 1 Option F: Sikhism A120PF
The current edition of our Entry Procedures and Coding Information gives up-to-date
entry procedures.
4.2 Grading, awarding and reporting
A level qualifications are reported as a grade from A* to E. Results not attaining the
minimum standard for the award will be reported as U (unclassified).
WJEC Eduqas A level Religious Studies specification from 2016/LG
17.03.2016
