
1. Federico García Lorca: La casa de Bernarda Alba
A play (1936)
2. Fernando Fernán-Gómez: Las bicicletas son para el verano
A play (1984)
3. Laura Esquivel: Como agua para chocolate
A novel (1989)
4. Luis de Castresana: El otro árbol de Guernica
A novel (1967)
5. Gabriel García Márquez: El coronel no tiene quien le escriba
A novel (1961)
6. Ramón Sender: Réquiem por un campesino español
A novel (1953)
Film
7. Guillermo del Toro: El laberinto del fauno
Feature film (2006)
8. Pedro Almodóvar: Mujeres al borde de un ataque de nervios
Feature film (1988)
9. Joshua Marston: María, llena eres de gracia
Feature film (2004)
10. Emilio Martínez Lázaro: Las trece rosas
Feature film (2007)
11. Miguel Courtois: El Lobo
Feature film (2006)
12. Enrique Urbizu: La caja 507
Feature film (2002)
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL SPANISH 12
3 ASSESSMENT
3.1 Assessment objectives and weightings
Below are the assessment objectives for this specification. Learners must
demonstrate their ability to:
AO1
46T
Understand and respond:
 in speech to spoken language including face-to-face interaction
 in writing to spoken language drawn from a variety of sources
AO2
46T
Understand and respond:
 in speech to written language drawn from a variety of sources
 in writing to written language drawn from a variety of sources
AO3
46T
Manipulate the language accurately, in spoken and written forms, using a range of
lexis and structure
AO4
46T
Show knowledge and understanding of, and respond critically and analytically to,
different aspects of the culture and society of countries/communities where the
language is spoken
The table below shows the weighting of each assessment objective for each
component and for the qualification as a whole.
AO1 AO2 AO3 AO4 Total
Component 1
5% 5% 10% 10% 30%
Speaking
Component 2
Listening,
15% 25% 10% - 50%
Reading and
Translation
Component 3
Critical and analytical - - 10% 10% 20%
response in writing
Total 20% 30% 30% 20% 100%
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL SPANISH 13
3.2 Arrangements for non-exam assessment
Non-exam assessment accounts for 30% of this A level. The following are general
guidelines for the conduct of Component 1: Speaking. All non-exam assessment
must be conducted under controlled conditions as outlined below, and in accordance
with regulatory requirements.
Learners are not permitted to use dictionaries in any part of the assessment.
Task setting and format of the assessment
In preparation for the speaking assessment the learner will have undertaken an
independent research project (see section 2.1 for full details). The task related to the
theme-based stimulus card will be set by WJEC, but the candidate will have a choice
from two cards. The speaking assessment will be conducted at centres by a visiting
examiner appointed by WJEC. He/she will conduct and mark the assessment which
will be digitally recorded.
During preparation for the speaking assessment candidates must complete the
independent research pro-forma providing the title of their research project and
outlining up to 10 key points in English. The form can be downloaded from the
subject page on the Eduqas website. The purpose of the pro-forma is to provide the
visiting examiner with some prior information about the candidate's chosen
independent research project. The pro-forma will be sent by the centre to the visiting
examiner at least three weeks before the beginning of the assessment period in
April. In order to ensure that the pro-forma is sufficiently informative for the visiting
examiner, the candidate's teacher may assist with its completion. The pro-forma itself
will not be assessed. The candidate may bring a copy of the pro-forma to the
speaking assessment which he/she can use as a prompt if necessary for the
presentation and discussion. The pro-forma is an aid to memory only and will not
provide linguistic support in Spanish. Further guidance for the completion of the
independent research project pro-forma can be found on page 18 of this
specification.
Learners are not permitted to choose for their independent research project any of
the literary works or films which they have studied for their written assessment in
Component 3.
The assessment will comprise the following tasks;
Task 1 - Presentation and discussion on candidate's independent research
project
(a) Each candidate will give a spoken presentation in Spanish of an independent
research project, selected by the candidate. The presentation will last 2
minutes. If the presentation lasts longer than the allocated time the visiting
examiner will interrupt the candidate with a question related to the
independent research project. This will indicate the beginning of the
discussion. There are no additional marks available for a presentation which
extends beyond 2 minutes.
(b) A discussion in Spanish comprising responses by the candidate to questions
relating to their independent research project. The questions will be set and
asked by the visiting examiner. The discussion will last 9-10 minutes
maximum.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL SPANISH 14
After Task 1 has been completed the candidate will be given 5 minutes
preparation time in the examination room with the visiting examiner to prepare
for Task 2 – the theme-based discussion.
Task 2 - Theme-based discussion
A discussion in Spanish based on a stimulus card containing an image with related
text on one of the sub-themes, as set out in this A level specification (see section 2).
The visiting examiner will offer the candidate two stimulus cards. The candidate must
pick one of these cards and he / she will then prepare the discussion point on that
stimulus card during the allocated preparation time.
At the end of the 5 minutes preparation time the visiting examiner will initiate a
discussion with the candidate based on the stimulus card he/she has prepared. After
the candidate has responded to the discussion point on the card, the visiting examiner
will then ask the candidate one further question. This supplementary question will be
unseen.
At the start of the discussion, candidates must make reference to information in
the stimulus text, to show the examiner that they have understood that material.
During the discussion based on themes Being a young person in Spanish-
speaking society, Understanding the Spanish-speaking world and Diversity and
difference, candidates can talk about Spain or Spanish-speaking
countries/communities, depending on the context in which they have studied the
theme or sub-theme. This instruction will be stated on the front of the stimulus
card. The discussion based on the theme, The two Spains: 1936 onwards, will be
limited to Spain only.
The candidate will be required to ask the visiting examiner at least two questions.
Should the candidate omit to ask any questions during the assessment, the
visiting examiner will ask the candidate in Spanish whether he/she has any
questions to ask. If there is time within the discussion, the examiner will explore
other points related to the sub-theme. The examiner will also follow up points
raised by the candidate during the discussion.
Task taking
The speaking assessments will take place during a five-week period between April
and May. The visiting examiner will contact centres directly to arrange a visit to
conduct the assessment. The visiting examiner will take dates of school holidays
during this period into account when arranging a visit. However, centres should bear
in mind that the visiting examiner will have many centres to examine and in order to
help the visiting examiner and to be fair to all, centres must be flexible with dates.
The visiting examiner will bring a full set of cards with him/her to the centre.
On the day(s) when the assessment is conducted, each candidate will arrive at the
appointed time for the speaking assessment with the visiting examiner. There will be
no formal preparation time before the assessment begins.
If the candidate has chosen to use a copy of the independent research project pro-
forma as an aid to memory, he/she will show it to the visiting examiner before the
assessment begins. This is to ensure that the copy only contains notes in English. A
copy of a pro-forma found to contain notes in Spanish will be retained by the visiting
examiner and the candidate will not have access to it during the assessment. The
assessment will commence with the candidate's presentation of the independent
research project which will last a maximum of 2 minutes. This will then be followed by
a discussion with the visiting examiner based on the project lasting 9-10 minutes
maximum. At the end of the discussion on the presentation, if a copy of the pro-forma
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL SPANISH 15
has been used by the candidate it will be handed to the visiting examiner. The visiting
examiner will then show the candidate two theme-based stimulus cards. The
candidate will choose which card he/she would like to prepare. The candidate will
then be given 5 minutes preparation time in the examination room with the visiting
examiner. During the preparation time the candidate may, if he/she wishes, make
notes in Spanish or English on a separate piece of paper, not on the card. The
candidate may refer to these notes during the assessment of the theme based
stimulus card. The notes are an aid to memory and must not constitute whole
sentences or a complete text. Reading out whole sentences or a complete text will
have a detrimental effect on a candidate's spontaneity.
The candidate will hand the notes to the visiting examiner at the end of the
assessment. The visiting examiner will keep the notes and any copy of the pro-forma
used by the candidate until the end of the Enquiry about Results period.
Timings for each part of the assessment must be adhered to. Any speaking evidence
which exceeds these timings will not be marked.
Teachers should make candidates aware that they will not be penalised by the
visiting examiner if they make use of any of the following skills during the speaking
assessment:
 adjusting the message
 circumlocution
 self-correction
 repair strategies.
Conduct of the assessment
Candidates will be allowed only one attempt at the assessment. Once the recording
begins it cannot be paused or stopped during the assessment of either Task 1 or
Task 2. The visiting examiner will, however, pause the recording during the 5 minutes
preparation time allocated to the candidate prior to the assessment of Task 2. The
recording will start again when Task 2 commences. The only circumstances in which
a candidate can be re-tested are if there is a technical malfunction during the
assessment (so that, for example, the assessment has not been recorded or is
inaudible) or an incident occurs beyond the visiting examiner's control which prevents
the completion of the assessment. In any such circumstance the visiting examiner
will inform WJEC immediately and inform the examinations’ officer at the centre.
Audio recordings rather than video recordings are specified because the assessment
is only of candidates’ proficiency in the language (as well as knowledge and
understanding of the themes), not of their presentation skills.
Centres will need to keep a record of the examining schedule including dates when
the assessments are conducted.
The visiting examiner will make every effort to meet all candidates in a group before
the individual assessments, in order to put them at their ease. The visiting examiner
will introduce him/herself, speak a little in Spanish to familiarise candidates with
his/her voice, talk to them informally and answer any preliminary questions that might
arise.
Speaking assessment grids are provided in the sample assessment materials
produced by WJEC.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL SPANISH 16
Authentication
It is important that non-exam assessment is rigorously monitored by centres to
ensure that candidates’ work is their own.
Centres could monitor in a number of ways, for example:
 careful record-keeping of the progress of the learner’s work
 careful consideration of whether the work prepared is characteristic of the
learner’s ability
 keeping any preparatory work securely locked in a cabinet or cupboard.
All candidates are required to sign a statement endorsing the originality of their research
and confirming that their preparation for the independent research project is their own.
Teachers will be required to countersign the candidate's pro-forma, declaring that the
research and preparation that has been undertaken by the named candidate for Task 1
of Component 1 is indeed the candidate's own work. The non-exam assessment
sheets can be downloaded from the subject page at www.eduqas.co.uk. Validity can
23TU U23T
be further enhanced by careful attention to the following points.
Acknowledgements
Reference to approximately 5 sources must be clearly acknowledged on the non-
exam pro-forma. (See Appendix B.)
Preparation of the Independent Research Project
The independent research project requires learners to develop research skills in
Spanish and to identify a key topic or subject which they would like to study for Task
1 of the speaking assessment. Learners are required to select relevant information
from a range of authentic sources which they will then use, as appropriate, to
illustrate their knowledge and understanding of their research project through oral
presentation and discussion.
The A Level Content Advisory Board for Modern Foreign Languages has drawn up
the following list as examples of topic areas for the independent research project in
Spanish:
 A historical event or building such as: ‘el golpe de estado chileno’ (the Chilean
coup d’état) or la Alhambra
 A person or group such as Eva Perón, Augusto Pinochet, Hugo Chávez, Che
Guevara, Violeta Parra or Víctor Jara
 An issue such as ‘el sistema de autonomías en España’ (the system of devolved
government in Spain) or ‘la narcoguerra mexicana’ (the Mexican drug war)
 A case study such as ‘el síndrome tóxico en España de 1981’ (the Spanish
“cooking oil scandal” of 1981), ‘el Caso Nani’ (the Nani case), ‘los atentados del
11-M’ (the terrorist attacks at Atocha station on 11 March 2004)
 A topic related to a personal interest such as ‘Real Madrid y la décima copa de
Europa’ (Real Madrid and their 10th European Cup) or ‘la moda española’
(Spanish fashion)
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL SPANISH 17
Learners should be advised to avoid choosing a research topic which is too
descriptive. Indeed, learners need to select a research topic which provides them
with scope to use their analytical skills and also provides opportunities to put forward
their own viewpoints and arguments during the discussion part of the assessment.
Candidates will be assessed on two assessment objectives for their presentation:
AO2 which requires candidates to show their understanding based on information
drawn from a variety of sources; and AO4 which requires candidates to show
knowledge and understanding of different aspects of the culture and society of
countries / communities where the language is spoken.
Learners may choose a topic for their independent research project linked to one of
the themes or sub-themes listed on page 6 of the specification. However, the
independent research project also gives learners the opportunity to study an area or
theme not otherwise covered by the specification. Learners must, however, ensure
that the topic they have chosen relates to a country or countries where Spanish is
spoken.
If teachers are in any doubt about the topic a learner has chosen for the independent
research project, then it is always possible to contact the Subject Officer at WJEC for
further guidance.
Controls relating to the guidance teachers give to learners in preparation for
the independent research project
Teachers may give guidance on
 selecting a topic for the independent research project
 research skills, such as referencing research findings and using a
bibliography
 the suitability of a selected area of research and the extent to which it will or
will not meet the assessment criteria
 sources of information, including but not limited to the internet, particularly
noting the importance of using authentic sources and materials
 the marking criteria used to assess the work and the assessment objectives
 progress of research using milestones or deadlines
 completing the independent research project pro-forma.
Teachers must ensure that
 the topic of each independent research project meets the requirements of the
specification and is appropriate
 the research topics relate to the countries or communities where Spanish is
spoken
 the topic of the individual research project does not include a literary work and
film that the learner has studied for Component 3
 all individual research projects are distinctly different from each other (See
page 8.)
 the independent research project pro-forma is signed before the examination
to confirm that the work is the candidate's own.
Teachers must not
 provide the learner with specific source material or related extracts
 give feedback or guidance orally or in writing on any drafts produced in
preparation for the presentation
 give feedback or guidance orally or in writing on a practice presentation.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL SPANISH 18
Completion of the Independent Research Project Pro-forma
The independent research pro-forma is not assessed and a teacher may therefore
assist learners with its completion before it is sent to the visiting examiner three
weeks before the speaking assessment takes place.
The independent research project pro-forma must include:
 the candidate's name and candidate number
 the candidate's signature with the date
 the centre name and number
 the teacher's name
 the teacher's signature with the date
 the title of the independent research project
 up to 10 key points of the independent project in bullet form and in ENGLISH
 approximately 5 sources, including full title and the date of each source where
applicable
 title of the literary work(s) and/or film studied for Component 3.
Research Methods
Sources should be authentic and in Spanish. They could include sources such as:
newspaper and magazine articles, online sources, reports, literary texts, films,
television, radio, interviews etc. Approximately 5 researched sources must be
referenced on the independent research study pro-forma, Appendix B.
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL SPANISH 19
4 TECHNICAL INFORMATION
4.1 Making entries
This is a linear qualification in which all assessments must be taken at the end of the
course. Assessment opportunities will be available in May/June each year, until the
end of the life of this specification. Summer 2018 will be the first assessment
opportunity.
A qualification may be taken more than once. Candidates must resit all examination
components in the same series.
Marks for NEA may be carried forward for the life of the specification. If a candidate
resits an NEA component (rather than carrying forward the previous NEA mark), it is
the new mark that will count towards the overall grade, even if it is lower than a
previous attempt.
Where a candidate has certificated on two or more previous occasions, the most
recent NEA mark is carried forward, regardless of whether that mark is higher or
lower (unless that mark is absent)
The entry code appears below.
WJEC Eduqas A level Spanish: A810QS
The current edition of our Entry Procedures and Coding Information gives up-to-date
entry procedures.
4.2 Grading, awarding and reporting
A level qualifications are reported as a grade from A* to E. Results not attaining the
minimum standard for the award will be reported as U (unclassified).
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL SPANISH 20
APPENDIX A
Grammatical content, appropriate to Spanish
Learners will be expected to have studied the grammatical system and structures of the
language during their course. Knowledge of the grammar and structures specified for GCSE
is assumed.
In the examination learners will be required to use, actively and accurately, grammar and
structures appropriate to the tasks set, drawn from the following lists. The mention of an item
in these lists implies knowledge of both its forms and its functions at an appropriate level of
accuracy and complexity.
The examples in italics in parentheses are indicative; that is, they serve to illustrate the part
of speech or structure that the candidate must know and hence do not represent an
exhaustive specification of the required grammatical knowledge. For items marked (R),
receptive knowledge only is required.
Nouns
Gender
Singular and plural forms
Plural of male/female pairs (e.g. los Reyes)
Affective suffixes (R)
Articles
Definite and indefinite
El with feminine nouns beginning with stressed a (el agua)
Lo + adjective
Adjectives
Agreement
Position
Apocopation (e.g. gran, buen, mal, primer)
Comparative and superlative (e.g. más fuerte; mejor, peor, mayor, menor)
Use of adjectives as nouns (e.g. una triste, la roja, las norteamericanas)
Demonstrative (e.g. este, ese, aquel)
Indefinite (e.g. alguno, cualquiera, otro)
Possessive (weak and strong forms) (e.g. mi / mío)
Interrogative and exclamatory (e.g. ¿cuánto? / ¡cuánto!, etc., including use of
¿qué? / ¡qué!)
Relative (cuyo)
Numerals
Cardinal (e.g. uno, dos)
Ordinal 1-10 (e.g. primero, segundo)
Agreement (e.g. cuatrocientas chicas)
Expression of time and date
Adverbs
Formation of adverbs in -mente
Comparative and superlative (e.g. más despacio)
Use of adjectives as adverbs (e.g. rápido, claro)
Adjectives as equivalents of English adverbs (e.g. Salió contenta)
Interrogative (e.g. ¿cómo?, ¿cuándo?, ¿dónde?)
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL SPANISH 21
Quantifiers/intensifiers
(e.g. muy, bastante, poco, mucho)
Pronouns
Subject
Object: direct and indirect; use of se for le(s); ‘redundant’ use of indirect object (e.g.
Dale un beso a tu papá)
Reflexive
Unstressed / stressed forms (e.g. me / mí)
Position and order
Relative (que, quien, el que, el cual)
Demonstrative (este, ese, aquel; esto, eso, aquello)
Indefinite (e.g. algo, alguien)
Possessive (e.g. el mío, la mía). Expression of possession by the use of the indirect
object pronoun (Le rompió el brazo) must also be included.
Interrogative
Verbs
Regular conjugations of -ar, -er and -ir verbs, including radical-changing (e.g.
recordar / recuerdo, pedir / pido) and orthographic-changing (e.g. abrazar / abracé)
verbs, in all tenses and moods, finite and non-finite forms
Regular and Irregular verbs, in all tenses and moods, finite and non-finite forms
Agreement of verb and subject
Use of hay que in all tenses
Use of tenses
Present
Preterite
Imperfect
Future
Conditional
Perfect
Future perfect
Conditional perfect
Pluperfect
Use of the infinitive, the gerund and the past participle
Verbal paraphrases and their uses. These include but are not limited to the following:
ir a + gerund
estar + gerund
acabar de + infinitive
estar para + infinitive
llevar + gerund
ir + gerund (R)
venir + gerund (R)
Use of the subjunctive
Commands
Conditional sentences
After conjunctions of time
After para que, sin que
In relative clauses
After other subordinating conjunctions
With verbs and verbal expressions of wishing, commanding, influencing,
emotional reaction, doubt, denial, possibility, probability
Sequence of tense in indirect speech and other subordinate clauses
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL SPANISH 22
Voice
Use of the reflexive as a passive (e.g. El puente se construyó para unir a las
comunidades)
Use of the reflexive to express an impersonal subject (e.g. ¿Cómo se llega a
la estación?)
Use of ser + past participle
Use of estar + past participle
‘Nuance’ reflexive verbs (e.g. caerse, pararse)
Modes of address (tú, usted; vos (R))
Constructions with verbs
Verbs followed directly by an infinitive (e.g. querer, poder)
Verbs followed by a preposition plus an inifnitive or noun phrase (e.g. insistir
en, negarse a)
Verbs followed by a gerund (e.g. seguir)
Verbs of perception (e.g. Vi asfaltar la calle)
Uses of ser and estar
Use of the subjunctive
In relative clauses
After other subordinating conjunctions
With verbs and verbal expressions of wishing, commanding, influencing,
emotional reaction, doubt, denial, possibility, probability
Prepositions
All prepositions, both simple (e.g. bajo) and complex (e.g. encima de)
‘Personal’ a
Discrimination of por and para
Conjunctions
Coordinating conjunctions (e.g. y, o, pero)
Subordinating conjunctions. These include but are not limited to the following:
Cause (porque)
Purpose (para que)
Proviso (con tal que)
Supposition (a no ser que)
Time (cuando)
Concession (aunque)
Use of que to introduce a clause (¡Cuidado, que se va a quemar la tortilla!)
Negation
Questions
Commands
Word order
Subject following verb (Ha llegado el profesor; Me gustan las patatas)
Focalisation (Tú ¿qué opinas?; A Cristiano lo odian) (R)
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL SPANISH 23
Other constructions
Time expressions with hace / hacía and desde hace / hacía
Cleft sentences (Fue en Madrid donde nos conocimos)
Comparative constructions. These include but are not limited to the following:
tan... como..., etc.
más... que..., etc.
Tiene más dinero de lo que creía
Indirect speech
Expression of concession other than by aunque (por muy adjective que, por mucho
que) (R)
Discourse markers
(e.g. Es que..., Por ejemplo, Ahora bien...)
Fillers
(e.g. pues, bueno)
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
A LEVEL SPANISH 24
APPENDIX B
A LEVEL SPANISH - COMPONENT 1
Independent Research Project Pro-forma - online version available
Candidate name Candidate Centre name Centre
number number
*I certify that the research and preparation I have undertaken for Component 1 task 1 is my
own work ………………………………………… (*Candidate signature)
Teacher name Teacher signature ** Date
** I declare that the research and preparation that has been undertaken by the named
candidate above for Component 1 task 1 is the candidate’s own work and that no mock oral
has been conducted and/or feedback given on the live IRP.
N.B. A copy of this pro-forma must to be sent to the visiting examiner three weeks
prior to the assessment taking place. The candidate is permitted to bring a copy of
this form with him/her to the assessment provided no extra notes are added.
Title of the independent research project :
Outline of the independent research project : (up to 10 key points in English)
Sources referenced: (approximately 5, to include full title with dates where
applicable)
Component 3 : Name of literary work(s) and / or film studied
Section below to be completed by visiting examiner
Task 2 Card number : Date of assessment :
Visiting examiner’s name……………………………………………………...
Visiting examiner’s signature…………………………………………………
WJEC Eduqas A level Spanish specification from 2016/ED 16/06/16
© WJEC CBAC Ltd.
