Option 10: Crime and punishment in Britain, c1000–present and  Whitechapel, c1870-c1900: crime, policing and the inner city Crime and punishment in Britain, c1000–present The process of change  ● In studying the content defined below in strands 1 and 2, students should understand how key features in the development of crime and punishment were linked with the key features of society in Britain in the periods studied. ● They should develop an understanding of the nature and process of change. This will involve understanding patterns of change, trends and turning points, and the influence of factors inhibiting or encouraging change within periods and across the theme. The key factors are:  o attitudes in society o individuals and institutions (Church and government) o science and technology.  ● They should also understand how factors worked together to bring about particular developments at particular times. ● The selected case studies in strand 3 of each period exemplify, in context, the elements defined in strands 1 and 2. They provide opportunities to explore the operation of the key factors and to make detailed comparisons over time. c1000–c1500: Crime and punishment in medieval England 1 Nature and changing definitions of criminal activity ● Crimes against the person, property and authority, including poaching as an example of ‘social’ crime. ● Changing definitions of crime as a result of the Norman Conquest, including William I’s Forest Laws. 2 The nature of law enforcement and punishment ● The role of the authorities and local communities in law enforcement in Anglo-Saxon, Norman and later medieval England, including tithings, the hue and cry, and the parish constable. ● The emphasis on deterrence and retribution, the use of fines, corporal and capital punishment. The use and end of the Saxon Wergild. 3  Case study  ● The influence of the Church on crime and punishment in the early thirteenth century: the significance of Sanctuary and Benefit of Clergy; the use of trial by ordeal and reasons for its ending. c1500–c1700: Crime and punishment in early modern England 1  Nature and changing definitions of criminal activity ● Continuity and change in the nature of crimes against the person, property and authority, including heresy and treason. ● New definitions of crime in the sixteenth century: vagabondage and witchcraft. 2  The nature of law enforcement and punishment ● The role of the authorities and local communities in law enforcement, including town watchmen. ● The continued use of corporal and capital punishment; the introduction of transportation and the start of the Bloody Code. 3  Case studies ● The Gunpowder Plotters, 1605: their crimes and punishment.  ● Key individual: Matthew Hopkins and the witch-hunts of 1645–47. The reasons for their intensity; the punishment of those convicted.  c1700–c1900: Crime and punishment in eighteenth- and nineteenthcentury Britain 1 Nature and changing definitions of criminal activity ● Continuity and change in the nature of crimes against the person, property and authority, including highway robbery, poaching and smuggling. ● Changing definitions of crime exemplified in the ending of witchcraft prosecutions and treatment of the Tolpuddle Martyrs. 2 The nature of law enforcement and punishment ● The role of the authorities and local communities in law enforcement, including the work of the Fielding brothers. The development of police forces and the beginning of CID. ● Changing views on the purpose of punishment. The use and ending of transportation, public execution and the Bloody Code. Prison reform, including the influence of John Howard and Elizabeth Fry. 3 Case studies ● Pentonville prison in the mid nineteenth century: reasons for its construction; the strengths and weaknesses of the separate system in operation. ● Key individual: Robert Peel – his contribution to penal reform and to the development of the Metropolitan Police Force. c1900–present: Crime and punishment in modern Britain 1 Nature and changing definitions of criminal activity ● Continuity and change in the nature of crimes against the person, property and authority, including new forms of theft and smuggling. ● Changing definitions of crime, including driving offences, race crimes and drug crimes. 2 The nature  of law enforcement and punishment ● The role of the authorities and local communities in law enforcement, including the development of Neighbourhood Watch. Changes within the police force: increasing specialisation, use of science and technology and the move towards prevention. ● The abolition of the death penalty; changes to prisons, including the development of open prisons and specialised treatment of young offenders; the development of non-custodial alternatives to prison.  3 Case studies ● The treatment of Conscientious Objectors in the First and Second World Wars. ● The Derek Bentley case: its significance for the abolition of the death penalty.  Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History 9 Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024  Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 10 Whitechapel, c1870–c1900: crime, policing and the inner city The historic environment 1 Whitechapel, c1870–c1900: crime, policing and the inner city ● The local context of Whitechapel. The problems of housing and overcrowding. Attempts to improve housing: the Peabody Estate. Provision for the poor in the Whitechapel workhouses. Links between the environment and crime. Life in Whitechapel as an inner city area of poverty and discontent.  ● The inhabitants of Whitechapel. The lack of employment opportunities and level of poverty. The prevalence of lodging houses and pubs creating a fluctuating population without ties to the community. The impact of changing patterns of migration: the settlement of migrants from Ireland and Eastern Europe, and the increase in Jewish migration during the 1880s. ● The organisation of policing in Whitechapel. The role of the ‘beat constable’. The work of H division and the difficulties of policing the slum area of Whitechapel, the rookeries, alleys and courts. Problems of policing caused by crime and antisocial behaviour: alcohol, prostitution, protection rackets, gangs, violent demonstrations and attacks on Jewish people.  ● Investigative policing in Whitechapel: developments in techniques of detective investigation, including the use of sketches, photographs and interviews; problems caused by the need for cooperation between the Metropolitan Police, the City of London Police and Scotland Yard. Dealing with the crimes of Jack the Ripper and the added problems caused by the media reporting of the ‘Ripper’ murders. The Whitechapel Vigilance Committee. ● The national and regional context: the working of the Metropolitan Police, the quality of police recruits. The development of CID, the role of the Home Secretary and of Sir Charles Warren, public attitudes towards the police. 2 Knowledge, selection and use of sources for historical enquiries ● Knowledge of local sources relevant to the period and issue, e.g. housing and employment records, council records and census returns, Charles Booth’s survey, workhouse records, local police records, coroners’ reports, photographs and London newspapers. ● Knowledge of national sources relevant to the period and issue, e.g. national newspapers, records of crimes and police investigations, Old Bailey records of trials and Punch cartoons. ● Recognition of the strengths and weaknesses of different types of source for specific enquiries. ● Framing of questions relevant to the pursuit of a specific enquiry. ● Selection of appropriate sources for specific investigations.   Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 11 Option 11: Medicine in Britain, c1250–present  and  The British sector of the Western Front,  1914–18: injuries, treatment and the trenches Medicine in Britain, c1250–present The process of change ● In studying the content defined below in strands 1 and 2, students should understand how key features in the development of medicine were linked with the key features of society in Britain in the periods studied. ● They should develop an understanding of the nature and process of change. This will involve understanding patterns of change, trends and turning points, and the influence of factors inhibiting or encouraging change within periods and across the theme. The key factors are:  o individuals and institutions (Church and government) o science and technology o attitudes in society. ● They should also understand how factors worked together to bring about particular developments at particular times. ● The selected case studies in strand 3 of each period exemplify, in context, the elements defined in strands 1 and 2. They provide opportunities to explore the operation of the key factors and to make detailed comparisons over time. c1250–c1500: Medicine in medieval England 1 Ideas about the cause of disease and illness ● Supernatural and religious explanations of the cause of disease. ● Rational explanations: the Theory of the Four Humours and the miasma theory; the continuing influence in England of Galen. 2 Approaches to prevention and treatment  ● Approaches to prevention and treatment, and their connection with ideas about disease and illness: religious actions, bloodletting and purging, purifying the air.  ● Medical training and traditional approaches to treatment and care for the sick: the role of the physician, apothecary and barber surgeon; the role of hospitals, care within the community and at home, including the use of herbal remedies. 3  Case study  ● Dealing with the Black Death, 1348–49; approaches to treatment and attempts to prevent its spread. c1500–c1700: The Medical Renaissance in England 1 Ideas about the cause of disease and illness ● Continuity and change in explanations of the cause of disease and illness. A scientific approach, including the work of Thomas Sydenham in improving diagnosis. The influence of the printing press and the work of the Royal Society on the transmission of ideas. 2 Approaches to prevention and treatment  ● Continuity and change in approaches to prevention, treatment and care in the community and in hospitals. ● Improvements in medical training and the influence in England of the work of Vesalius.  3 Case studies ● Key individual: William Harvey and the discovery of the circulation of the blood. ● Dealing with the Great Plague in London (1665): approaches to treatment and attempts to prevent its spread. c1700–c1900: Medicine in eighteenth- and nineteenth-century Britain 1 Ideas about the cause of disease and illness ● Continuity and change in explanations of the cause of disease and illness. The influence in Britain of Pasteur’s Germ Theory and Koch’s work on microbes. 2 Approaches to prevention and treatment ● The extent of change in care and treatment: improvements in hospital care and the influence of Nightingale on nursing and hospitals in Britain. The impact of anaesthetics and antiseptics on surgery. ● New approaches to prevention: the development and use of vaccinations and the Public Health Act (1875). 3 Case studies ● Key individual: Jenner and the development of vaccination. ● Fighting Cholera in London (1854); attempts to prevent its spread; the significance of Snow and the Broad Street pump. c1900–present: Medicine in modern Britain 1 Ideas about the cause of disease and illness ● Advances in understanding the causes of illness and disease: the influence of genetic and lifestyle factors on health. ● Improvements in diagnosis: the impact of the availability of blood tests, scans and monitors. 2 Approaches to prevention and treatment  ● The extent of change in care and treatment. The impact of the NHS and science and technology: improved access to care; advances in medicines, including magic bullets and antibiotics; high-tech medical and surgical treatment in hospitals. ● New approaches to prevention: mass vaccinations and government lifestyle campaigns.  3 Case studies  ● Key individuals: Fleming, Florey and Chain’s development of penicillin. ● The fight against lung cancer in the twenty-first century: the use of science and technology in diagnosis and treatment; government action. 12 Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024  Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 13 The British sector of the Western Front, 1914–18: injuries, treatment and the trenches The historic environment  1 The British sector of the Western Front, 1914–18: injuries, treatment and the trenches ● The context of the British sector of Western Front and the theatre of war in Flanders and northern France: the Ypres salient, the Somme, Arras and Cambrai. The trench system - its organisation, including frontline and support trenches. Significance for medical treatment of the nature of the terrain and problems of the transport and communications infrastructure. ● Conditions requiring medical treatment on the Western Front, including the problems of ill health arising from the trench environment. The nature of wounds from rifles and explosives. The problem of shrapnel, wound infection and increased numbers of head injuries. The effects of gas attacks. ● Medical treatment on the Western Front. The work of the RAMC and nurses. Transport in the chain of evacuation: stretcher bearers, horse and motor ambulances. Stages of treatment in the chain of evacuation: aid post and field ambulance, dressing station, casualty clearing station, base hospital. The underground hospital at Arras. ● The significance of the Western Front for experiments in surgery and medicine: new techniques in the treatment of wounds and infection, the Thomas splint, the use of mobile x-ray units, the creation of a blood bank for the Battle of Cambrai. ● The historical context of medicine in the early twentieth century: the understanding of infection and moves towards aseptic surgery; the development of x-rays; blood transfusions and developments in the storage of blood. 2 Knowledge, selection and use of sources for historical enquiries ● Knowledge of national sources relevant to the period and issue, e.g. army records, national newspapers, government reports, medical articles. ● Knowledge of local sources relevant to the period and issue, e.g. personal accounts, photographs, hospital records, army statistics. ● Recognition of the strengths and weaknesses of different types of source for specific enquiries. ● Framing of questions relevant to the pursuit of a specific enquiry. ● Selection of appropriate sources for specific investigations.   Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 14 Option 12: Warfare and British society, c1250–present  and  London and the Second World War, 1939–45 Warfare and British society, c1250–present The process of change ● In studying the content defined below in strands 1 and 2, students should understand how key features in the development of warfare on land were linked with the key features of society in Britain in the periods studied. ● They should develop an understanding of the nature and process of change. This will involve understanding patterns of change, trends and turning points, and the influence of factors inhibiting or encouraging change within periods and across the theme. The key factors are:  o governments and individuals o science, technology and communications o attitudes in society. ● They should also understand how factors worked together to bring about particular developments at particular times. ● The selected case studies in strand 3 of each period exemplify, in context, elements defined in strands 1 and 2. They provide opportunities to explore the operation of the key factors and to make detailed comparisons over time. c1250–c1500: Medieval warfare and English society 1 The nature of warfare ● The composition of the army, including the roles of the infantry, archer and the mounted knight. The link between social structure and army command. ● The impact on warfare (strategy, tactics and combat) of new weapons and formations, including the longbow and schiltrons. The importance of gunpowder and the development of cannon. The decline of the mounted knight. 2 The experience  of war ● The recruitment and training of combatants in the medieval feudal army. ● The impact of war on civilians, including the impact of feudal duties and army plunder on civilian lives. 3  Case studies ● The Battle of Falkirk (1298): reasons for its outcome; the roles of William Wallace and Edward I.  ● The Battle of Agincourt (1415): reasons for its outcome; the role of Henry V.  Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 15  c1500–c1700: Warfare and English society in the early modern period 1  The nature of warfare ● Continuity and change in the composition of the army in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, including the role of the musketeer, pikemen, dragoons and the cavalry. The development of a standing army. ● The impact on warfare of developments in weaponry, including new muskets and pistols. 2  The experience  of war ● The recruitment and training of combatants, including the New Model Army. ● The impact of war on civilians, including recruitment and requisitioning. 3  Case study  ● The Battle of Naseby (1645): reasons for its outcome; the role of Oliver Cromwell. c1700–c1900: Warfare and British society in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries 1 The nature of warfare ● Continuity and change in the composition of the army, including the decline of the cavalry. ● Impact on warfare of changes in weaponry, including the use of rifles and bullets, and the development of field guns and heavy artillery. The impact on warfare of industrialisation, including steampowered transport and the mass production of weapons. 2 The experience  of war ● The recruitment and training of combatants, including Cardwell’s army reforms and professionalisation. ● The impact of war on civilians, including recruitment and requisitioning. The impact on popular attitudes of the growth of newspaper reporting and photography in the nineteenth century, exemplified in the Crimean and Boer Wars. 3 Case studies  ● The Battle of Waterloo (1815): reasons for its outcome; the role of the Duke of Wellington. ● The Battle of Balaclava (1854): reasons for its outcome; the role of Lord Raglan. c1900–present: Warfare and British society in the modern era 1 The nature of warfare ● Continuity and change in the composition of the army, including the growth of a logistics corps and specialised bomb disposal units. ● The impact on warfare of developments in weaponry, transport and surveillance, including machine guns, tanks, chemical and nuclear weapons, the use of radar and aircraft. The impact of computerised high-tech warfare. The increasing use of motor and air transport and aerial support. Dealing with guerrilla warfare in the twenty-first century. 2 The experience  of war ● The recruitment and training of combatants, including the introduction of conscription, national service, the recruitment of women and the development of a professional army. ● The impact of war on civilians, including recruitment and the organisation of a Home Front during the First and Second World Wars and fear of nuclear war post-1945. Attitudes to Conscientious Objectors. The influence of war reporting in the period on attitudes, including increased concern for casualties. Government use of censorship and propaganda in wartime. 3 Case studies ● The Western Front during the First World War and the Battle of the Somme (1916): the nature of trench warfare and war of attrition; reasons for the outcome of the Somme; role of General Haig. ● The Iraq War (2003): reasons for its outcome; use of high-tech weaponry and surveillance techniques.  Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 16 London and the Second World War, 1939–45 The historic environment 1 London and the Second World War, 1939–45 ● The context of London in the Second World War, including its role in national government, significance as a target, importance as a port and industrial centre and its accessibility for German bombers. Preparations for war in London in 1939 and ongoing measures to safeguard the population: implementation of plans for evacuation, provision of Anderson shelters and gas masks. ● The nature of attacks on London. Attacks on the docks and industries of the East End, including Black Saturday (7 September 1940), and the V2 attack on Deptford (1944). Types of bomb used in 1940–41 and 1944–45, the scale of attack and extent of devastation, including problems dealing with incendiaries and V1 and V2 rockets. ● The impact of the Blitz on civilian life in London: air-raid precautions, including the use of underground stations and ‘Mickey’s shelter’; the impact of the South Hallsville School (1940) and Bethnal Green (1943) disasters. The continuance of leisure activities in London, including dancehalls and theatre. The extent of disruption to daily life and work, and government concerns about morale. ● London’s response to the war. The continued presence of the Royal Family and government ministers; the Cabinet War Rooms. The use of public spaces, including Victoria Park and the Tower of London moat, as part of the ‘Dig for Victory’ campaign.  ● The historical context of the Second World War: the nature and purpose of the Blitz. Government use of propaganda and censorship to influence attitudes about the Blitz. 2 Knowledge, selection and use of sources for historical enquiries ● Knowledge of local sources relevant to the period and issue,  e.g. personal accounts and photographs, local newspapers, local council records. ● Knowledge of national sources relevant to the period and issue,  e.g. government records, newspapers, Mass Observation reports, newsreels, memoirs. ● Recognition of the strengths and weaknesses of different types of source for specific enquiries. ● Framing of questions relevant to the pursuit of a specific enquiry. ● Selection of appropriate sources for specific investigations.   Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 17 Option 13: Migrants in Britain, c800–present and  Notting Hill, c1948–c1970 Migrants in Britain, c800–present The process of change ● In studying the content defined below in strands 1 and 2, students should understand how key features in the migration to and within Britain were linked with the key features of society in Britain in the periods studied which drew migrants to Britain. It will be important for students to understand that ‘migrant’ can encompass both voluntary and forced migration, temporary migrants and internal migrants. In covering reasons for migration, the primary focus of teaching should be on what drew migrants to Britain (‘pull’ factors), although students should have some awareness of why migrants left their countries of origin (‘push’ factors). ● They should develop an understanding of the nature and process of change. This will involve understanding patterns of change, trends and turning points, and the influence of factors inhibiting or encouraging change within periods and across the theme. The key factors are:  o institutions (government and Church) o religion o economic influences o attitudes in society.  ● They should also understand how factors worked together to bring about particular developments at particular times. ● The selected case studies in strand 3 of each period exemplify, in context, the elements defined in strands 1 and 2. They provide opportunities to explore the operation of the key factors and to make detailed comparisons over time. c800–c1500: Migration in medieval England 1 The context for migration ● Reasons for migration and patterns of settlement, including Vikings, Normans, Jews and other European traders and craftsmen. ● The context of English society: landownership and the growth of towns; the role of the wool industry; opportunities for migrants; the role the monarchy, including the need for royal finance; England as a part of Christendom. 2 The experience and impact of migrants ● The experience of migrants in England: their relations with the authorities and the existing population, including the legal status of ‘alien’ and the impact of the Black Death. ● The impact of migrants in England, including the Danelaw, culture, trade and the built environment. 3 Case study ● The city of York under the Vikings.  Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 18  c1500–c1700: Migration in early modern England 1 The context for migration ● Change and continuity in reasons for migration and patterns of settlement, including migrants from Europe and Africa.   ● The changing context of English society: changing social structures; economic growth, including the cloth industry and global trading companies; privateering and trade; the emergence of England as a predominantly Protestant nation.  2 The experience and impact of migrants ● The experience of migrants in England: their relations with the authorities and the existing population. ● The impact of migrants in England, including culture, trade, industry and agriculture. 3 Case studies ● Sandwich and Canterbury in the sixteenth century: the experiences of Flemish and Walloon migrants and their role in the local economy.  ● The experience of Huguenots in seventeenth century England.  c1700–c1900: Migration in eighteenth- and nineteenth-century Britain 1 The context for migration ● Change and continuity in reasons for migration and patterns of settlement, including migrants from Ireland, Europe and the Empire. ● The changing context of British society: changing social structures; the Industrial Revolution; urbanisation; transatlantic slavery; the growth of the British Empire; civil liberties. 2 The experience and impact of migrants ● The experience of migrants in Britain: their relations with the authorities and the existing population. The role of the media. ● The impact of migrants in Britain, including culture, trade and industry, politics and the urban environment. 3 Case studies ● Liverpool in the nineteenth century: its role in migration and the experiences of migrants, including Irish migrants.  ● The experience of Jewish migrants in the East End of London in late nineteenth century. c1900–present: Migration in modern Britain 1 The context for migration ● Change and continuity in reasons for migration and patterns of settlement, including migrants from Ireland, Europe, the British Empire and the Commonwealth; refugees and asylum seekers. ● The changing context of British society: the World Wars; the end of the British Empire, decolonisation and the development of the Commonwealth; EU membership; legislation on immigration and nationality, including the Aliens Act (1905) and British Nationality Acts.  2 The experience and impact of migrants ● The experience of migrants in Britain: their relations with the authorities and the existing population, including anti-immigration and equal rights movements. The Race Relations Act (1965). The role of the media. ● The impact of migrants in Britain, including culture, politics, the urban environment, public services and the economy. 3 Case studies ● Bristol in the mid-twentieth century: the experiences of migrants and their impact on society. ● The experience of Asian migrants in Leicester from 1945.   Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 19 Notting Hill, c1948–c1970 The historic environment 1 Notting Hill, c1948–c1970 ● The local context of Notting Hill. The reasons for Caribbean migration to the area. The problems of housing: houses of multiple occupation (HMOs), overcrowding and slum landlords, e.g. Peter Rachman. Bruce Kenrick and the Notting Hill Housing Trust. The development of Portobello Road market. ● The influence of Caribbean cultures on the area, in particular the development of shops, markets, cafes and restaurants, shebeens, nightclubs and entertainment which featured Caribbean food and music. The development of All Saints Road. Mutual self-help organisations, e.g. ‘pardner’ schemes. ● Racism and policing. The Notting Hill Riots (1958). The murder of Kelso Cochrane and the reaction of the local community. The impact of anti-immigrant groups, including Oswald Mosley’s Union Movement and his 1959 election campaign.  ● Black activism in the Notting Hill area. Claudia Jones and the West Indian Gazette. The 1959 Caribbean Carnival and the later development of the Notting Hill Carnival. Frank Crichlow and the Mangrove Restaurant. The British Black Panthers. The ‘Mangrove Nine’. ● The national and regional context: Britain after the Second World War, reconstruction and demand for labour; the connection to the British Empire and Commonwealth. The ‘Swinging Sixties’. Poverty in London. Policing in London. 2 Knowledge, selection and use of sources for historical enquiries ● Knowledge of local sources relevant to the period and issue, e.g. local newspapers, publications written for the Caribbean community, local council and police records, housing and employment records, oral and written memoirs of local residents, photographs. ● Knowledge of national sources relevant to the period and issue, e.g. national newspapers, photographs, government records, census data, opinion polls, television reports, memoirs. ● Recognition of the strengths and weaknesses of different types of source for specific enquiries. ● Framing of questions relevant to the pursuit of a specific enquiry. ● Selection of appropriate sources for specific investigations. 20 Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 Paper 2: Period study and British depth study Overview The relevant pages of this section specify the content that must be taught for the chosen option. All of the content for the option is mandatory. Students are required to study one British depth study and one period study. The two parts are independent and so any depth study can be combined with any period study. British depth studies (pages 22–29) The depth studies focus on a substantial and coherent short time span and require students to understand the complexity of a society or historical situation and the interplay of different aspects within it. Depending on the depth study chosen, these may include social, economic, political, religious and military aspects. The content is divided into three key topics. These provide a framework for teaching and understanding the option, but should not be taken in isolation from each other. For each depth study, there is some chronological overlap between key topics – this structure helps highlight the complexity and interplay of different aspects within society.  Assessment Students will be assessed on their knowledge and understanding. Questions will target key features and causation, and may also target other second order concepts (change, continuity, consequence, similarity, difference, significance). Period studies (pages 30–39) The period studies focus on a substantial and coherent medium time span of at least 50 years and require students to understand the unfolding narrative of substantial developments and issues associated with the period. The content is divided into three key topics, which provide a framework for teaching and understanding the option. These run in chronological sequence, but should not be taken in isolation from each other – students should appreciate the narrative connections that run across the key topics. Assessment Students will be assessed on their knowledge and understanding. Questions will target: consequence; significance (of specified events in relation to situations and unfolding developments); and analytical narrative (requiring students not only to describe what happened, but also to analyse events to find connections that explain the way in which events unfolded). Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History 21 Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 British depth studies Option B1: Anglo-Saxon and Norman England, c1060–88 Key topic 1: Anglo-Saxon England and the Norman Conquest, 1060–66 1  Anglo-Saxon government, economy and society ● Monarchy and government. The power of the English monarchy. Earldoms, local government and the legal system.  ● The economy and social system. Towns and villages. The influence of the Church. 2  The last years of Edward the Confessor and the succession crisis ● The significance and power of the house of Godwin. Harold Godwinson’s succession as Earl of Wessex.   ● Harold Godwinson’s embassy to Normandy. The reasons for the rising against Tostig and his exile. The death of Edward the Confessor.  3  The rival claimants for the throne ● The motives and claims of William of Normandy, Harald Hardrada and Edgar the Aethling. ● Reasons for, and significance of, the outcome of the battles of Gate Fulford and Stamford Bridge.  ● The Witan and the coronation and reign of Harold Godwinson.  4  The Norman invasion ● The Battle of Hastings. ● Reasons for William’s victory, including the leadership skills of Harold and William, Norman and English troops and tactics.  Key topic 2: William I in power: securing the kingdom, 1066–87 1  Establishing control ● The submission of the earls, 1066.  ● Reasons for the building of castles; their key features and importance.  ● Rewarding followers and establishing control on the borderlands through the use of earls. The Marcher earldoms.  2  Anglo-Saxon resistance, 1068–71 ● Causes and outcomes of Anglo-Saxon resistance: the revolt of  Earls Edwin and Morcar (1068); Edgar the Aethling and the rebellions in the North (1069); Hereward the Wake and rebellion at Ely (1070–71).  3  The legacy of resistance to 1087 ● The reasons for and features of Harrying of the North (1069–70). Its immediate and long-term impact, 1069–87. ● Changes in landownership from Anglo-Saxon to Norman, 1066–87.  4  Revolt of the Earls, 1075 ● Reasons for and features of the revolt.  ● The defeat of the revolt and its effects.  22 Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 Key topic 3: Norman England, 1066–88 1  The feudal system and the Church ● The feudal hierarchy. The role and importance of tenants-in-chief and knights. The nature of feudalism (landholding, homage, knight service, labour service); forfeiture.  ● The Church in England: its role in society and relationship to government, including the significance of Stigand and Lanfranc. The Normanisation and reform of the Church in the reign of William I.  ● The extent of change to Anglo-Saxon society and economy. 2  Norman government ● Changes to government after the Conquest. Centralised power and the limited use of earls under William I. The role of regents during William’s absences. ● The Domesday survey and Domesday Book and their significance for Norman government and finance.  ● The office of sheriff and the demesne. Introduction and significance of the ‘forest’.  3  The Norman aristocracy ● The culture and language of the Norman aristocracy.  ● The career and significance of Bishop Odo.  4  William I and the succession ● Character and personality of William I and his relations with Robert, including Robert’s revolt in Normandy (1077–80).  ● William’s death and the disputed succession. William Rufus and the defeat of Robert and Odo.  Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History 23 Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024  Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 24 Option B2: The reigns of King Richard I and King John,  1189–1216 Key topic 1: Life and government in England, 1189–1216 1  The feudal system ● The feudal hierarchy and the nature of feudalism (landholding, homage, knight service, labour service); forfeiture. ● The role and influence of the Church. 2  Kingship and succession ● The nature of kingship: duties, rights, rituals. ● Richard I as king: his claim to the throne; how power was secured; his character. ● John as king: his claim to the throne; how power was secured and the murder of Prince Arthur; John’s character. 3  Royal government and finances ● How England was governed when Richard was absent, 1189–99, and during King John’s continued presence in England, 1199–1216. ● Royal revenues: the royal demesne and the role of sheriffs in collecting revenues; feudal incidents; scutage; taxes on moveables and income in 1207.  4  English society ● Countryside: the nature of agriculture and peasant life. ● Towns: life in towns; their role in the economy. ● Jews in Medieval England: legal status; role in moneylending; antisemitism; the causes and extent of the pogroms of 1189–90, including the significance of the coronation of Richard I; royal exploitation via taxes. Key topic 2: Involvements overseas, 1189–1204 1  The nature of crusading ● The concept of crusade and attitudes in England to the crusades. ● The nature of the English crusading army: who they were, why they went. 2  Richard and the Third Crusade ● The immediate causes of the Third Crusade; Richard’s motives for involvement in the Third Crusade.  ● Richard’s quarrel with Philip II; Richard’s military victories at Acre and Arsuf. ● The failure to recapture Jerusalem. 3  Aftermath of the crusade ● Richard’s return from the Holy Land. ● Richard’s capture, the ransom and its burden on England. 4  Richard, John and the loss of Normandy ● The competing aims of Richard and John and Philip II in Normandy. ● Richard and Chateau Gaillard: its cost and importance. ● John and the fall of Chateau Gaillard; the loss of Normandy (1204). Key topic 3: King John’s downfall, 1205–16 1  The dispute with the Papacy ● Causes of the dispute. ● The Interdict and its impact on everyday life. ● The significance of the reconciliation between John and  Innocent III. 2  Worsening relations with the barons ● Growing financial impositions to raise money for war with France: taxation and ‘fines’; John’s use of arbitrary power. The plot of 1212. ● The impact of the failure to regain Normandy in 1214. ● The rebellion of 1215: Northampton, Lincoln, the march on London. 3  Magna Carta and the First Barons’ War ● Runnymede: the motives of John and the barons, and the main provisions of Magna Carta. ● Reasons for the outbreak of the First Baron’s War. The siege and taking of Rochester; the invasion of Prince Louis. 4  England in 1216  ● The condition of England at the time of John’s death. ● The problem of the succession. ● The role of William Marshal as Protector. Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History 25 Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024  Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 26 Option B3: Henry VIII and his ministers, 1509–40 Key topic 1: Henry VIII and Wolsey, 1509–29 1  Henry VIII, Renaissance Prince ● England in 1509: society and government. The young Henry and his accession to the throne. ● Henry’s character and views on sovereignty and monarchy. His personal style of government. ● Strengths, weaknesses and aims as monarch.  2  The rise of Wolsey and his policies ● Reasons for Wolsey’s rise to power. His personality, roles and wealth. ● Wolsey’s reforms: enclosures, finance and justice. The Eltham Ordinances. ● Reasons for and reactions to the Amicable Grant. 3  Wolsey’s foreign policy ● Aims of Wolsey’s foreign policy. ● Successes and failures, including relations with France and the Holy Roman Empire, the Treaty of London (1518), the ‘Field of the Cloth of Gold’ (1520) and increasing difficulties in the 1520s. 4  Wolsey, Catherine, the succession and annulment  ● Catherine of Aragon and the succession. ● Henry’s reasons for and attempts to gain an annulment. Opposition to the annulment, including the role of Pope Clement VII. ● Reasons for Wolsey’s fall from power, including the failure of the divorce proceedings in London and the influence of the Boleyns. Key topic 2: Henry VIII and Cromwell, 1529–40 1  Cromwell’s rise to power, 1529–34 ● Personality and early career, including service to Wolsey, election as MP and eventual membership of the Royal Council. ● Handling of the king’s annulment and influence over Henry. Role as the king’s Chief Minister. 2  The king’s marriages ● Reasons for the fall of Anne Boleyn, including the role of Cromwell. ● Reasons for marriage to Jane Seymour; her influence, heir and death.  ● Reasons for marriage to Anne of Cleves. 3  Cromwell and government, 1534–40 ● Reform of government and royal finance. ● The management and use of parliament. 4 The fall of Cromwell ● Reasons for Cromwell’s fall from power in 1540, including the influence of the Duke of Norfolk and the failure of the marriage to Anne of Cleves.  Key topic 3: The Reformation and its impact, 1529–40 1  The break with Rome ● Henry as ‘Defender of the Faith’. Reasons for Henry’s campaign against the Pope and the Catholic Church, 1529–33. ● The significance of the Act of Succession and the Act of  Supremacy (1534) for the break with Rome. Cromwell’s role in their enforcement, including the use of oaths and treason laws. 2 Opposition to, and impact of, Reformation, 1534–40 ● Elizabeth Barton (the Nun of Kent) and John Fisher. ● The significance of opposition from Thomas More. ● Impact of the Reformation on the English Church, including the work of Thomas Cranmer and the influence of Thomas Cromwell.  3  The dissolution of the monasteries ● The role of religious houses in local communities. ● Reasons for the dissolutions, including the findings of Cromwell’s commissions of 1535. ● The impact of the dissolutions. Beneficiaries and losers. 4 The Pilgrimage of Grace, 1536 ● Reasons for the uprising.  ● Key events of the uprising, including rebellions in Lincolnshire and Yorkshire and the roles of Robert Aske and the Duke of Norfolk.  Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History 27 Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 Option B4: Early Elizabethan England, 1558–88 Key topic 1: Queen, government and religion, 1558–69 1  The situation on Elizabeth’s accession ● Elizabethan England in 1558: society and government. ● Challenges at home and from abroad: financial weaknesses, religious divisions, the French threat. ● The Virgin Queen: the problem of her legitimacy, gender, marriage. Her character and strengths. 2  The ‘settlement’  of religion ● Elizabeth’s religious settlement (1559): its features and impact. ● The Church of England: its role in society. 3  Challenge to the religious settlement ● The nature and extent of the Puritan challenge. ● The nature and extent of the Catholic challenge, including the role of the nobility, Papacy and foreign powers. 4  The problem of Mary, Queen of Scots ● Mary, Queen of Scots: her claim to the English throne.  ● Relations between Elizabeth and Mary, 1568–69. Key topic 2: Challenges to Elizabeth at home and abroad, 1569–88 1  Plots and revolts at home ● The reasons for, and significance of, the Revolt of the Northern Earls, 1569–70.  ● The reasons for, and significance of, Mary Queen of Scots’ execution in 1587. ● The features and significance of the Ridolfi, Throckmorton and Babington plots. Walsingham and the use of spies.  2  Relations with Spain ● Political, religious and commercial rivalry.  ● The significance of privateering and the activities of Drake. 3  Outbreak of war with Spain,  1585–88 ● Reasons for deteriorating relations with Spain: English direct involvement in the Netherlands and the actions of Robert Dudley. ● Drake and the raid on Cadiz: ‘Singeing the King of Spain’s beard’.  4  The Armada ● Spanish invasion plans. Key events of the Spanish Armada.  ● The reasons for the English victory. 28 Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 Key topic 3: Elizabethan society in the Age of Exploration, 1558–88 1  Education and leisure ● Education in the home and schools. ● Sport, pastimes and the theatre.  2  The ‘problem’ of the poor ● The reasons for the increase in poverty and vagabondage during these years.  ● The changing attitudes and policies towards the poor. 3  Exploration and voyages of discovery ● Factors prompting exploration, including the impact of new technology on ships and sailing and the drive to expand trade.  ● The reasons for, and significance of, Drake’s circumnavigation of the globe. 4  Attempted colonisation of Virginia ● Reasons for the attempted colonisation of Virginia, including the significance of Raleigh.  ● Reasons for the failure of the first settlement in Virginia.  Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History 29 Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024  Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 30 Period studies Option P1: Spain and the ‘New World’, c1490–c1555 Key topic 1: Spain reaches the Americas, c1490–1512 1  Spanish exploration ● Spain c1490: the crusading spirit and foreign ambitions. ● Columbus’s attempts to gain sponsorship. The role of Queen Isabella: her desire to spread Christianity and sponsorship of Columbus. ● Columbus’s first voyage of 1492 and the problems encountered. 2  Columbus reaches the Americas ● Columbus’s actions: exploration of the Bahamas and the Caribbean. The foundation of La Navidad. ● The impact of contact with Indigenous peoples: the discovery of gold, relations with the Tainos and Caribs. ● The impact of rivalry with Portugal, and the Treaty of Tordesillas (1494). 3  Spanish claims in the Caribbean ● Columbus’s later voyages and his role as governor in the Spanish settlement. The significance of the establishment of the Spanish colony at Santo Domingo (1496). ● The effects of Spanish settlement: treatment of Indigenous peoples, effects of smallpox.  ● Development of an imperial policy in relation to the Caribbean: the regulation of further exploration, the establishment of a monopoly on trade, the extension of Spanish authority and the use of slavery. The role of Catholic missionaries. Key topic 2: The conquistadors, 1513–c1528 1  The start of an empire  ● Balboa’s claim of Spanish authority over the Pacific (1513).  ● The conquest of Cuba. ● The voyage of Magellan and Spanish claim to the Philippines. 2  The conquest of Mexico ● Cortes’s expedition to Mexico in 1519. ● Key events of the Spanish conquest of Mexico; the role of Montezuma, the war between Aztecs and Tlaxcalans.  ● The capture of Tenochtitlan and the Aztec surrender. 3 Impact of Spain in the Americas ● Cortes’s actions as Governor and Captain-General of New Spain (1523–28). ● The consequences of the Spanish invasion for the Aztecs. ● The founding and significance of a Spanish base at Panama. Key topic 3: The Spanish Empire c1528–c1555 1  Pizarro and the conquest of the Incas ● Contact with the Incas (1528); the significance of the death of Huayna Capac. ● The voyage of Pizarro (1530), and the significance of the war between Atahuallpa and Huascar. ● Key events of the Spanish conquest of Peru: the Battle of Cajamarca and the capture of Atahuallpa, the revolt of the Incas, the siege of Cuzco (1536–37). The impact of the conquest. 2  Expansion of empire ● The role of the viceroys and encomiendas in the Spanish Empire. The role of Las Casas and the significance of the New Laws (1542). ● The significance of the discovery of silver in Bolivia and in Mexico. The foundation of La Paz (1548). 3  Impact of the 'New World' on Spain ● The importance of gold and silver for the Spanish economy and to support Spain’s European empire. ● The government of the Spanish Empire: the role of the House of Trade and Council of the Indies. ● The impact on Spain of the slave trade and goods from the Americas.  Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History 31 Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 Option P2: British America, 1713–83: empire and revolution Key topic 1: British settlement in North America, 1713–41 1  Developments in colonial society ● The impact of expansion and immigration on society: the pattern of settlement and tensions among social groups.  ● Economic developments: trade with Britain and with the West Indies, the importance of tobacco, the impact of piracy, including the activities of ‘Black Sam’ Bellamy and Edward Teach (‘Blackbeard’). ● The suppression of piracy in American waters: King George I’s Proclamation and the Piracy Act (1717), the work of Governor Spotswood. 2  Slavery in North America ● The transatlantic slave trade and ‘Atlantic trade triangle’. ● The impact of slavery on the development of tobacco and rice plantations. ● The impact of slavery on colonial society; the position of enslaved people within society and the treatment of fugitives within the colonies. 3  Problems within the colonies ● Slave revolts in the Carolinas: the Stono Rebellion (1739); the significance of Spain’s decision to protect runaways in Florida. ● The New York Conspiracy (1741). ● Smuggling, attempts to collect customs revenue and to control the fur trade.  Key topic 2: A disrupted society, 1742–64 1  The impact of cultural developments ● Religious revivals, including the Great Awakening and revivalist preachers. ● The significance of Benjamin Franklin as a writer, philanthropist and intellectual. ● The Enlightenment: the emphasis on education; the growth of newspapers and public libraries. 2  War in the colonies ● Relations with the French and with Indigenous peoples during and after King George’s War (1744–48). ● The significance of the Treaty of Paris (1763) and the Proclamation Act (1763).  ● The French and Indian War (1754–63) in North America and the role of Wolfe in Canada. 3  The aftermath of the French and Indian war ● The impact of the war on American colonists’ relations with Britain. ● Opposition to the Sugar Act (1764). ● Relations with Indigenous peoples, including Pontiac’s Rebellion  (1763–64). The Paxton Boys: their actions and impact. 32 Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 Key topic 3: The loss of an empire, 1765–83 1  American colonist relations with Britain: growing opposition, 1765-75  ● Opposition to British policies: the Stamp Act, the Sons of Liberty and the Boston Massacre (1770).  ● The significance of the First and Second Continental Congresses, 1774–75.  ● British and American relations: the Boston Tea Party (1773) and the Intolerable Acts (1774). 2 The War of Independence 1775-83 ● The influence of Thomas Paine's 'Common Sense'. The significance of the Declaration of Independence. The role of Thomas Jefferson. ● Key American victories: Saratoga (1777) and Yorktown (1781). The significance of Washington’s role, British mistakes, and French and Spanish involvement in the war.  ● The Peace of Paris (1783), including the role of Franklin. 3  Consequences of the war in America ● The significance of American independence for slavery. ● The consequences of the war for Indigenous peoples. ● The impact of the war on Loyalists, including their resettlement in Nova Scotia and Niagara. Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History 33 Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 Option P3: The American West, c1835–c1895 Key topic 1: The early settlement of the West, c1835–c1862 1  Indigenous peoples of the Plains: their beliefs and ways of life ● Social and tribal structures, ways of life and means of survival on the Plains. ● Beliefs about land and nature and attitudes to war and property. 2  Migration and early settlement ● The factors encouraging migration, including the Oregon Trail from 1836, the belief in Manifest Destiny, and the California Gold Rush of 1849.  ● Early migration to c1850, including the experiences of the Donner Party and the Mormon migration, 1846–47. ● The development and problems of early settlement.  3  Conflict and tension ● Reasons for tension with Indigenous peoples of the Plains, including US government policy and the 'Permanent Indian Frontier'. The significance of the first Fort Laramie Treaty (1851). The Indian Appropriations Act (1851). ● Lawlessness in early towns and settlements, including attempts to tackle lawlessness. Key topic 2: Development of the Plains, c1862–c1876 1  The development of settlement in the West ● The significance of the railroads; the Pacific Railroad Act (1862) and the completion of the First Transcontinental Railroad (1869) and the spread of the railroad network.    ● Introducing law and order in settlements, including the roles of law officers and increases in federal government influence.  ● The impact of the Homestead Act (1862). Attempts at solutions to problems faced by homesteaders: the use of new methods and new technology; the impact of the Timber Culture Act (1873). 2  Ranching and the cattle industry ● The cattle industry and factors in its growth, including the roles of Iliff, McCoy and Goodnight, the significance of Abilene and of the increasing use of the railroad network.  ● The changing role of the cowboy, including changes in ranching. Relations between ranchers and homesteaders. 3  Changes in the ways of life of Indigenous peoples of the Plains ● The impact of railroads, the cattle industry and gold prospecting on Indigenous peoples. ● Conflict on the Plains: Little Crow’s War (1862) and the Sand Creek Massacre (1864), the significance of Red Cloud’s War (1866–68). ● The impact of US government policy towards Indigenous peoples, including the continued use of reservations. The second Fort Laramie Treaty (1868). 34 Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 Key topic 3: Later developments in the West, c1876–c1895 1  Changes in farming, the cattle industry and settlement ● Changes in farming: the impact of new technology and new farming methods.  ● Changes in the cattle industry, including the impact of the winter of 1886–87. The significance of changes in the nature of ranching. The end of the open range.  ● Continued settlement: the Exoduster movement and Kansas (1879), the Oklahoma Land Rush of 1893. The closure of the 'Indian Frontier'. 2  Conflict and tension ● Dealing with law and order, including sheriffs and marshals, including the significance of Billy the Kid, Wyatt Earp, the  OK Corral (1881). ● Conflict on the Plains: the Battle of the Little Big Horn (1876) and its impact; the Wounded Knee Massacre (1890). ● The range wars, including the Johnson County War of 1892. 3  Indigenous peoples of the Plains: the destruction of their ways of life ● The hunting and extermination of the buffalo. ● Indigenous people's lives on the reservations. ● The significance of changing government attitudes to Indigenous peoples, including the Dawes Act (1887). Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History 35 Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024  Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 36 Option P4: Superpower relations and the Cold War, 1941–91 Key topic 1: The origins of the Cold War, 1941–58  1  Early tension between East and West ● The Grand Alliance. The outcomes of the Tehran, Yalta and Potsdam conferences.  ● The ideological differences between the superpowers and the attitudes of Stalin, Truman and Churchill. ● The impact on US-Soviet relations of the development of the atomic bomb, the Long and Novikov telegrams and the creation of Soviet satellite states in Eastern Europe. 2  The development of the Cold War ● The impact on US-Soviet relations of the Truman Doctrine and the Marshall Plan, 1947. ● The significance of Cominform (1947), Comecon (1949) and the formation of NATO (1949). ● Berlin: its division into zones. The Berlin Crisis (blockade and airlift) of 1948-49 and its impact. The formation of the Federal Republic of Germany and German Democratic Republic. 3  The Cold War intensifies ● The significance of the arms race. The formation of the Warsaw Pact. ● Events in 1956 leading to the Hungarian Uprising, and Khrushchev’s response. ● The international reaction to the Soviet invasion of Hungary. Key topic 2: Cold War crises, 1958–70 1  Increased tension between East and West ● The refugee problem in Berlin, Khrushchev’s Berlin ultimatum (1958), and the summit meetings of 1959–61. ● The impact of the Cuban Revolution on relations with the USA and the Soviet Union, including the refusal of the USA to recognise Castro’s government and the closer relations with the Soviet Union. The significance of the Bay of Pigs incident. ● Opposition in Czechoslovakia to Soviet control: the Prague Spring. 2  Cold War crises  ● The construction of the Berlin Wall, 1961. ● The events of the Cuban Missile Crisis. ● The Brezhnev Doctrine and the re-establishment of Soviet control in Czechoslovakia. 3  Reaction to crisis ● Impact of the construction of the Berlin Wall on US-Soviet relations. Kennedy’s visit to West Berlin in 1963.  ● The consequences of the Cuban Missile Crisis, including the ‘hotline’. Attempts at arms control: the Limited Test Ban Treaty (1963); the Outer Space Treaty (1967); and the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (1968). ● International reaction to Soviet measures in Czechoslovakia. Key topic 3: The end of the Cold War, 1970–91 1  Attempts to reduce superpower tensions in the 1970s  ● Détente and attempts to reduce tensions in the 1970s. ● The significance of SALT 1, the Helsinki Accords, and SALT 2. 2  The end of détente and the ‘Second Cold War’ ● The significance of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, the Carter Doctrine and the Olympic boycotts. ● Reagan and the ‘Second Cold War’, the Strategic Defence Initiative (SDI). ● The significance of Reagan and Gorbachev in reducing tensions. 3  The collapse of Soviet control of Eastern Europe,  1985-91 ● The impact of Gorbachev’s ‘new thinking’ on Eastern Europe: the loosening Soviet grip on Eastern Europe. ● The significance of the fall of the Berlin Wall. ● The collapse of the Soviet Union and its significance in bringing about the end of the Warsaw Pact. Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History 37 Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024  Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 38 Option P5: Conflict in the Middle East, 1945–95 Key topic 1: The birth of the state of Israel, 1945–63 1  The British withdrawal and the creation of Israel ● Conflicting interests and demands of Jews and Arabs within the British Mandate. ● Key events leading to the end of the British Mandate, partition and the creation of Israel, including the significance of the bombing of the King David Hotel and UN Resolution 181. ● Key events of the Arab-Israeli war (1948–49). 2  Aftermath of the 1948–49 war ● Territorial changes and their impact. The refugee status of Palestinian Arabs. ● The creation of the Israeli Defence Forces and the Law of Return. US aid to Israel. ● Israel’s relations with Egypt. 3  Increased tension,  1955–63 ● Nasser and Egypt’s leadership of the Arab world. ● The events and significance of Israeli attacks on Gaza in 1955 and Sinai in 1956. ● The events and significance of the Suez Crisis (1956), including the formation of the UAR in 1958. Key topic 2: The escalating conflict, 1964–73 1  The Six Day War, 1967 ● The significance of the Cairo Conference (1964). Escalating tension between Israel, Syria and Jordan: Syria’s support for Fatah, Israel’s raid on Samu and events of 7 April 1967. ● The actions of the USSR, Nasser and the USA in the period leading to war. ● Key events of the war. 2  Aftermath of the 1967 war ● UN Resolution 242 and continued dispute over the Suez Canal. ● Palestinian refugees and the significance of the occupied territories: Golan Heights, Gaza Strip, West Bank, Sinai and East Jerusalem. ● The use of terrorism, Israel’s response and international attitudes towards the Palestine issue: the PFLP airplane hijacks of 1970; Black September and the Munich Olympics. The expulsion of the PLO from Jordan (1970). 3  Israel and Egypt,  1967–73 ● Egyptian relations with Israel, the USA, the USSR and other Arab states.  ● Israel’s consolidation of control of the occupied territories.  ● Key events of the Yom Kippur War (1973) and its aftermath.  Key topic 3: Attempts at a solution, 1974–95 1  Diplomatic negotiations ● The significance of the oil crisis and the involvement of the USA and the USSR. ● Kissinger, ‘shuttle diplomacy’ and the reopening of the Suez Canal. ● Sadat’s visit to Israel (1977), Begin’s visit to Egypt (1977), US President Carter and Camp David (1978) and the Treaty of Washington (1979). 2  The Palestinian issue ● Arafat’s speech to the UN (1974). The significance of PLO activities in Lebanon.  ● The Israeli occupied territories and the First Palestinian Intifada  (1987–93). ● Israeli reprisals, the invasion of Lebanon (1982) and the results. 3  Attempts at a solution ● The significance of Arafat’s renunciation of terrorism in a speech at the UN (1988). ● Changing superpower policies in the Middle East: US involvement in the Gulf War (1991), and the end of the Cold War.  ● Arafat, Rabin and the Oslo Accords (1993); the setting up of the Palestinian National Authority; Israel-Jordan peace treaty (1994); Oslo II (1995). Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History 39 Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 40 Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 Paper 3: Modern depth study Overview The relevant pages of this section specify the content that must be taught for the chosen option.  Students are required to study one modern depth study. All of the content for the option is mandatory. The depth studies focus on a substantial and coherent short time span and require students to understand the complexity of a society or historical situation and the interplay of different aspects within it. Depending on the depth study chosen, these may include social, economic, political, cultural and military aspects. The main content is divided into four key topics. These provide a framework for teaching and understanding the option, but should not be taken in isolation from each other. For each depth study, there is some chronological overlap between key topics – this structure helps highlight the complexity and interplay of different aspects within society.  Assessment Students will be assessed on all four Assessment Objectives. All questions may relate to any content specified in the four key topics. Questions focusing solely on knowledge and understanding will target causation.  Other questions will target the ability to analyse and evaluate contemporary sources and later interpretations. Students should be aware that interpretations are based on evidence from their period of study. They should be aware of a range of evidence that can be used to reach conclusions. They should study examples of such evidence and consider ways in which it could give rise to and support different interpretations. Students should understand a range of reasons why interpretations may differ. They should be aware that differences based on conclusions drawn from evidence are legitimate and can be explained. They should be able to evaluate given interpretations using their own knowledge of the period. Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History 41 Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 Option 30: Russia and the Soviet Union, 1917–41 Key topic 1: The revolutions of 1917 1  The growth of opposition to the tsar in early 1917 ● Growing discontent among peasants and town workers. ● The impact of the First World War: military defeats; economic, political and social effects; the Tsar as commander-in-chief. 2  The February Revolution 3  The Provisional Government ● The immediate reasons for the February Revolution: events in Petrograd in February 1917, including strikes and the mutiny in the army. The Tsar’s absence and abdication. ● The establishment of the Provisional Government and the problems it faced, including ‘Dual Control’ and Soviet Order Number 1. The role of Kerensky. ● The weaknesses and failures of the Provisional Government.  ● The significance of the Kornilov Revolt.  4  The Bolshevik Revolution ● Lenin’s return and activities, including the April Theses and the growth in support for the Bolshevik Party. The ‘July Days’. ● The Bolshevik seizure of power in October 1917. The reasons for their success. The roles of Trotsky and Lenin.  Key topic 2: The Bolsheviks in power, 1917–24 1  Early consolidation of power, 1917–18 ● The early Bolshevik decrees of November–December 1917.  ● The reasons for, main terms, and significance of, the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk. Different reactions in Russia to the Treaty.  ● The removal of opposition, including the Constituent Assembly and the execution of Tsar Nicholas II and his family.  2  The Civil War, 1918–21 ● The reasons for, key events and effects of the Civil War.  ● The reasons for the Bolshevik victory, including the strengths of the Bolsheviks, role of Trotsky, foreign intervention and the weaknesses of the Whites.  3  Moves towards totalitarianism ● The Red Terror and the role of the Cheka. The Kronstadt Mutiny. ● Bolshevik centralisation, including the role of Lenin and the Politburo. Setting up of the USSR.  4  Economic and social change, 1918–24 ● Reasons for, and features of, War Communism. Reasons for its unpopularity.  ● Social changes, including the impact of Bolshevik policies on women, education and culture.  ● Reasons for, and features of, the New Economic Policy. Different reactions to the NEP. Its effects on the economy, 1921–24.  42 Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024  Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 43  Key topic 3: Stalin’s rise to power and dictatorship, 1924–41 1  The struggle  for power,  1924–28 ● The strengths and weaknesses of Stalin and his rivals (Trotsky, Kamenev, Zinoviev and Bukharin). ● The reasons for the emergence of Stalin as leader of the USSR,  including the removal of rivals for the leadership in the years 1924–28.  2  The use of terror in the 1930s ● The reasons for, nature of and consequences of the purges, including the purges of the armed forces.  ● The work of the secret police (NKVD); the use of, and conditions in, the labour camps.  ● The reasons for, and the importance of, the show trials of  1936–1938.  3  Propaganda and censorship ● Official culture, socialist realism, control of education and religion. Media censorship. ● The new Constitution of 1936.  4  The Cult of Stalin ● The meaning of the Cult of Stalin and reasons for its introduction.  ● How the Cult of Stalin was achieved.  Key topic 4: Economic and social changes, 1924–41 1  Agriculture and collectivisation ● Stalin’s reasons for changes in agriculture, including the problems of the NEP.  ● The organisation of collectives, mechanisation, widespread opposition and the attack on the kulaks. Famine in Ukraine.  ● The successes and failures of collectivisation.  2  Changes in industry ● Stalin’s motives for rapid industrialisation, including the failings of the NEP.  ● Gosplan, Five-Year Plans and the Stakhanovite Movement.  ● The successes and failures of industrialisation.  3  Life in the Soviet Union ● Living and working conditions in towns and the countryside.  ● The differing experiences of social groups. 4  The position of women and ethnic minorities ● Changes in family life and employment and the political position of women. ● Reasons for, and features of, the persecution of ethnic minorities.    Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 44 Option 31: Weimar and Nazi Germany, 1918–39 Key topic 1: The Weimar Republic 1918–29 1  The origins of the Republic, 1918–19 ● The situation in Germany at the end of the War: political unrest, abdication of the Kaiser, armistice and new republic. ● The strengths and weaknesses of the new Weimar Constitution.  2  The early challenges to the Weimar Republic, 1919–23 ● Reasons for the early unpopularity of the Republic, including the ‘stab in the back’ theory and the key terms of the Treaty of Versailles. ● Challenges to the Republic from Left and Right: Spartacists, Freikorps, the Kapp Putsch.  ● The challenges of 1923: hyperinflation; the reasons for, and effects of, the French occupation of the Ruhr.  3  The ‘Golden Years’: recovery of the Republic, 1924–29 ● Reasons for economic recovery, including the work of Stresemann, the Rentenmark, the Dawes and Young Plans and American loans and investment. ● Stresemann’s achievements in gaining international acceptance of Germany abroad through the Locarno Pact and joining the League of Nations.  4  Changes in society,  1924–29 ● Changes in the standard of living. ● Changes in the position of women in work, politics and leisure. ● Cultural changes: developments in architecture, art and the cinema.  Key topic 2: Hitler’s rise to power, 1919–33 1  Early development of the Nazi Party,  1920–22 ● Hitler’s early career: joining the German Workers’ Party and setting up the Nazi Party, 1919–20. ● The Twenty-Five Point Programme. The role of the SA.  2  The Munich Putsch and the Nazi Party,  1923–28 ● The reasons for, events and consequences of the Munich Putsch;  Mein Kampf.  ● Reasons for limited support for the Nazi Party, 1924–28. Party reorganisation, including the Bamberg Conference of 1926.  3  The growth in support for the Nazis,  1929–32 ● The growth of unemployment – its causes and impact. The growth of support for the Communist Party. ● Reasons for the growth in support for the Nazi Party, including the appeal of Hitler and the Nazis, the effects of propaganda and the work of the SA.  4  How Hitler became Chancellor,  1932–33 ● The Presidential and Reichstag elections of 1932; reasons for Hitler becoming Chancellor in 1933, including the roles of Hindenburg and von Papen.  Key topic 3: Nazi control and dictatorship, 1933–39 1  The creation of a dictatorship, 1933–34 ● The Reichstag Fire. The Enabling Act and the banning of other parties and trade unions.  ● The threat from Röhm and the SA, the Night of the Long Knives. The death of Hindenburg. Hitler becomes Führer, the army oath of allegiance.  2  The police state ● The role of the Gestapo, the SS and concentration camps.  ● Nazi control of the legal system.  3  Controlling and influencing attitudes ● Goebbels and the Ministry of Propaganda: censorship, Nazi use of media, rallies and sport, including the Berlin Olympics (1936).  ● Nazi attempts to control the Catholic and Protestant Churches: the Concordat and the Reich Church. ● Nazi control of culture and the arts, including art, architecture, literature and film.  4  Opposition, resistance and conformity ● The extent of support for the Nazi regime.  ● Opposition from the Churches, including the role of Pastor Niemöller.  ● Opposition from the young, including the Swing Youth and the Edelweiss Pirates.  Key topic 4: Life in Nazi Germany, 1933–39 1  Nazi policies towards women ● Nazi views on women and the family.  ● Nazi policies towards women, including marriage and family, employment and appearance.  2  Nazi policies towards the young ● Nazi aims and policies towards the young. The Hitler Youth and the League of German Maidens.  ● Nazi control of the young through education, including the curriculum and teachers.  3  Employment and living standards ● Nazi policies to reduce unemployment: labour service, autobahns, rearmament and invisible unemployment.  ● Changes in the standard of living, especially of German workers. The Labour Front, Strength Through Joy, Beauty of Labour. 4  The persecution of minorities ● Nazi racial beliefs and policies and the treatment of minority groups: Slavs, Roma and Sinti, homosexuals, and people with disabilities. ● The persecution of Jewish people, including the boycott of Jewish shops and businesses (1933), the Nuremberg Laws and 'Kristallnacht'. Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History 45 Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 Option 32: Mao’s China, 1945–76 Key topic 1: Establishing communist rule, 1945–59 1  The Civil War, 1945–49 ● The relative strengths and weaknesses of the CCP and the Guomindang at the start of the Civil War.  ● Reasons for the success of Mao and the CCP, including leadership, military factors, and unrest in the towns and cities.  2  Communist rule ● The ideology and role of Mao. Reasons for Mao’s dominant position.  ● The use of terror against opponents of communist rule.  ● The ‘three antis’ and ‘five antis’ movements.  ● The role of the CCP in the government of China, including new mass party membership and democratic centralism.  3  Consolidating the CCP’s hold on power, 1951–52 4  The Hundred Flowers campaign, 1956–57  ● Mao’s reasons for the Hundred Flowers campaign.  ● Key features of the Hundred Flowers campaign; criticism of communist rule and the reaction of Mao.  ● Results of the campaign, including the ‘Anti-Rightist’ purge. Key topic 2: Economic policy, 1949–65  1  Early changes in agriculture, 1949–57 ● Reasons for, and features of, the attacks on landlordism and the redistribution of land. ● Moves towards agricultural cooperation. ● Reasons for the change from voluntary to enforced collectivisation. 2  Industry and the Five-Year Plan, 1953–57 ● Reasons for, and targets of, the first Five-Year Plan. The significance of USSR financial and technical support.  ● Success and failures of the first Five-Year Plan.  3 The Great Leap Forward  ● Mao’s reasons for the second Five-Year Plan (the Great Leap Forward), 1958–62. ● The successes and failures of the Great Leap Forward. Reasons for failures. The importance of the Lushan Conference (1959).  ● The organisation of the commune: communal living and the abolition of private farming. The significance of Lysenkoism.  ● The causes and impact of the Great Famine, 1958–62.  4  Economic reform ● Reasons for the restoration of private farming under Liu Shaoqi and Deng Xiaoping. ● Reasons for, and features of, economic reform (1962–65) under Liu and Deng. 46 Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 Key topic 3: The Cultural Revolution and its aftermath, 1966–76 1  Reasons for the Cultural Revolution ● The power struggle: Mao, Liu Shaoqi and Deng Xiaoping. ● Purification of communism, including the Socialist Education Movement, and the reform of education.  2  The Red Guards and the Red Terror ● Mao’s hold on young people, including the mass rallies of 1966. Jiang Qing and the attack on the CCP.  ● Red Guard attacks on the ‘four olds’ and the CCP. The growth of anarchy and the use of terror. Cultural destruction.  3  The effects of the Cultural Revolution ● Political effects: the purging of the CCP, Liu Shaoqi and Deng Xiaoping, the rise and fall of Lin Biao.  ● Economic effects: changes in industry, the removal of technicians, the move to the countryside and the impact on farming.  ● Social effects, including the impact on education. 4  The end of the Cultural Revolution, 1968–76 ● Reasons for the end of the Red Guards and the significance of the restoration of order by the PLA, including the ‘Up to the mountains and down to the villages’ campaign.  ● The return to power of Deng Xiaoping and the increased influence of Zhou Enlai. The rise and fall of the ‘Gang of Four’ and the death of Mao.  Key topic 4: Life in Mao’s China, 1949–76 1  Communist control ● Propaganda and censorship and the significance of the ‘cult of Mao’.  ● Thought control and the development of the ‘Reform Through Labour’ system. 2  Family life and the role of women ● Changes in family life in towns and countryside. The impact of collectivisation and communes.  ● Reasons for changes in the status of women under Mao. The significance of foot binding and the Marriage Law (1950).  3  Education and health ● Reasons for changes in education. Growth in literacy and the significance of Pinyin. The collapse of education after 1966.  ● Reasons for changes in health provision. The significance of the barefoot doctors. Successes and failures of healthcare reform.  4  Cultural change ● Reasons for attacks on traditional culture in towns and countryside.  ● Reasons for attacks on Buddhism, Confucianism, Christianity, Islam and ancestor worship. ● The imposition of revolutionary art and culture; the role of Jiang Qing. Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History 47 Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024  Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 48 Option 33: The USA, 1954–75: conflict at home and abroad Key topic 1: The development of the civil rights movement, 1954–60 1  The position of Black Americans in the early 1950s ● Segregation, discrimination and voting rights in the Southern states. ● The work of civil rights organisations, including the NAACP and CORE. 2  Developments in education   ● Reasons for, key features and significance of the Brown v. Topeka case (1954). ● Reasons for, key features and significance of the events at Little Rock High School (1957). 3  The Montgomery Bus Boycott and its impact,  1955–60 ● Causes and events of the Montgomery Bus Boycott. The significance of Rosa Parks.  ● Reasons for the success and importance of the boycott. The Supreme Court ruling. The Civil Rights Act (1957).  ● The significance of the leadership of Martin Luther King. The setting up of the SCLC.  4  Opposition to the civil rights movement ● The Ku Klux Klan and violence, including the murder of Emmet Till in 1955.  ● Opposition to desegregation in the South, including the ‘Dixiecrats’ and the setting up of White Citizens’ Councils.   Key topic 2: Protest, progress and radicalism, 1960–75  1 Developments, 1960–62 ● The significance of Greensboro and the sit-in movement.  ● Reasons for, key features and significance of the Freedom Riders, including Ku Klux Klan violence and the Anniston bomb (1961).  ● The James Meredith case (1962).  2  Peaceful protests and their impact, 1963–65 ● King and the peace marches of 1963 in Birmingham and Washington.  ● Freedom Summer and the Mississippi murders.  ● The impact of peaceful protest and the roles of Presidents Kennedy and Johnson in the passage of the Civil Rights Act (1964). Selma and the Voting Rights Act (1965).  3  Malcolm X and Black Power, 1963–70 ● Malcolm X, his beliefs, methods and involvement with the Black Muslims. His later change of attitude and assassination.  ● Reasons for the emergence of Black Power. The significance of Stokely Carmichael and the 1968 Mexico Olympics.  ● The methods and achievements of the Black Panther movement.  4  The civil rights movement, 1965–75 ● The riots of 1965–67 and the Kerner Report (1968). ● King’s campaign in the North. The assassination of Martin Luther King and its impact.  ● The extent of progress in civil rights by 1975.   Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in History Specification – Issue 6 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 49  Key topic 3: US involvement in the Vietnam War, 1954–75  1  Reasons for US involvement in the conflict in Vietnam,  1954–63 ● Reasons for greater US involvement under Eisenhower, including the domino theory and weaknesses of the Diem government.  ● Greater involvement under Kennedy, including the overthrow of Diem and the Strategic Hamlet Program.  2  Escalation of the conflict under Johnson  ● Reasons for the escalation of the conflict and increased US involvement in Vietnam, including the increasing threat of the Vietcong and the Gulf of Tonkin incident (1964).  3  The nature of the conflict in Vietnam,  1964–68  ● The guerrilla tactics used by the Vietcong. ● The methods used by the USA, including Search and Destroy, Operation Rolling Thunder and chemical weapons.  ● The key features and significance of the Tet Offensive, 1968.  4  Changes under Nixon,  1969–73 ● The key features of Vietnamisation. Reasons for its failure.  ● The Nixon Doctrine and the withdrawal of US troops.  ● Attacks on Cambodia (1970) and Laos (1971), and the bombing of North Vietnam (1972).  Key topic 4: Reactions to, and the end of, US involvement in  Vietnam, 1964–75 1  Opposition to the war  ● Reasons for the growth of opposition, including the student movement, TV and media coverage of the war and the draft system.  ● Public reaction to the My Lai Massacre (1968). The trial of Lt. Calley. ● The Kent State University shootings (1970).  2  Support for the war ● Reasons for support for the war, including the fear of communism.  ● The ‘hard hats’ and the ‘silent majority’.  3  The peace process and end of the war ● Reasons for, and key features of, the peace negotiations (1972–73).  ● The significance of the Paris Peace Agreement (1973).  ● The economic and human costs of the war for the USA. 4  Reasons for the failure of the USA in Vietnam ● The strengths of North Vietnam, including the significance of Russian and Chinese support, Vietcong tactics and the Ho Chi  Minh Trail.  ● The weaknesses of the US armed forces. The failure of US tactics.  ● The impact of opposition to the war in the USA.  