GCSE (9-1)
English 
Language
Specification 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9 - 1) in English Language (1EN0)
First teaching from September 2015
First certification from June 2017 Issue 6

 
About Pearson 
We are the world’s leading learning company operating in countries all around the 
world. We provide content, assessment and digital services to learners, educational 
institutions, employers, governments and other partners globally. We are 
committed to helping equip learners with the skills they need to enhance their 
employability prospects and to succeed in the changing world of work. We believe 
that wherever learning flourishes so do people. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References to third party materials made in this specification are made in good 
faith. Pearson does not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of 
materials, which may be subject to change, or any opinions expressed therein. 
(Materials may include textbooks, journals, magazines and other publications and 
websites.) 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
 
ISBN 978 1 446 96309 8 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2024 
 
 
 
Summary of Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) 
in English Language specification  
Issue 6 changes 
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this current 
issue 
Page 
number 
Spoken language endorsement 
There has been an addition made to the teacher declaration and candidate 
declaration regarding the use of AI. 
35–36 
 
If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, contact us via our 
website at: qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/contact-us.html.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
May 2014 
  The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important 
change to the education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications 
will assist them in helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an 
‘Expert Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or 
because of our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the 
world as diverse as Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries 
across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification 
development process that has included: 
● extensive international comparability of subject content against the highest-
performing jurisdictions in the world 
● benchmarking assessments against UK and overseas providers to ensure that 
they are at the right level of demand 
● establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent  
subject-specific expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
● subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future 
oriented. The design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, 
meaning learner outcomes have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a 
learner’s success in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident 
that we have supported the development of qualifications that are outstanding for 
their coherence, thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as 
representing world-class best practice.
” 
  Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Lee Sing Kong  
Director, National Institute of 
Education, Singapore 
  
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
  
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
 
All titles correct as at May 2014 
“ 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language is designed 
for use in schools and colleges. It is part of a suite of GCSE qualifications offered by 
Pearson. 
Purpose of the specification 
This specification sets out: 
● the objectives of the qualification 
● any other qualification(s) that students must have completed before taking the 
qualification 
● any prior knowledge and skills that students are required to have before taking 
the qualification 
● any other requirements that students must have satisfied before they will be 
assessed or before the qualification will be awarded 
● the knowledge and understanding that will be assessed as part of the 
qualification 
● the method of assessment and any associated requirements relating to it 
● the criteria against which students’ level of attainment will be measured (such 
as assessment criteria). 
 
 
Rationale 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language meets the 
following purposes, which fulfil those defined by the Office of Qualifications and 
Examinations Regulation (Ofqual) for GCSE qualifications in their GCSE (9–1) 
Qualification Level Conditions and Requirements document, published in April 2014. 
The purposes of this qualification are to: 
● provide evidence of students’ achievements against demanding and fulfilling 
content, giving students the confidence that the literacy skills, knowledge and 
understanding that they will have acquired during the course of their study are 
comparable to those of the highest performing jurisdictions in the world 
● provide a strong foundation for further academic and vocational study and for 
employment, to help students progress to a full range of courses in further and 
higher education. This includes Level 3 English courses, as well as Level 3 
courses in other disciplines such as drama and theatre studies 
● provide (if required) a basis for schools and colleges to be held accountable for 
the performance of all of their students. 
Qualification aims and objectives 
The aims and objectives of the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in 
English Language are to enable students to: 
● read a wide range of texts fluently and with good understanding 
● read critically and use knowledge gained from wide reading to inform and 
improve their own writing 
● write effectively and coherently using Standard English appropriately 
● use grammar correctly, punctuate and spell accurately 
● acquire and apply a wide vocabulary alongside knowledge and understanding of 
grammatical terminology, and linguistic conventions for reading, writing and 
spoken language 
● listen to and understand spoken language, and use spoken Standard English 
effectively. Spoken language will be reported as a separate grade on the 
student’s certificate. 
 
 
The context for the development of this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] 
and our ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by:  
● reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with 
those taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
● consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including learned 
bodies, subject associations, higher-education academics, teachers and 
employers to ensure this qualification is suitable for a UK context 
● reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in 
their documents GCSE (9–1) Qualification Level Conditions and Requirements and 
GCSE Subject Level Conditions and Requirements for GCSE in English Language, 
published in April 2014. 
 
 
 
 
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification Principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
● demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning and 
measuring higher-order skills 
● rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and valid 
assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in end users of the knowledge, skills 
and competencies of certified students 
● inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students develop at 
different rates and have different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
● empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills, see Appendix 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents 
Qualification at a glance 1 
Assessment Objectives and weightings 3 
Knowledge, skills and understanding 5 
Component 1: Fiction and Imaginative Writing 5 
Component 2: Non-fiction and Transactional Writing 7 
Spoken Language Endorsement 9 
Malpractice 16 
Further information 17 
Assessment 19 
Assessment summary tables 19 
Assessment Objectives and weightings 21 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 22 
Entry and assessment information 23 
Student entry 23 
November resits 23 
Discount code and performance tables 23 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special 
consideration 24 
Equality Act 2010 and Pearson equality policy 25 
Awarding and reporting 26 
Language of assessment 26 
Other information 27 
Student recruitment 27 
Prior learning and other requirements 27 
Progression from GCSE 27 
Appendix 1: Transferable skills 31 
Appendix 2: Codes 33 
Appendix 3: Spoken Language Endorsement:  
Assessment record sheet 35 
Appendix 4: Spoken Language Endorsement: Head of 
Centre Declaration 37 
 
 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
1 
Qualification at a glance 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language is a linear 
course. It consists of two externally examined components and one endorsement 
for Spoken Language. 
Students must complete all assessment in the same series. 
 
Component 1: Fiction and Imaginative Writing 
*Paper code: 1EN0/01 
● Externally assessed 
● Availability: May/June and November** 
● First assessment: May/June 2017 
40% of the 
total GCSE 
Overview of content 
● Study selections from a range of prose fiction. 
● Develop skills to analyse and evaluate 19th-century fiction extracts. 
● Develop imaginative writing skills to engage the reader. 
● Use spelling, punctuation and grammar accurately. 
Overview of assessment 
● Section A – Reading: questions on an unseen 19th-century fiction extract. 
● Section B – Writing: a choice of two writing tasks. The tasks are linked by a 
theme to the reading extract. 
● The total number of marks available is 64. 
● Assessment duration 1 hour and 45 minutes. 
 
The sample assessment materials can be found in the Pearson Edexcel  
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language Sample Assessment Materials 
document. 
*See Appendix 2: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant 
to this qualification. 
**See Entry and assessment information for details of restrictions on November 
entry. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
2 
 
 
Spoken Language Endorsement *Paper code 1EN0/03 
 
● Internally assessed under controlled conditions 
● Availability: May/June and November** 
● First assessment: May/June 2017 
0% of the 
total GCSE 
Overview of content 
● Developing spoken language skills. 
Overview of assessment 
● The component is internally assessed under controlled conditions, and 
externally monitored by Pearson. 
● Candidates must undertake a prepared spoken presentation on a specific topic 
in a formal setting, listen and respond to questions and feedback, and use 
spoken English effectively. 
● There are no marks for the Spoken Language endorsement. Students are 
awarded a grade (Pass, Merit or Distinction). 
 
The sample assessment materials can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language Sample Assessment Materials 
document. 
*See Appendix 2: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant 
to this qualification. 
**See Entry and assessment information for details of restrictions on November 
entry. 
Component 2: Non-fiction and Transactional Writing 
*Paper code: 1EN0/02 
● Externally assessed 
● Availability: May/June and November** 
● First assessment: May/June 2017 
60% of the 
total GCSE 
Overview of content 
● Study a range of 20th- and 21st-century non-fiction texts (including literary 
non-fiction). 
● Develop skills to analyse, evaluate and compare non-fiction extracts. 
● Develop transactional writing skills for a variety of forms, purposes and 
audiences. 
● Use spelling, punctuation and grammar accurately. 
Overview of assessment 
● Section A – Reading: questions on two thematically linked, unseen non-fiction 
extracts. 
● Section B – Writing: a choice of two writing tasks. The tasks are linked by a 
theme to the reading extracts. 
● The total number of marks available is 96. 
● Assessment duration: 2 hours and 5 minutes. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
3 
Assessment Objectives and weightings 
 
Students must: 
% in 
GCSE 
READING 
AO1 ● Identify and interpret explicit and implicit 
information and ideas 
● Select and synthesise evidence from different texts 
9.4 
AO2 Explain, comment on and analyse how writers use 
language and structure to achieve effects and influence 
readers, using relevant subject terminology to support 
their views 
13.1 
AO3 Compare writers’ ideas and perspectives, as well as how 
these are conveyed, across two or more texts 8.8 
AO4 Evaluate texts critically and support this with 
appropriate textual references 18.8 
WRITING 
AO5 ● Communicate clearly, effectively and imaginatively, 
selecting and adapting tone, style and register for 
different forms, purposes and audiences 
● Organise information and ideas, using structural and 
grammatical features to support coherence and 
cohesion of texts 
30 
AO6 Candidates must use a range of vocabulary and 
sentence structures for clarity, purpose and effect, with 
accurate spelling and punctuation 
20 
SPOKEN 
LANGUAGE *AO7 Demonstrate presentation skills in a formal setting n/a 
*AO8 Listen and respond appropriately to spoken language, 
including to questions and feedback to presentations n/a 
*AO9 Use spoken Standard English effectively in speeches and 
presentations n/a 
Total 100% 
 
*These Assessment Objectives are for the Spoken Language Endorsement, which 
will be reported as a separate grade on the awarding body certificate. 
NB: some figures have been rounded up or down.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
4 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
5 
Knowledge, skills and understanding 
Component 1: Fiction and Imaginative Writing 
Overview 
The focus of this component is: 
● Section A – Reading: study and analyse selections from a range of prose 
fiction. 
● Section B – Imaginative writing: explore and develop imaginative writing 
skills. 
The learning outcomes below are drawn from the GCSE Subject Level Conditions 
and Requirements for English Language, published April 2014. 
 
Learning 
outcomes 
Students will: 
1.1 
Reading 
1.1.1 read and understand a range of prose fiction, including unseen 
texts 
1.1.2 critical reading and comprehension: identify and interpret 
themes, ideas and information in a range of literature and 
other high-quality writing; read in different ways for different 
purposes, and evaluate the usefulness, relevance and 
presentation of content for these purposes; draw inferences 
and justify these with evidence; support a point of view by 
referring to evidence within the text; identify bias and misuse 
of evidence, including distinguishing between statements that 
are supported by evidence and those that are not; reflect 
critically and evaluatively on text, use the context of the text 
and draw on knowledge and skills gained from wider reading; 
recognise the possibility of different responses to a text 
1.1.3 summary: identify the main theme or themes; summarise 
ideas and information from a single text 
1.1.4 evaluation of a writer’s choice of vocabulary, form, 
grammatical and structural features: explain and illustrate 
how vocabulary and grammar contribute to effectiveness and 
impact, use linguistic and literary terminology accurately to do 
so and pay attention to detail; analyse and evaluate how form 
and structure contribute to the effectiveness and impact of a 
text 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
6 
 
Learning 
outcomes 
Students will: 
1.2 
Writing 
 
1.2.1 produce clear and coherent text: write accurately and 
effectively for different purposes and audiences: to describe, 
narrate, explain, instruct, give and respond to information, 
and argue; select vocabulary, grammar, form, and structural 
and organisational features judiciously to reflect audience, 
purpose and context; use language imaginatively and 
creatively; using information provided by others to write in 
different forms; maintaining a consistent point of view; 
maintaining coherence and consistency across a text 
1.2.2 write for impact: select, organise and emphasise facts, ideas 
and key points; cite evidence and quotation effectively and 
pertinently to support views; create emotional impact; use 
language creatively, imaginatively and persuasively, including 
rhetorical devices (such as rhetorical questions, antithesis, 
parenthesis). 
 
Content 
Students should read selections from a range of high-quality, challenging prose 
fiction, in preparation for responding to an unseen 19th-century prose fiction 
extract in the examination. They should be able to read substantial pieces of writing 
(extended texts) that make significant demands on them in terms of content, 
structure and the quality of language. Throughout the qualification, students should 
develop the skills of inference, analysis and evaluation. Students studying GCSE 
English Literature should be encouraged to analyse and evaluate the use of English 
language in a full range of their literature texts.  
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) English Language Unseen 
Preparation Anthology is a resource that supports teachers by providing examples 
of 19th-century prose fiction. Students should read a variety of prose fiction from a 
range of genres and cultures. 
Students should use what they have learned about the writer’s craft in their reading 
of fiction to inspire and influence their own imaginative writing. They should 
develop a range of creative writing techniques, and planning and proofreading 
skills. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
7 
Component 2: Non-fiction and Transactional 
Writing 
Overview 
This focus of this component is: 
● Section A – Reading: study and analyse selections from a range of non-fiction 
texts (including literary non-fiction) 
● Section B – Transactional writing: explore and develop transactional writing 
skills, for example letters, articles, reviews. 
The learning outcomes below are drawn from the GCSE Subject Level Conditions 
and Requirements for English Language, published April 2014. 
 
Learning 
outcomes 
Students will: 
2.1 
Reading 
2.1.1 read and understand a range of non-fiction texts, including 
whole texts and unseen texts 
2.1.2 critical reading and comprehension: identify and interpret 
themes, ideas and information in a range of literature and 
other high-quality writing; read in different ways for different 
purposes, and compare and evaluate the usefulness, 
relevance and presentation of content for these purposes; 
draw inferences and justify these with evidence; support a 
point of view by referring to evidence within the text; identify 
bias and misuse of evidence, including distinguishing between 
statements that are supported by evidence and those that are 
not; reflect critically and evaluatively on text, use the context 
of the text and draw on knowledge and skills gained from 
wider reading; recognise the possibility of different responses 
to a text 
2.1.3 summary and synthesis: identify the main theme or themes; 
summarise ideas and information from a single text; 
synthesise from more than one text 
2.1.4 evaluation of a writer’s choice of vocabulary, form, 
grammatical and structural features: explain and illustrate 
how vocabulary and grammar contribute to effectiveness and 
impact, use linguistic and literary terminology accurately to do 
so and pay attention to detail; analyse and evaluate how form 
and structure contribute to the effectiveness and impact of a 
text 
2.1.5 compare texts: compare two or more texts critically with 
respect to the above. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
8 
 
Learning 
outcomes 
Students will: 
2.2 
Writing 
 
2.2.1 
 
produce clear and coherent text: write accurately and 
effectively for different purposes and audiences: to describe, 
narrate, explain, instruct, give and respond to information, 
and argue; select vocabulary, grammar, form, and structural 
and organisational features judiciously to reflect audience, 
purpose and context; use language imaginatively and 
creatively; using information provided by others to write in 
different forms; maintaining a consistent point of view; 
maintaining coherence and consistency across a text 
2.2.2 write for impact: select, organise and emphasise facts, ideas 
and key points; cite evidence and quotation effectively and 
pertinently to support views; create emotional impact; use 
language creatively, imaginatively and persuasively, including 
rhetorical devices (such as rhetorical questions, antithesis, 
parenthesis). 
 
Content 
Students should read a variety of high-quality, challenging non-fiction and literary 
non-fiction, in preparation to respond to unseen 20th- and 21st-century non-fiction 
in the examination. They should be able to read substantial pieces of writing, 
including whole and extended texts, that make significant demands in terms of 
content, structure and the quality of the language. Throughout the qualification, 
students should develop the skills of interpretation, analysis and evaluation. 
Text types studied should include a range of non-fiction forms, such as journalism 
(for example articles and reviews), speeches, journals and reference book extracts. 
Text types should also include literary non-fiction, such as selections from 
autobiography, letters, obituaries and travel writing. These lists are not exhaustive. 
Texts that are essentially transient, such as instant news feeds and advertisements 
will not form part of the assessment. 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) English Language Unseen 
Preparation Anthology is a resource that supports teachers by providing indicative 
examples of different types of non-fiction. Examples are indicative only and 
students should read widely. Students should use what they have learned about 
different text types to feed into their transactional writing. They should be 
introduced to, and be given the opportunity to practise, a range of non-fiction 
writing techniques planning and proofreading skills. The transactional text types 
that students will be asked to write are: 
● article 
● letter 
● review 
● text for a speech 
● section for guide/textbook/leaflet/booklet. 
The writing tasks may make reference to a digital location for such texts, such as a website. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
9 
Spoken Language Endorsement 
Overview 
The focus of this component is on developing spoken language skills. 
Content 
The learning outcomes below are drawn from the Ofqual ‘GCSE Subject Level 
Conditions and Requirements for English Language and Certificate Requirements’ 
document published July 2015 and available on the Ofqual website. 
 
 
Learning 
outcomes 
Students will: 
3.1 
Spoken 
language 
3.1.1 presenting information and ideas: selecting and organising 
information and ideas effectively and persuasively for prepared 
spoken presentations; planning effectively for different purposes 
and audiences; making presentations and speeches 
3.1.2 responding to spoken language: listening to and responding 
appropriately to any questions and feedback 
3.1.3 spoken Standard English: expressing ideas using Standard 
English whenever and wherever appropriate. 
 
Content 
Students must demonstrate their presentation skills in a formal setting, listen and 
respond to questions and feedback, and use spoken English effectively. 
Presentation: 
The spoken language presentation is to be completed individually by a student and 
may take a variety of forms, including: 
(a) a speech or talk by a student, followed by questions from the audience or  
(b) a formal debate or dialogue, such as an interview where the student is able to 
prepare extended responses to questions or prompts which have been shared in 
advance, followed by questions from the audience.  
In all cases, the presentation should be prepared and last no longer than 10 
minutes per student and this includes questions and answers.  
Centres should be mindful of the comparability of presentations they allow students 
to undertake. They are encouraged to take steps to ensure that all tasks 
undertaken in their centre are of comparable demand. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
10 
Audience: 
Students must give their presentations to an audience, which must always include 
the teacher and we recommend the audience consist of at least two people as this 
gives greater opportunities for students to demonstrate the necessary knowledge, 
skills and understanding for this assessment. The composition of the audience 
must also provide students with opportunities to respond to appropriate questions 
and feedback. 
The size and composition of the audience should be determined by the teacher, in 
discussion with the student. However, where the audience is the teacher only, the 
presentation and dialogue should be designed in such a way that it could have a 
potentially wider audience than just one person (for example, it replicates a 
television interview). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
11 
Assessment criteria 
Students should be assessed either live or from recordings.  
There are no marks for the Spoken Language endorsement. Students should be 
awarded a grade (Pass, Merit or Distinction) using the assessment criteria below. 
Students who do not reach the Pass standard, or who do not attempt the 
assessment, must be recorded as Not Classified. This grade will appear on the 
student’s certificate.  
In order to achieve a particular grade, a student must meet all of the 
criteria for that grade.  
For more information on grading see the Awarding and Reporting section. 
 
General criteria 
To be awarded a Pass, Merit or Distinction a student must: 
● be audible, and  
● use spoken Standard English which, for the purposes of the spoken language 
assessment, means that a Learner must: 
o be intelligible, and  
o generally use language appropriate to the formal setting of the presentation. 
Pass Merit Distinction 
In addition to the general 
criteria, to be awarded a 
Pass a Learner’s 
performance in his or her 
spoken language 
assessment must meet 
all of the following 
criteria –  
● expresses 
straightforward 
ideas/information/ 
feelings,  
● makes an attempt to 
organise and 
structure his or her 
presentation,  
● makes an attempt to 
meet the needs of the 
audience, and  
● listens to 
questions/feedback 
and provides an 
appropriate response 
in a straightforward 
manner. 
In addition to the general 
criteria, to be awarded a 
Merit a Learner’s 
performance in his or her 
spoken language 
assessment must meet all 
of the following criteria –  
● expresses challenging 
ideas/information/feel
ings using a range of 
vocabulary,  
● organises and 
structures his or her 
presentation clearly 
and appropriately to 
meet the needs of the 
audience,  
● achieves the purpose 
of his or her 
presentation, and  
● listens to 
questions/feedback 
responding formally 
and in some detail. 
In addition to the general 
criteria, to be awarded a 
Distinction a Learner’s 
performance in his or her 
spoken language 
assessment must meet all 
of the following criteria –  
● expresses sophisticated 
ideas/information/feeling
s using a sophisticated 
repertoire of vocabulary,  
● organises and structures 
his or her presentation 
using an effective range 
of strategies to engage 
the audience,  
● achieves the purpose of 
his or her presentation, 
and 
● listens to 
questions/feedback, 
responds perceptively 
and if appropriate 
elaborates with further 
ideas and information. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
12 
Re-use (carry forward) of Spoken Language grades 
A student who is re-taking GCSE English Language (post-16) may re-use a previous 
result for the Spoken Language Endorsement, even if it was awarded by another 
awarding body. 
The result for the Spoken Language Endorsement may be transferred even if the 
overall grade at GCSE achieved is unclassified.  
External monitoring 
Each centre is required to provide audio-visual recordings of the presentations of a 
sample of students, that is representative of the various teaching groups. There is 
no requirement to record the presentations of all students.  
For further information, please see the Instructions for conducting non-examination 
assessments document, which is available on the JCQ website
 and Pearson’s 
Administrative Support Guide (ASG): Instructions for the Conduct of Spoken 
Language Endorsement available on our website: qualifications.pearson.com. 
Head of centre declaration 
Heads of centres are required to complete the declaration in Appendix 2. This form 
must be submitted at this at the same time as the sample of students’ recordings. 
Failure by a centre to provide a Head of Centre Declaration may be treated as 
malpractice or maladministration (see Section 3 Administration and general 
information section for more information). 
Assessment record sheet 
An assessment record sheet (see Appendix 1) should be completed for each student 
and kept securely by the centre. The assessment record sheets of the sampled 
students must be sent to Pearson. 
Guidance on making and submitting audio-visual recordings for the Spoken 
Language Endorsement 
1. Recording of the presentation 
The presentation should be saved digitally. Each recording must be saved 
individually and not as one long recording of multiple students. The recording must 
be made under controlled conditions 
[1]  . It must be a complete, unedited recording 
of each performance. The presentations can be undertaken by students and 
recorded by the centre at any time during the course.  
The camera must be positioned to ensure the best possible sound and visual 
quality. The centre must ensure that the camera is not obscured, for example by 
the backs of people’s heads.  
At the start of each performance the candidate must state their full name. There is 
a requirement for an audience of at least one person, which can be the teacher, to 
be present during the recording. The audience must include the teacher.  
The recording must be readable through one of the following programmes: 
Windows Movie Maker, Real Time, VLC or Quicktime. We advise that you save the 
recordings in one of the following file types: MPEG, FLV, MOV, WMV or RM. 
Recordings should then be securely stored until it is time to submit the sample to 
Pearson. Once the sample is submitted, a monitor, whose responsibility it will be to 
ensure that the centre’s assessment is in line with the national standard, will review 
the centre’s submission. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
13 
2. Preparation of material 
Presentation recordings 
You must submit the recording of the presentation/s digitally to Pearson. Each 
recording file must be created in the following way: 
● create a file for each student. 
● name each file according to the following naming convention:  
[centre #]_[candidate number #]_[surname]_[first letter of first name]_[grade]  
Example: Joshua Smith with candidate number 7890 at centre 12345 would a 
recording titled, ‘12345_7890_Smith_J_Merit’ 
It is the centre’s responsibility to check all performances on a computer before 
sending to Pearson. You must ensure the quality of the sound and picture of the 
recordings is sufficient to enable performances to be marked. Before the recordings 
are sent for review, the teacher should check that: 
● the files submitted play on all computers/operating systems. For instance, if the 
recording was created on an Apple Mac computer, you must check that they can 
be opened on a Microsoft Windows computer. 
Assessment sheets 
Centres are provided with an assessment record sheet for use in assessing 
students’ performances.  
One record sheet should be completed for each student.  
All forms should be retained securely, and the sampled students’ sheets must be 
sent to Pearson. 
Head of Centre declaration 
The Head of Centre Declaration (see Appendix 2: Spoken Language Endorsement: 
Head of Centre Declaration) should be submitted at the same time as the sampled 
students’ recordings. 
The form must be named according to the following naming convention:  
● [centre #]_[SLE head of centre declaration]  
● example: centre 12345 would have a declaration titled, ‘12345_SLE head of 
centre declaration’. 
All materials – recordings of all student presentations and assessment sheets and 
the Head of Centre Declaration – should be stored securely until after the review of 
marking period. 
3. Submission of work  
All the sampled students’ presentation recordings and assessment sheets, and the 
Head of Centre Declaration, must be submitted digitally.  Documents can be 
submitted in either Word or PDF formats.  
Recordings of student presentations and assessment sheets should be stored 
securely until you are required to submit them.  
Submission checklist: 
● files named as described above 
● recording files checked on Apple/PC (as appropriate) for audio-visual quality 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
14 
● backup copies made and stored securely 
● assessment record sheet completed correctly for each student sampled 
● Head of Centre Declaration completed correctly. 
Submission requirements 
 
No. of students  
at centre 
No. of students whose 
presentations must be 
recorded 
Minimum no. of 
students at each  
grade (D, M, P)+ 
30 or fewer All students 10++ 
Over 30 30 10+++ 
 
The sample should be representative of the teaching groups within the centre. 
+ All students at a grade if the centre has fewer than the stated minimum. 
Students assessed as Not Classified should not be included. 
++ For example, if a centre has 15 D students, 11 M students and 3 P students, all 
of these students will be in the sample. 
+++ For example: 
(a) if a centre has 21 D students, 14 M students and 3 P students, the sample will 
consist of 10 of the D students, 10 of the M students and all of the P students, 
with 7 additional students (from D and/or M) to make the overall sample up to 
30. 
(b) if a centre has no D students, 7 M students and 60 P students, the sample will 
consist of all of the M students and 23 of the P students. 
 
[1] Please see the JCQ Instructions for conducting non-examination assessments 
(new GCE & GCSE specifications). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
15 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to comply with the 
requirements of Ofqual's General Conditions of Recognition. 
This GCSE qualification will be graded and certificated on a nine-grade scale from 9 
to 1 using the total subject mark where 9 is the highest grade. Individual papers 
are not graded. Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum judged 
by Pearson to be of sufficient standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive 
an unclassified U result. 
The result of the Spoken Language Endorsement will be reported separately from a 
student’s English Language result, and where a certificate is issued, be recorded as 
a separate line on the certificate.  
A pass, merit or distinction result will be recorded on a certificate when a student 
also achieves a 9–1 grade for the GCSE.  
Students who do not receive a pass, merit, distinction result for the Spoken 
Language Endorsement, but achieve a 9–1 grade for GCSE, will be awarded a ‘not 
classified’ and this is what will be recorded separately on their certificate.  
If a student achieves the required standard for the Spoken Language Endorsement 
but does not achieve a 9–1 grade for GCSE, both results will be issued, but no 
certificates will be issued. However, the result for the Spoken Language 
Endorsement may be transferred even if the overall grade at GCSE achieved is 
unclassified. 
The first certification opportunity for this qualification will be 2022. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
16 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of 
assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in controlled assessments discovered 
before the candidate has signed the declaration of 
authentication form does not need to be reported to 
Pearson. 
Candidate malpractice found in controlled assessments after 
the declaration of authenticity has been signed, and in 
examinations must be reported to Pearson on a  
JCQ Form M1 (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-
office/malpractice).  
The form should be emailed to 
candidatemalpractice@pearson.com. Please provide as 
much information and supporting documentation as 
possible. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate 
sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report candidate malpractice constitutes staff or 
centre malpractice.  
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate 
malpractice and maladministration of our qualifications. As 
with candidate malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is 
any act that compromises or seeks to compromise the 
process of assessment or undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and 
maladministration must be reported immediately, before 
any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson 
on a JCQ Form M2(a) (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-
office/malpractice).  
The form, supporting documentation and as much 
information as possible should be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com. Note that the final decision 
regarding appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More-detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the 
latest version of the document General and Vocational 
Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments Policies and Procedures, available at 
www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
17 
Further information 
For up-to-date advice on teacher involvement and 
administration of non-examined assessments, please refer 
to the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ) Instructions for 
conducting non-examination assessments (new GCE and 
GCSE specifications) document on the JCQ website: 
www.jcq.org.uk   
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
18 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
19 
Assessment 
Assessment summary tables 
Students must complete all assessment in the same series. 
 
Component 1: Fiction and Imaginative Writing 
*Paper code: 1EN0/01 
● Availability: May/June and November** 
● First assessment: May/June 2017 
● Assessed through a 1 hour and 45 minute examination. 
● The total number of marks available is 64. 
● The reading and writing sections on this paper will be linked by 
a theme. 
40% of the 
total GCSE 
 
Section A – Reading 
● The length of the 19th-century fiction extract will be approximately 650 words. 
● There will be a mixture of short and extended response questions on the 
extract. 
Section B – Imaginative Writing 
● Writing tasks are linked by a theme to the reading extract. Different aspects of 
the theme will be reflected in each task. 
● One of the writing tasks will provide two images that students can use to help 
them generate ideas for their writing. Students can write a response that draws 
on just one or neither of the images. 
 
The sample assessment materials can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language Sample Assessment Materials 
document. 
*See Appendix 2: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant 
to this qualification. 
**See Entry and assessment information for details of restrictions on November 
entry. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
20 
 
Component 2: Non-fiction and Transactional Writing  
*Paper code: 1EN0/02 
● Availability: May/June and November** 
● First assessment: May/June 2017 
● Assessed through a 2 hour and 5 minute examination. 
● The total number of marks available is 96. 
● The reading and writing sections on this paper will be linked by 
a theme. 
60% of the 
total GCSE 
 
Section A – Reading 
● Two unseen non-fiction extracts, from 20th- and 21st-century texts. One of 
these texts will be literary non-fiction. 
● The word count across the two extracts will be approximately 1000 words. The 
minimum length of an extract will be 300 words. 
● Questions will be on Text 1, followed by Text 2. There will be a mixture of short 
and extended response questions on the extracts. 
● Students’ ability to synthesise across two texts will be assessed in a separate 
question. 
● The final question of this section requires students to compare the writers’ ideas 
and how they are presented in the two texts. 
Section B – Transactional Writing 
● Writing tasks are linked by a theme to the reading extracts. 
● It is possible for the same form (for example a letter, an article) to be present 
on both tasks in the same paper but with a different focus and/or audience. 
 
Speaking and Listening Endorsement  *Paper code 1EN0/03 
● Availability: May/June and November** 
● First assessment: May/June 2017 
● Assessed through 1 presentation of up to 10 minutes. 
● There are no marks for the Spoken Language endorsement. 
Students are awarded a grade (Pass, Merit or Distinction). 
0% of the 
total GCSE 
 
Candidates must undertake a prepared spoken presentation on a specific topic in a 
formal setting, listen and respond to questions and feedback, and use spoken 
English effectively. 
 
The sample assessment materials can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in English Language Sample Assessment Materials 
document. 
*See Appendix 2: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant 
to this qualification. 
**See Entry and assessment information for details of restrictions on November 
entry. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
21 
Assessment Objectives and weightings 
 
Students must: 
% in 
GCSE 
READING 
AO1 ● Identify and interpret explicit and implicit 
information and ideas 
● Select and synthesise evidence from different texts 
9.4 
AO2 Explain, comment on and analyse how writers use 
language and structure to achieve effects and influence 
readers, using relevant subject terminology to support 
their views 
13.1 
AO3 Compare writers’ ideas and perspectives, as well as how 
these are conveyed, across two or more texts 8.8 
AO4 Evaluate texts critically and support this with 
appropriate textual references 18.8 
WRITING 
AO5 ● Communicate clearly, effectively and imaginatively, 
selecting and adapting tone, style and register for 
different forms, purposes and audiences 
● Organise information and ideas, using structural and 
grammatical features to support coherence and 
cohesion of texts 
30 
AO6 Candidates must use a range of vocabulary and 
sentence structures for clarity, purpose and effect, with 
accurate spelling and punctuation 
20 
SPOKEN 
LANGUAGE *AO7 Demonstrate presentation skills in a formal setting n/a 
*AO8 Listen and respond appropriately to spoken language, 
including to questions and feedback to presentations n/a 
*AO9 Use spoken Standard English effectively in speeches and 
presentations n/a 
Total 100% 
 
*These AOs are for the Spoken Language Endorsement, which will be reported as a 
separate grade on the awarding body certificate. 
NB: some figures have been rounded up or down. 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
22 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives  
 Assessment Objectives Total  
Component AO1 AO2 AO3 AO4 AO5 AO6 
Component 1 – Fiction and Imaginative Writing        
Question 1 1      1 
Question 2 2      2 
Question 3  6     6 
Question 4    15   15 
Question 5 or 6     24 16 40 
Component 2 – Non-fiction and Transactional Writing        
Question 1 2      2 
Question 2 2      2 
Question 3  15     15 
Question 4 1      1 
Question 5 1      1 
Question 6    15   15 
Question 7a 6       6 
Question 7b   14    14 
Question 8 or 9     24 16 40 
Total for this qualification 15 21 14 30 48 32 160 marks 
Total % Assessment Objectives for qualification  9.4% 13.1% 8.8% 18.8% 30% 20% 100% 
AO7, AO8 and AO9 will be assessed through the Spoken Language Endorsement. 
NB: some figures have been rounded up or down. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
23 
Entry and assessment information 
Student entry 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for 
this qualification can be found in our UK Information 
Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations 
officers and is available on our website at: 
www.edexcel.com/iwantto/Pages/uk-information-
manual.aspx 
November resits 
This qualification is available in both the summer and the 
November series. Entry to the November series is 
restricted. Students who take GCSE English Language in a 
November series must be at least 16 years of age on the 
preceding 31st August. 
Please check our website for further information. 
Discount code and performance tables 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more 
than one GCSE or other Level 2 qualifications with the same 
discount code will have only the grade for their 'first entry' 
counted for the purpose of the School and College 
Performance Tables (please see Appendix 2: Codes). For 
further information about what constitutes 'first entry' and full 
details of how this policy is applied, please refer to the DfE 
website: www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-
for-education 
Students should be advised that if they take two GCSEs 
with the same discount code, schools and colleges they 
wish to progress to are likely to take the view that this 
achievement is equivalent to only one GCSE. The same 
view may be taken if students take two GCSEs or other 
Level 2 qualifications that have different discount codes but 
have significant overlap of content. Students or their 
advisers who have any doubts about their subject 
combinations should check with the institution they wish to 
progress to before embarking on their programmes. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
24 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and 
special consideration 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. 
They allow students with special educational needs, 
disabilities or temporary injuries to: 
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the 
demands of the assessment. 
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the 
particular needs of an individual student with a disability 
without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding 
bodies comply with the duty under the Equality Act 2010 to 
make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the 
start of the course. Students will then know what is 
available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for 
assessment. 
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to 
make reasonable adjustments where a person with a 
disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in 
undertaking an assessment. The awarding organisation is 
required to take reasonable steps to overcome that 
disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be 
unique to that individual and therefore might not be in the 
list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will 
depend on a number of factors, which will include: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with 
the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves 
unreasonable costs to the awarding organisation, 
timeframes or affects the security or integrity of the 
assessment. This is because the adjustment is not 
‘reasonable’. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
25 
In most cases it will not be reasonable for adjustments to 
be made to assessment objectives within a qualification. To 
do so would be likely to undermine the effectiveness of the 
qualification in providing a reliable indication of the 
knowledge, skills and understanding of the student. There is 
no duty to make adjustments which the qualifications 
regulators have specified should not be made. 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a 
student's mark or grade to reflect temporary injury, illness 
or other indisposition at the time of the 
examination/assessment, which has had, or is reasonably 
likely to have had, a material effect on a candidate’s ability 
to take an assessment or demonstrate his or her level of 
attainment in an assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to 
apply for access arrangements and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, 
reasonable adjustments and special consideration, please 
refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk 
Equality Act 2010 and Pearson equality policy 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality 
policy requires all students to have equal opportunity to 
access our qualifications and assessments, and our 
qualifications to be awarded in a way that is fair to every 
student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by 
the Equality Act 2010) are not, when they are 
undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in 
comparison to students who do not share that 
characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for 
undertaking a qualification and that this achievement 
can be compared fairly to the achievement of their 
peers. 
You can find details on how to make adjustments for 
students with protected characteristics in the policy 
document Access Arrangements, Reasonable Adjustments 
and Special Considerations, which is on our website, 
www.edexcel.com/Policies 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
26 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to 
comply with the requirements of the current Code of 
Practice published by the Office of Qualifications and 
Examinations Regulation (Ofqual). 
The GCSE (9–1) qualification will be graded and certificated 
on a nine-grade scale from 9 to 1 using the total subject 
mark where 9 is the highest grade. Individual components 
are not graded. 
Students are awarded a grade (Pass, Merit, Distinction or 
Not Classified) for the Spoken Language Endorsement. The 
Spoken Language Endorsement grade will appear on all 
students’ certificates as a separately reported grade, 
alongside the overall 9-1 grade issued. 
The first certification opportunity for the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language will be 
2017. 
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum 
judged by Pearson to be of sufficient standard to be 
recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified 
U result. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be available in English. 
All student work must be in English. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
27 
Other information 
Student recruitment 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to 
our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of 
reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and 
progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this 
qualification. 
Progression from GCSE 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) English Language is a 
requirement for progression to a wide range of courses at 
Level 3. Students are expected to continue with their study 
of GCSE English Language after the age of 16 if they have 
not achieved the qualification at Key Stage 4. 
Students can progress from this qualification to Level 3 
qualifications in similar disciplines such as English literature, 
drama, theatre studies, media studies and film studies, and 
to other qualifications that require literacy skills, knowledge 
and understanding. 
This qualification prepares students for progression to 
further study of English Language at AS and A level and to 
the study of AS and A level English Language and 
Literature. These Level 3 qualifications prepare students for 
a variety of further progression routes. Students should 
seek advice about which of these qualifications best 
prepares them for their intended progression routes. 
This qualification also supports further training and 
employment where literacy skills are required. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
28 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
29 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Transferable skills 31 
Appendix 2: Codes 33 
Appendix 3: Spoken Language Endorsement: Assessment record 
sheet 35 
Appendix 4: Spoken Language Endorsement: Head of Centre 
Declaration 37 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
30 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
31 
Appendix 1: Transferable skills 
 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently 
flagged the need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable 
them to respond with confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the 
world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines 
skills, or competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that 
can be learned and that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform 
an activity or task and can be built upon and extended through learning.’
 [1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected 
and evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this 
process, we identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the 
most evidence-based and robust skills framework. We adapted the framework 
slightly to include the Program for International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT 
Literacy and Collaborative Problem Solving (CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves: [2] 
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve 
general cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and 
communicate[3]. 
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, oral communication, written 
communication, assertive communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, 
service orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and 
negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared 
understanding, taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team 
organisation. 
 
 
[1]  OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012) 
[2]  Koenig J A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop  
(National Academies Press, 2011) 
[3]  PISA – The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy (2011) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
32 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work 
stress, adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, 
and physical adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual 
teams, work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and 
able to acquire new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher 
education, as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the 
teaching and learning of this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning 
materials, developed with stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
33 
Appendix 2: Codes 
 
Type of code Use of code Code number 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for 
performance tables is assigned a 
discount code indicating the subject 
area to which it belongs. 
Discount codes are published by the 
DfE. 
Please see the  
GOV.UK website 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an 
Ofqual Regulated Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) code. 
The RQF code is known as a 
Qualification Number (QN). This is 
the code that features in the DfE 
Section 96 and on the LARA as being 
eligible for 16–18 and 19+ funding, 
and is to be used for all qualification 
funding purposes. The QN will 
appear on students’ final certification 
documentation. 
The QN for this 
qualification is:  
601/4836/6 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres 
to enter students for a qualification. 
Centres will need to use the entry 
codes only when claiming students’ 
qualifications. 
GCSE (9–1) – 1EN0 
 
Paper code These codes are provided for 
reference purposes. Students do not 
need to be entered for individual 
papers. 
Paper 1: 1EN0/01 
Paper 2: 1EN0/02 
Spoken Language 
Endorsement: 1EN0/03 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
34 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
35 
Appendix 3: Spoken Language 
Endorsement: Assessment record sheet 
 
 
 
 
GCSE English Spoken Language Endorsement 
Centre number: Recorded?     
Candidate number: Candidate name: 
Details of task: 
 
Assessment criteria  
Pass criteria 
Is audible  P 
Uses Spoken Standard English* P 
Expresses straightforward ideas/information/ feelings P 
Makes an attempt to organise and structure their presentation P 
Makes an attempt to meet the needs of the audience P 
Listen to questions/feedback and provides an appropriate response in a 
straight forward manner 
P 
Merit criteria 
Is audible  M 
Uses Spoken Standard English* M 
Expresses challenging ideas/information/ feelings using a range of vocabulary M 
Organises and structures their presentation clearly and appropriately to meet 
the needs of the audience 
M 
Achieves the purpose of their presentation M 
Listens to questions/feedback responding formally and in some detail M 

 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
36 
Assessment criteria  
Distinction criteria 
Is audible  D 
Uses Spoken Standard English* D 
Expresses sophisticated ideas/ information/feelings using a sophisticated 
repertoire of vocabulary 
D 
Organises and structures their presentation using an effective range of 
strategies to engage the audience 
D 
Achieves the purpose of their presentation D 
Listens to questions/feedback, responds perceptively and if appropriate 
elaborates with further ideas and information 
D 
 
* For the purposes of the spoken language assessment, use of Spoken Standard 
English means that a learner must: 
● be intelligible, and 
● generally use language appropriate to the formal setting of the presentation  
 
Candidates must fulfil ALL the criteria for a level in order to achieve that 
level overall. 
Candidates must also fulfil ALL the criteria for preceding levels, where 
applicable. 
 
 
Teacher Declaration  
I declare that the work submitted for assessment has been carried out without 
assistance other than that which is acceptable according to the rules of the 
specification. I certify that to the best of my knowledge the evidence submitted for 
this assignment is the learner’s own. The learner has clearly referenced any sources 
and any artificial intelligence (AI) tools used in the work. I have not solely used AI to 
mark the learner’s work. I understand that false declaration is a form of malpractice. 
 
Teacher signature: ________________________________ Date: _____________ 
 
 
Candidate Declaration 
I certify that the work submitted for this assessment is my own. I have clearly 
referenced any sources and any AI tools used in the work. I understand that false 
declaration is a form of malpractice. I acknowledge that Pearson may use candidate 
work for the purposes of standardisation, training, and exemplar material. 
 
Candidate signature: ________________________________ Date: ____________ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in English Language 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
37 
 
 
Appendix 4: Spoken Language 
Endorsement: Head of Centre Declaration 
 
GCSE English Spoken Language endorsement  
GCSE English Language (9-1) 
Head of centre declaration 
 
Centre name: 
 
 
 
Centre number: 
Exams series and year – May/June 
 
 
Name of Head of centre (please print in block capitals)*: 
 
Declaration: 
 
I 
hereby confirm that reasonable steps have been taken to ensure that all 
candidates entered for GCSE English Language (9-1) have undertaken the Spoken 
Language endorsement. 
 
I hereby confirm that the sample is representative of the various teaching groups 
within our centre. 
Signature of head of centre: 
 ________________________________________________________________  
 
Date: 
 ________________________________________________________________  
 
 
*The head of centre is usually the head teacher or principal. 
Please submit the completed form to Pearson along with the sample 
student audio-visual recordings. 
 
DB140824 9781446963098_GCSE_2015_L12_ENGLANG_ISS6.DOC.1–50/0 

For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office:  80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121