Specification
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9 - 1) in Drama (1DR0)
First teaching from September 2016
First certification from 2018 Issue 6
GCSE (9-1)
Drama

 
 
About Pearson 
We are the world’s leading learning company operating in countries all around the world. We 
provide content, assessment and digital services to learners, educational institutions, 
employers, governments and other partners globally. We are committed to helping equip 
learners with the skills they need to enhance their employability prospects and to succeed in 
the changing world of work. We believe that wherever learning flourishes so do people. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References to third party materials made in this specification are made in good faith. Pearson 
does not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may 
be subject to change, or any opinions expressed therein. (Materials may include textbooks, 
journals, magazines and other publications and websites.) 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
 
ISBN 978 1 446 92631 4 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2025 
 
 
 
Summary of changes for Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama (1DR0) 
specification Issue 6 
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this current 
issue 
Page 
number 
The following sentence has changed from: 
Centres are free to make these live theatre arrangements at any time during the 
delivery of the qualification before Component 3 is taken. 
To: 
Centres are free to make these live theatre arrangements at any time during the 
delivery of the qualification before submission of the live performance statement. 
7 
The word “extreme” has been added before extenuating circumstances. 7 
The statements “please note that international centres have no obligation to fulfil 
this live theatre requirement” has been removed.  
7 
The following sentence has changed from: 
To ensure that this requirement is met, centres are required to submit a live 
performance statement. This must be submitted to Pearson by 15th May  
(see page 6). 
To: 
To ensure that this requirement is met, centres are required to submit a live 
performance statement. From September 2025 and onwards, for the lifetime of 
the qualification, this must be submitted to Pearson by 1st May.  
7 
We have updated Component 1 to include the option of performing as part of  
a duologue. As a result, all references to a "group" performance (within 
component 1 only) have been revised to "group/duologue" performance. Full 
details of this addition can be found on pages 10 and 10 of the specification. 
9 and 10 
The statement below is an amendment which correctly verifies that Component 2 
is externally assessed. 
The proportional time penalty will be applied by Pearson Edexcel after the work 
has been marked by the examiner, using the conversion tables in Appendix 6. 
32 
The following sentence has been removed (the option is for UK centres only. 
International centres do not have visiting examiner options) 
37 
The following statement has been added in:  
Permission must be sought from Pearson in advance for the inclusion of non-
assessed individuals. Please email your requests to 
drama.assessment@pearson.com. Please upload to Learner Work Transfer when 
submitting assessment materials. 
38 
Remove the following statement from the bottom of the page: 
Students should consider the potential for staging the text. They must explore 
and develop an understanding of how performers, directors and designers 
influence performance style, design elements and staging, to communicate 
meaning to an audience. 
47 
 
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this current 
issue 
Page 
number 
The sentence “watching a recorded live performance or live stream of a 
performance.” has been removed and the clearer definition of live theatre has 
been updated with: 
For the purposes of this qualification, live theatre means being a member of the 
audience in the same performance space as the performers.  
48 
The following sentence has been changed:  
Students will reflect on their experience as an informed member watching a live 
theatre performance 
To 
Students will reflect on their experience as an informed member of an audience 
at a live theatre performance. 
48 The following statement has been added:  
Centres are reminded that they must submit a live performance statement to 
Pearson (please see page 8 for details) 
If there are extreme extenuating circumstances regarding the access to live 
theatre for this component, then centres are required to contact 
drama.assessment@pearson.com. 
49 
The following statement has been replaced: 
Students must answer all questions related to the performance text they have 
studied for Section A. For Section B they answer both questions on the 
performance they have seen either in person or via recorded or streamed live 
theatre. 
To 
Students must answer all questions related to the performance text they have 
studied for Section A. For Section B they answer both questions on the 
performance they have seen. 
50 
 
 
 
Contents 
1 Introduction 1 
Why choose Edexcel GCSE Drama? 1 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this qualification 2 
Qualification at a glance 3 
Prescribed texts at a glance 5 
2 Subject content and assessment information 8 
Component 1: Devising 9 
Component 2: Performance from Text 29 
Component 3: Theatre Makers in Practice 46 
Assessment Objectives 51 
3 Administration and general information 52 
Entries 52 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special consideration 
and malpractice 52 
Student recruitment and progression 56 
Appendix 1: Non-examination assessment authentication sheet 
(Component 1) 58 
Appendix 2: Live theatre evaluation notes form (Component 3) 59 
Appendix 3: Design roles minimum resource guidance for centres 60 
Appendix 4: Best practice when recording performance 61 
Appendix 5: Guidance on selecting suitable material for students 63 
Appendix 6: Mark penalty tables for performances/design realisations 
not meeting the minimum assessment time – Component 2 64 
Appendix 7: Diversity and Inclusion statement 66 
Appendix 8: The context for the development of this qualification 68 
Appendix9: Transferable skills 70 
Appendix 10: Codes 71 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
1 
 
1 Introduction 
Why choose Edexcel GCSE Drama? 
We have listened to feedback from all parts of the drama community, including higher 
education, teachers and subject groups.  
We have used this opportunity of curriculum change to redesign a qualification that will 
engage students through encouraging creativity, focusing on practical work which reflects 
twenty-first century theatre practice and developing skills that will support progression to 
further study of drama and a wide range of other subjects.  
Clear and coherent structure – our qualification has a straightforward structure with three 
components, one that focuses on devising, one that focuses on performing in or designing for 
a performance from a text and one that focuses on practical understanding of a performance 
text.  
Practical focus – this new qualification focuses on the practical exploration of performance 
texts. The performance text that will be studied for the examination will require students to 
articulate how they would perform in certain roles, and direct and design for certain extracts, 
putting practical work at the heart of the qualification. 
Engaging prescribed texts – we have selected a list of performance texts that will engage 
students and will inspire teachers and students. Our selection ensures that texts which have 
been popular in the past are still available to centres for performance in the non-examination 
assessment components.  
Free choice of performance texts – this new qualification will continue to allow you the 
freedom to choose performance texts that will best suit your students, their ability to access 
the work, their interests and their performance skills.  
Clear and straightforward question papers – we have focused on ensuring that our 
question papers are clear and accessible for students and that mark schemes are 
straightforward and make the requirements clear.  
Performance and design skills – we will continue to assess student’s performance and 
design skills through visiting examiners ensuring students skills are assessed in a live 
context. 
Develops transferable skills for progression to A level – students will develop a 
multitude of skills, including collaboration, communication and an understanding of how to 
amend and refine work in order to make a smooth transition to the next level of study.  
Supports progression to A level – we have developed this GCSE at the same time as our 
A level qualifications. This ensures sensible progression of knowledge, understanding and 
skills from GCSE to A level and similar approaches to assessment, so that students will have 
a coherent experience of drama if they take Pearson Edexcel GCSE in Drama, and A level in 
Drama and Theatre. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
2 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this 
qualification 
Planning  
● Our Getting Started Guide gives you an overview of the new GCSE qualification to help 
you get to grips with the changes to content and assessment and to help you understand 
what these changes mean for you and your students. 
● We will give you an editable course planner and scheme of work that you can adapt to 
suit your department.  
● Our mapping documents highlight key differences between this new qualification and 
the 2009 qualification.  
Teaching and learning  
There will be lots of free teaching and learning support to help you deliver the new 
qualification, including: 
● a guide to devising work for performance 
● a guide to interpreting texts for performance.  
Preparing for exams  
We will also provide a range of resources to help you prepare your students for assessments, 
including: 
● additional assessment materials to support formative assessments and mock exams 
● marked examples of student work with examiner commentaries.  
Results Plus 
Results Plus provides the most detailed analysis available of your students’ exam 
performance. It can help you identify the topics and skills where further learning would 
benefit your students.  
Get help and support 
Our subject advisor service and our online community will ensure you receive help and 
guidance from us and that you can share ideas and information with other teachers. You can 
sign up to receive e-newsletters by emailing TeachingPerformingArts@pearson.com for 
qualification updates and product and service news.  
Learn more on our website. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
3 
Qualification at a glance 
Content and assessment overview 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Drama consists of two non-examination 
assessment components and one externally examined paper.  
Students must complete all assessment by May/June in any single year. 
Details of the Assessment Objectives (AO) are on page 52. 
 
Component 1: Devising (*Component code: 1DR0/01) 
Non-examination assessment  
40% of the qualification – 60 marks 
Content overview 
● Create and develop a devised piece from a stimulus (free choice for centre). 
● Performance of this devised piece or design realisation for this performance. 
● Analyse and evaluate the devising process and performance. 
● Performer or designer routes available.  
Assessment overview 
● AO1, AO2 and AO4 are assessed.  
● Internally assessed and externally moderated. 
● There are two parts to the assessment:  
1) a portfolio covering the creating and developing process and analysis and evaluation 
of this process (45 marks, 30 marks assessing AO1 and 15 marks assessing AO4). 
The portfolio submission recommendations are:  
- can be handwritten/typed evidence between 1500–2000 words  
or 
- can be recorded/verbal evidence between 8–10 minutes  
or 
- can be a combination of handwritten/typed evidence (between 750–1000 words) 
and recorded/verbal evidence (between 4–5 minutes) 
2) a devised performance/design realisation (15 marks, assessing AO2). 
 
*See Appendix 10: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to this 
qualification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
4 
 
Component 2: Performance from Text (*Component code: 1DR0/02)  
Non-examination assessment  
20% of the qualification – 48 marks 
Content overview 
● Students will either perform in and/or design for two key extracts from a performance 
text. 
● Centre choice of performance text. 
● Performer or designer routes available.  
Assessment overview 
● AO2 is assessed. 
● Externally assessed either by visiting examiner or by examiner assessing the recorded 
live performance. Centres are free to cover the performance/designing of the two key 
extracts in any way. This freedom caters for centres with different cohort sizes and 
allows them to choose group, solo and/or partner-based routes for assessment. 
● Performance/design realisation covering both key extracts is worth 48 marks. 
● If two separate performances are done covering two key extracts, then each 
performance/design realisation is worth 24 marks. 
 
Component 3: Theatre Makers in Practice (*Paper code: 1DR0/3A or 3B)  
Written examination: 1 hour 45 minutes 
40% of the qualification – 60 marks 
Content overview 
● Practical exploration and study of one complete performance text. 
● Choice of 12 performance texts. 
● Live theatre evaluation. 
Assessment overview 
3A – covers the List A performance text choices. 
3B – covers the List B performance text choices. 
Section A: Bringing Texts to Life 
● 45 marks, assessing AO3. 
● This section consists of one question broken into five parts (short and extended 
responses) based on an unseen extract from the chosen performance text.  
● Performance texts are not allowed in the examination as the extracts will be provided. 
Section B: Live Theatre Evaluation   
● 15 marks, assessing AO4. 
● This section consists of two questions requiring students to analyse and evaluate a live 
theatre performance they have seen. 
● Students are allowed to bring in theatre evaluation notes of up to a maximum of 
500 words.  
 
*See Appendix 10: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to this 
qualification. These options will be operational in 2022 to cover the new performance text 
additions. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
5 
Prescribed texts at a glance 
Students must study one complete and substantial performance text (Component 3) and a 
minimum of two key extracts from a second contrasting performance text (Component 2).  
Contrasting text requirement 
In order to ensure that centres meet the requirement to study contrasting performance 
texts, the prescribed texts lists for Component 3 have been grouped into two time periods 
and categorised by genre and playwright. List A consists of pre-1954 texts and List B 
represents post-2000 texts. 
For Component 3 centres must study a performance text from one of the following lists. 
For Component 2 centres must ensure they meet all three contrast rules of time, genre 
and playwright as shown below. Examples of how this might work are given on pages 7 
and 8. 
To ensure that this contrast requirement is met, centres are required to submit their text 
choices via an online form. This form must be submitted to Pearson at the beginning of 
the year of certification. Details are on our website: qualifications.pearson.com 
Centres are reminded that if they do not submit their text choices then this may result in 
malpractice/maladministration. 
List A (pre-1954) one from: 
Component 3: performance text 
for written examination 
Genre Component 2: performance 
text 
A Doll’s House, Henrik Ibsen 
(adapted by Tanika Gupta)* 
Historical drama  Free choice of any 
post-1954 text (excluding 
any text on lists A and B) that 
has a different playwright 
and genre 
An Inspector Calls, J B Priestley Social thriller/ 
mystery 
Antigone, Sophocles (adapted by 
Roy Williams)* 
Tragedy 
Government Inspector, Nikolai 
Gogol (adapted by David Harrower) 
Black comedy 
The Crucible, Arthur Miller  Historical drama  
Twelfth Night, William Shakespeare Romantic comedy 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
6 
OR 
List B (post-2000) one from: 
Component 3: performance text 
for written examination 
Genre Component 2: performance 
text 
100, Diene Petterle, Neil Monaghan 
and Christopher Heimann 
Ensemble story-
telling 
Free choice of any pre-2000 
text (excluding any text on 
lists A and B) that has a 
different playwright and 
genre 
1984, George Orwell, Robert Icke 
and Duncan Macmillan 
Political satire 
Blue Stockings, Jessica Swale Historical drama 
DNA, Dennis Kelly Black comedy 
The Free9, In-Sook Chappell* Tragedy/ensemble 
story-telling  
Gone Too Far!, Bola Agbaje* Social drama 
 
*These texts are for first teaching from September 2021 and first assessment will be 2022. 
Achieving a contrast in practice – examples 
List A (pre-1954) 
Component 3 text choice Contrast requirement Example Component 2 
text choice 
The Crucible, Arthur Miller 
(historical drama) 
Centres must choose for 
Component 2: one  
post-1954 text that is not by 
Arthur Miller or a historical 
drama 
A Taste of Honey,  
Shelagh Delaney  
(1958 – kitchen sink drama) 
or 
Missing Dan Nolan,  
Mark Wheeller  
(2005 – verbatim drama) 
Twelfth Night, William 
Shakespeare (romantic 
comedy) 
Centres must choose for 
Component 2: one  
post-1954 text that is not by 
William Shakespeare or a 
romantic comedy 
One Man, Two Guvnors, 
Richard Bean (2011 – 
physical comedy) 
or 
Curious Incident of the Dog 
in the Night-Time,  
Simon Stephens  
(2012 – comic mystery) 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
7 
List B (post-2000) 
Component 3 text choice Contrast requirement Example Component 2 
text choice 
Blue Stockings, Jessica 
Swale (historical drama) 
Centres must choose for 
Component 2: one pre-2000 
text that is not by Jessica 
Swale or a historical drama 
Collected Grimm Tales, 
Carol Ann Duffy and Tim 
Supple (1994 – fairy tale) 
or 
Blood Brothers, Willy Russell 
(1983 – tragi-comedy) 
DNA, Dennis Kelly (black 
comedy) 
Centres must choose for 
Component 2: one pre-2000 
text that is not by Dennis 
Kelly or a black comedy 
Noises Off, Michael Frayn 
(1982 – British farce) 
or 
Medea, Euripides  
(431 BC – Greek tragedy) 
 
Texts will be reviewed regularly throughout the lifetime of the qualification to ensure that all 
prescribed texts remain fit for purpose. Therefore, texts may be subject to change and the 
list revised. In the event that a change is required, centres will be notified and, if required, a 
list of the appropriate alternative(s) will be posted on our website 
(qualifications.pearson.com) a year in advance. 
Please note that while resources are checked at the time of publication, materials may be 
withdrawn from circulation at any time. A list of appropriate alternatives will be provided on 
our website (qualifications.pearson.com) in the event that a named edition goes out of print. 
Live performance statement 
It is a requirement of this qualification for students to experience live theatre in person as a 
member of the audience in the same performance space as the performers. Centres must 
make every effort possible for students to see live performance in this manner and confirm 
that they have done so to Pearson. Centres are free to make these live theatre arrangements 
at any time during the delivery of the qualification before submission of the live performance 
statement.  
To ensure that this requirement is met, centres are required to submit a live performance 
statement. From September 2025 and onwards, for the lifetime of the qualification this must be 
submitted to Pearson by 1st May. 
If there are extreme extenuating circumstances regarding the access to live theatre, centres 
need to contact 
drama.assessment@pearson.com. 
For more details on all of the above please go to the subject page of our website – and click 
on the ‘Performance text choices and live performance statement’ section. 
Centres should be aware that if they do not submit a statement then it may result in 
malpractice/maladministration (see page 55). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
8 
2 Subject content and assessment 
information 
Qualification aims and objectives 
The aims and objectives of this qualification are to enable students to:  
● apply knowledge and understanding when making, performing and responding to drama  
● explore performance texts, understanding their social, cultural and historical context 
including the theatrical conventions of the period in which they were created  
● develop a range of theatrical skills and apply them to create performances  
● work collaboratively to generate, develop and communicate ideas  
● develop as creative, effective, independent and reflective students able to make informed 
choices in process and performance  
● contribute as an individual to a theatrical performance  
● reflect on and evaluate their own work and that of others  
● develop an awareness and understanding of the roles and processes undertaken in 
contemporary professional theatre practice  
● adopt safe working practices.  
Core skills 
The core skills developed in this qualification are: 
● the ability to recognise and understand the roles and responsibilities of performer, 
designer and director 
● the study and exploration of texts and extracts must include the relevant social, historical 
and cultural contexts 
● the ability to analyse and evaluate their own work and the work of others 
● the ability to understand how performance texts can be interpreted and performed. 
Performance and designer routes 
Students may complete Components 1 and 2 as a performer or designer or do any 
combination of both of these roles. 
Option 1 
Component 1 Component 2 
Student completes as a performer or 
designer  
Student studies both key extracts as a 
performer or designer 
 
Option 2 
Component 1 Component 2 
Student completes as a performer or 
designer 
Student studies one extract as a designer 
and the second extract as a performer (or 
vice versa) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
9 
Component 1: Devising  
Overview 
This component deals with devising, which is an exciting and challenging opportunity to work 
collaboratively with others to explore a range of stimuli in order to create an original 
performance piece.  
Devising is essential for the development of new theatre and performance; it allows for 
personal development and exploration. It allows both performer and designer the 
opportunity to stretch the limits of their creativity and imagination, while exploring a theme 
or topic of interest to them and their intended audience.  
Students will develop skills in creative collaboration, research and negotiation, while also 
developing creativity, performance and design skills. Students will consider the impact that 
they can make on an audience, as they develop the ideas that they want to communicate. 
Content 
There are three areas of focus. 
1) Creating and developing a devised piece from stimuli. 
2) A performance/design realisation of the devised piece. 
3) Analysing and evaluating the creative process for a devised performance. 
Students may complete this component as part of a duologue performance (2 performers) or 
a group performance (3–6 performers). NB: The duologue performance option will be for first 
teaching September 2025, first assessment 2027. 
Students may complete this component either as a performer or designer.  
The design roles are: 
● costume design 
● lighting design 
● set design 
● sound design.  
Centres wanting to offer design roles to students should refer to Appendix 3: Design roles 
minimum resource requirements for centres. 
Choice of stimuli 
Centres have a free choice of stimuli, but the stimuli must ensure that students can: 
● work collaboratively to create and develop the performance  
● apply the necessary performance or design skills  
● analyse and evaluate both the process and the performance 
● meet the Assessment Objectives. 
Teachers should choose between 1–3 pieces of stimuli and these may be one or a 
combination of the following: 
● textual, for example a novel, poem, story, letter or factual material 
● visual, for example a painting, photograph, film or artefact 
● aural, for example a piece of music, a soundscape or a recording 
● abstract, for example a word, a theme or a mood. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
10 
Stimuli material should avoid any unnecessary offence to students – also please see 
Appendix 5 for further guidance on selection. Stimuli material should: 
● be age appropriate 
● not cause, racial, religious or gender offence 
● not include performance texts or recordings of live theatre. 
Duologue / Group Requirements  
Duologue time limits  
A duologue must contain 2 performance students. In addition, there can be up to one 
designer per role, per duologue.   
All students must be assessed as individuals.  
The regulatory requirements are that duologues must complete a minimum performance 
time of 3 minutes for this component.  
The recommended minimum performance times have been provided to ensure that each 
student within the duologue has sufficient time to access all levels of the assessment criteria.  
Group sizes and time limits 
A group must contain between three and six performance students. In addition, there can 
be up to one designer per role, per group.  
All students must be assessed as individuals. 
The regulatory requirements are that groups must complete a minimum performance time of 
4 minutes for this component.  
The recommended minimum performance times have been provided to ensure that each 
student within the group has sufficient time to access all levels of the assessment criteria. 
 
Group size Recommended 
minimum performance 
times 
Maximum performance 
times 
2 performance students (duologue) 6 minutes 8 minutes 
3–4 performance students (group) 10 minutes 15 minutes 
5–6 performance students (group) 20 minutes 25 minutes 
 
Centres should be aware that performance times that are between the regulatory minimum 
(4 minutes) and the recommended minimum (10 or 20 minutes) may not allow students to 
evidence their skills fully in order to access all levels of the assessment criteria. 
Meeting the performance timings 
Students (performance and design) who do not meet the regulatory minimum performance 
requirement of 4 minutes will be assessed by teachers against the assessment criteria on 
pages 25-28; however they will not be able to achieve beyond Level 2. 
Teachers will be required to stop marking after the maximum performance time has passed. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
11 
Failure to accurately record the performance times on the authentication sheet (see 
Appendix 1) may result in staff/centre malpractice. For further information about this, please 
see the Administration and general information section in this specification. 
1) Creating and developing a devised piece from stimuli 
Students must select stimuli and then be able to demonstrate how they have been used to 
create and develop a performance piece, this should include how they have rehearsed and 
refined their work with clear intent. This process must be recorded over the course of the 
development from inception to performance.  
Performers and designers must work collaboratively and keep an individual record of their 
contribution throughout the process.  
Students are required to know and understand the following:  
● characteristics of dramatic work including genre, structure, character, form, style, and 
language  
● how meaning is communicated and interpreted through: 
o performance conventions 
o use of space and spatial relationships on stage 
o relationships between performer and audience. 
All students must explore the processes by which devised performance is developed and 
demonstrate the following skills to create and communicate meaning through:  
● research  
● developing ideas and intentions  
● rehearsing, refining and amending work in progress for performance.  
Centres may practically explore stimuli using a variety of methods such as:  
● whole class exploration  
● small group improvisations  
● creating tableaux, role on the wall, hot seating, etc.   
● developing movement/physical sequences 
● developing soundscapes 
● forum theatre. 
Students’ research should include (where relevant) an investigation of:   
● social, historical and cultural contexts  
● theatrical conventions 
● current themes and trends  
● issues and controversies.  
The creative process should be done practically by students. Significant time should be spent 
developing and rehearsing the work for an audience. Students should also be aware of any 
relevant health and safety considerations. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
12 
 
2) Group/duologue-devised performances/design realisations  
All students must contribute to the realisation of artistic intentions. They will demonstrate 
skills as a performer and/or designer in a performance for a live audience.  
All performances must be recorded and centres are free to identify their own suitable 
audience and venue for the performance. This could include: 
● performance to the rest of the class or another class within the centre 
● performance to an invited external audience. 
Performers must develop skills in: 
● rehearsing and learning lines; adapting work in response to rehearsals (to be done 
collaboratively) 
● voice: use of clarity, pace, inflection, pitch and projection  
● physicality: use of space, gesture, stillness and stance 
● ability to combine and apply vocal and physical skills 
● characterisation  
● communication with other performers and with the audience 
● understanding of style, genre and theatrical conventions. 
For design skills, please see section below. 
Teachers should adopt a facilitating role in this component. They can give support and 
guidance at the development stage of the performance(s) but not during the performance(s). 
When in a facilitating role, teachers are allowed to: 
● help students with interpreting information, e.g. explaining assessment criteria and the 
requirements of the component 
● intervene if a health and safety issue arises 
● intervene if a risk to security of evidence arises 
● undertake a management role in relation to managing time, space, resources 
● ask questions to stimulate independent thought without leading students. 
When in a facilitating role, teachers are not allowed to: 
● offer coaching 
● direct students 
● undertake an artistic/creative role 
● give solutions to artistic/creative problems 
● make artistic/creative decisions. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
13 
●  
3) Analysing and evaluating the creative process and  
Group/duologue-devised performance 
All students must reflect on and evaluate the effectiveness of the devising process. Students 
must analyse and evaluate: 
● ideas explored and research undertaken 
● decisions made and the rationale behind them  
● their collaborative involvement 
● content, genre, structure, character, form, style, and language  
● the final performance and the effectiveness of their contribution to it 
● the realisation of their intentions.  
All students must also be aware of, and be able to use, appropriate subject-specific 
terminology.  
Design roles 
Designers must work collaboratively within a group of performers within their chosen area of 
design to realise artistic intentions. They must be aware of any relevant health and safety 
considerations. 
Where a student is assessed in a design role, it is their design skill that is the focus of the 
assessment, rather than their technical competence in the operation or use of equipment. 
The devised piece should provide sufficient opportunity for designers to meet the demands of 
this component. Designs should take into consideration performer/audience relationships and 
any health and safety implications and performer usage as appropriate.   
There is a maximum of one designer per role, per group/duologue.  
Designers must develop skills in: 
● making appropriate judgements during the development process  
● creating clear and practical design (e.g. creating plans/plots/diagrams/sketches) with 
consideration to practical application of materials and production elements 
● adapting designs in response to rehearsals (to be done collaboratively) 
● using visual/aural elements to create mood and atmosphere and style 
● using, applying and combining design skills to contribute and support the performance as 
a whole 
● demonstrating the ability to apply design skills effectively within the context of the 
performance  
● communicating intention and creating impact to an audience. 
There is a list of the requirements for each design skill for this component on the next page.  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
14 
Component 1 - Requirements for design skills 
Requirements Costume design Lighting design Set design Sound design 
Design skill Final costume designs for two 
characters in the production, 
incorporating hair, makeup and 
mask considerations if 
appropriate.  
All sourcing must be based wholly 
on the student’s design(s). 
Final lighting design 
incorporating grid plans and a 
lantern schedule that indicates 
the use of at least four different 
lighting states.  
Drawings of the final design 
to be realised in the 
performance space and any 
relevant props.  
Source sheet showing at 
least four sound cues –
original, live or found sound 
effects as appropriate.  
Additional 
documentation  
A costume plot or list of 
costumes/accessories worn by 
each performer indicating any 
changes as appropriate. 
A lighting plot or cue sheet 
showing at least four different 
lighting states as appropriate.  
A ground plan of the 
performance space, including 
entrances and exits, audience 
positioning and stage furniture 
(as appropriate). 
A cue sheet showing the 
source, order, length and 
output level of each cue.  
Supervision The student must supervise the 
construction and/or sourcing of 
the designed costumes as 
appropriate. 
The student must supervise the 
rigging, focusing, programming 
(if applicable) and operating of 
the design as appropriate. 
The student must supervise the 
construction, painting, hiring 
and /or finding of scenic 
elements needed to meet the 
requirements of their design as 
appropriate. 
The student must supervise 
the production of the final 
sound design which they 
have created and recorded 
using live and/or sampled 
material as appropriate.  
Performance A realisation of the costume 
design in the performance. 
A realisation of the lighting 
design in the performance. 
A realisation of the set design in 
the performance. 
A realisation of the sound 
design in the performance. 
 
NB: Centres are reminded that any appropriate evidence produced in line with the requirements above should also be sent to the moderator as part of the 
design students’ portfolio.  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
15 
Assessment information 
This component is internally assessed and externally moderated. It is worth 60 marks and 
AO1, AO2 and AO4 are assessed. 
First assessment: 2018 
There are two parts to the assessment. 
1) A portfolio containing evidence of: 
• creating and developing the group/duologue devised performance/design realisation  
• analysing and evaluating this creation and development   
• analysing and evaluating the group/duologue devised performance/design realisation.  
2) A recording of the group/duologue devised final performance.  
The portfolio 
All students must document the practical creation and development of ideas, along with the 
analysis and evaluation of this process and their performance of the devised work.  
The portfolio is worth 45 marks. AO1 and AO4 are assessed – AO1 is worth 30 marks and 
AO4 is worth 15 marks.  
The portfolio is marked by the teacher and sent to the moderator if requested as part of the 
sample, along with the accompanying performance recording(s). 
The portfolio must be the student’s own work.  
For each student the portfolio must cover the following: 
● their contribution to the creation, development and realisation  
● consideration of genre, structure, character, form, style, and language  
● successful communication of intentions 
● health and safety issues. 
Each student must include a response to the following questions.   
● What was your initial response to the stimuli and what were the intentions of the piece?  
● What work did your group do in order to explore the stimuli and start to create ideas for 
performance?  
● What were some of the significant moments during the development process and when 
rehearsing and refining your work? 
● How did you consider genre, structure, character, form, style, and language throughout 
the process?  
● How effective was your contribution to the final performance?  
● Were you successful in what you set out to achieve? 
Portfolios may include any of the following elements:  
● annotations and notes 
● audio and/or video evidence 
● annotated drawings and sketches 
● annotated photographs 
● extended written responses. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
16 
It is recommended that the portfolio submitted is: 
● handwritten/typed evidence between 1500 and 2000 words  
or  
● recorded/verbal evidence between 8 and 10 minutes  
or 
● a combination of handwritten/typed evidence (between 750 and 1000 words) and 
recorded/verbal evidence (between 4 and 5 minutes). 
It is strongly advisable that the upper word/time limits are adhered to by students to enable 
them to satisfy the requirement to produce a concise and coherently structured response. 
When students are working on producing their portfolio teachers must follow these rules: 
● students must be directly supervised for a sufficient portion of the creation of the portfolio 
to allow teachers to confidently authenticate each student’s work 
● teachers should not write any part of a student’s portfolio 
● teachers may help students to understand the assessment requirements of the task (e.g. 
length of the task) 
● teachers can provide feedback once on one draft version for the portfolio before it is 
handed in to be marked 
● the focus of this feedback must only be on the requirements of the portfolio and the 
Assessment Objectives 
● any additional feedback must be recorded on the Non-examination assessment 
authentication sheet (see Appendix 1). 
The group/duologue-devised performance  
The recorded and unedited devised performance is marked by the teacher and moderated by 
Pearson. Please refer to Appendix 4: Best practice when recording performance. 
The performance/design realisation is worth 15 marks. AO2 is assessed. 
The recorded evidence must be sent to the moderator if requested as part of the sample 
along with the accompanying portfolios. 
A realisation of design candidates’ work must be seen and assessed in the performance.  
Teachers should adopt a facilitating role in this component and they are not allowed to direct 
performance(s). They can give guidance during the practical work and the preparation for 
the devised performance but not during the performance itself
. 
When in a facilitating role, teachers are allowed to: 
● help students with interpreting assessment information, e.g. explaining the assessment 
criteria and the requirements of the component 
● intervene if a health and safety issue arises 
● intervene if a risk to security of evidence arises 
● undertake a management role in relation to managing time, space, resources 
● ask questions to stimulate independent thought without leading students. 
When in a facilitating role, teachers are not allowed to: 
● offer coaching 
● direct students 
● undertake an artistic/creative role 
● give solutions to artistic/creative problems 
● make artistic/creative decisions.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
17 
Performers will be assessed on their ability to realise artistic intentions through the: 
● use of vocal and physical skills 
● creation of character 
● communication of creative intent to an audience 
● understanding of style, genre and theatrical conventions. 
Designers will be assessed on their ability to realise artistic intentions through the: 
● use of design skills 
● use of design skills to contribute to and support the performance as a whole 
● communication of creative intent to audience 
● understanding of practical application and production elements. 
Non-assessed individuals 
Non-assessed individuals should be used only when: 
● the total number of students in the cohort does not meet the minimum group size 
requirement  
● a student has withdrawn from the performance near to the assessment date 
● a student is absent on the day of the assessment. 
Non-assessed individuals may be used to read out the lines of the absent student(s) to 
support the performance group/duologue. Please note that a non-assessed individual may be 
a class peer, student from a different year group or a member of staff. Assessed and non-
assessed individuals must be clearly identified at the start of the recorded evidence to aid 
moderation. 
Permission must be sought from Pearson in advance for the inclusion of non-assessed 
individuals. Please email your requests to drama.assessment@pearson.com.  
A copy of the email from our Drama Assessment team must be included with the work sent 
to the moderator. 
Resources  
Students must have equal access to IT resources and other equipment, as appropriate. 
Students must have access to a range of resources to enable them to make choices as 
required for this component. 
Authenticity  
Students and teachers must sign the Non-examination assessment authentication sheet 
(please see Appendix 1). All sources must be acknowledged. 
Teachers can give support and guidance in the development of the performance but not 
during the performance itself. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
18 
Marking, standardisation and moderation 
Teachers should mark this component using the assessment criteria on the following pages. 
Teachers may annotate students’ work but should also include any comments on the 
Appendix 1: Non-examination assessment authentication sheet to justify the marks awarded. 
Any annotations made by the teacher are to be left on the portfolio. 
Where marking has been carried out by more than one teacher in a centre, there must be a 
process of internal standardisation carried out to ensure that there is a consistent application 
of the assessment criteria. 
Marks awarded by the centre will be subject to external moderation by Pearson. Moderation 
will ensure consistency with national standards and will include a review of assignments to 
ensure that the assignment-setting rules have been correctly applied by centres. Pearson will 
notify centres of the students whose work has been selected for moderation. This sample will 
take cohort size into account. Detailed instructions will be made available for teacher-
assessed non-examination assessment and this will include instructions regarding:  
● internal standardisation 
● materials required for submission (such as timesheets and authentication forms, or 
additional design skills documentation submitted as part of the design students’ portfolio) 
● the required sample of candidates (the highest and lowest scoring candidates and a range 
in between). 
In addition to this, centre marking training will be organised by Pearson and will include 
training on the administrative requirements and best practice. 
Moderators of non-examination assessment components will be trained in the administrative 
arrangements that are required of centres and will be instructed to inform Pearson of any 
maladministration or malpractice concerns during the process of moderation. 
If the moderation indicates that centre assessment does not reflect national standards, an 
adjustment will be made to students’ final marks to compensate.  
For further information please refer to the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ) document 
Instructions for Conducting Non-examination assessment (new GCE and GCSE specifications) 
available on the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk 
The assessment of this qualification must comply with these instructions. 
Consortium arrangements 
If you are a centre that will be part of a consortium, your students will be treated as a single 
group for the purposes of non-examination assessment moderation. 
You need to identify a consortium coordinator who must ensure that internal standardisation 
is carried out by all the teachers involved in each component. 
We will allocate the same moderator to every centre within the consortium for a particular 
component, with confirmation or adjustment of marks being applied to all centres within the 
consortium. 
Centres must register their consortium arrangements using the JCQ centre consortium form 
available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/forms/centre-
 consortium-arrangements-form 
which then must be sent to Pearson. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
19 
Assessment criteria 
Teachers must mark students’ work using the following assessment criteria. Each mark grid 
identifies which Assessment Objective is being targeted.  
Marking guidance 
● All students must receive the same treatment. Teachers must mark the last student in 
exactly the same way as they mark the first. 
● The assessment criteria should be applied positively. Students must be rewarded for what 
they have shown they can do rather than be penalised for omissions. 
● All the marks on the assessment criteria are designed to be awarded. Teachers should 
always award full marks if deserved, i.e. if the work matches the assessment criteria. 
Teachers should be prepared to award zero marks if the student’s work is not worthy of 
credit according to the assessment criteria. 
Placing a mark within a level 
● Teachers should first decide which descriptor most closely matches the work and place it 
in that level. The mark awarded within the level will be decided based on the quality of the 
work and will be modified according to how securely all bullet points are displayed at that 
level. 
● In cases of uneven performance, the points above will still apply. Students will be placed 
in the level that best describes their work according to the descriptors in that level.  
● If work meets the requirements fully, markers should be prepared to award full marks 
within the level. The top mark in the level is used for work that is as good as can 
realistically be expected within that level. 
● If work only barely meets the requirements of the level, markers should consider awarding 
marks at the bottom of the level. The bottom mark in the level is used for work that is the 
weakest that can be expected within that level. 
● The middle marks of the level are used for work that is a reasonable match to the 
descriptor. This might represent a balance between some characteristics of the level that 
are fully met and others that are only barely met. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
20 
Assessment criteria for the portfolio 
 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO1) Create and develop ideas to communicate 
meaning for theatrical performance 
 0 No rewardable material 
Level 1 1–6 Low (1–2 marks) 
Qualities of level are 
partially met 
● Offers basic and underdeveloped 
explanations of the creative intentions for 
the performance. 
● Underdeveloped practical creation, 
development and refinement of ideas from 
the stimuli to communicate meaning. 
● Demonstrates tentative engagement with the 
process of collaboration, rehearsal and 
refinement. 
● Limited and inconsistent use of drama 
terminology, which may not always be 
appropriate. 
Mid (3–4 marks) 
Qualities of level are 
mostly met 
High (5–6 marks) 
Qualities of level are 
convincingly met 
Level 2 7–12 Low (7–8 marks) 
Qualities of level are 
partially met 
● Offers adequate explanations of the creative 
intentions for the performance. 
● Some sound practical creation, development 
and refinement of ideas from the stimuli to 
communicate meaning. 
● Demonstrates some adequate engagement 
with the process of collaboration, rehearsal 
and refinement. 
● Generally adequate use of drama 
terminology which is sometimes appropriate.  
Mid (9–10 marks) 
Qualities of level are 
mostly met 
High (11–12 marks) 
Qualities of level are 
convincingly met 
Level 3 13–18 Low (13–14 marks)  
Qualities of level are 
partially met 
● Offers coherent explanations of the creative 
intentions for the performance. 
● Competent practical creation, development 
and refinement of ideas from the stimuli to 
communicate meaning. 
● Demonstrates clear engagement throughout 
the process of collaboration, rehearsal and 
refinement. 
● Coherent use of drama terminology, which is 
mostly appropriate. 
Mid (15–16 marks) 
Qualities of level are 
mostly met 
High (17–18 marks) 
Qualities of level are 
convincingly met 
Level 4 19–24 Low (19–20 marks) 
Qualities of level are 
partially met 
● Offers sustained explanations of the creative 
intentions for the performance. 
● Effective and sustained practical creation, 
development and refinement of ideas from 
the stimuli to communicate meaning. 
● Demonstrates secure engagement with the 
process of collaboration, rehearsal and 
refinement. 
● Secure and consistent use of appropriate 
drama terminology. 
Mid (21–22 marks) 
Qualities of level are 
mostly met 
High (23–24 marks) 
Qualities of level are 
convincingly met 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
21 
 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO1) Create and develop ideas to communicate 
meaning for theatrical performance 
Level 5 25–30 Low (25–26 marks) 
Qualities of level are 
partially met 
● Offers comprehensive explanations of the 
creative intentions for the performance. 
● Assured and comprehensive practical 
creation, development and refinement of 
ideas from the stimuli to communicate 
meaning. 
● Demonstrates confident engagement with 
the process of collaboration, rehearsal and 
refinement. 
● Confident and accomplished use of 
appropriate drama terminology. 
Mid (27–28 marks) 
Qualities of level are 
mostly met 
High (29-30 marks) 
Qualities of level are 
convincingly met 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
22 
 
Marking instructions 
In AO4, analysis is required in order to reach evaluative judgements and conclusions in the 
context of the student’s own work. 
Evidence presented should show a balanced consideration between analysis and evaluation, 
and marks are equally distributed across these two elements. 
Responses that demonstrate isolated analysis without leading to evaluation can achieve a 
maximum of 5 marks only. 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO4) Analyse and evaluate own work 
 0 No rewardable material 
Level 1 1–3 ● Limited analysis and evaluation of personal contribution to the 
creation, development and refinement process. 
● Limited analysis and evaluation of decisions made regarding content, 
genre, structure, character, form, style, and language. 
● Underdeveloped analysis and evaluation of individual 
performance/design skills demonstrated in the performance. 
● Demonstrates limited ability to analyse and evaluate personal 
contribution and realisation of creative intentions within the 
performance. 
Level 2 4–6 ● Generally adequate analysis with basic evaluation of personal 
contribution to the creation, development and refinement process. 
● Generally adequate analysis with basic evaluation of decisions made 
regarding content, genre, structure, character, form, style, and 
language. 
● Adequate analysis with basic evaluation of individual 
performance/design skills demonstrated in the performance. 
● Demonstrates adequate ability to analyse and evaluate the realisation 
of creative intentions within the performance, however analysis does 
not always lead to evaluation. 
Level 3 7–9 ● Coherent and generally balanced analysis and evaluation of personal 
contribution to the creation, development and refinement process. 
● Coherent and generally balanced analysis and evaluation of decisions 
made regarding content, genre, structure, character, form, style, and 
language. 
● Competent and generally balanced analysis and evaluation of 
individual performance/design skills demonstrated in the performance. 
● Demonstrates clear ability to analyse and evaluate the realisation of 
creative intentions within the performance, with a general balance 
between analysis and evaluation. 
Level 4 10–12 ● Secure and balanced analysis and evaluation of personal contribution 
to the creation, development and refinement process. 
● Secure and balanced analysis and evaluation of decisions made 
regarding content, genre, structure, character, form, style, and 
language. 
● Effective and balanced analysis and evaluation of individual 
performance/design skills demonstrated in the performance. 
● Demonstrates effective and sustained ability to analyse and evaluate 
the realisation of creative intentions within the performance, with a 
balance between analysis and evaluation. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
23 
 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO4) Analyse and evaluate own work 
Level 5 13–15 ● Assured, fully-balanced and considered analysis and evaluation of 
personal contribution to the creation, development and refinement 
process. 
● Assured, fully-balanced and considered analysis and evaluation of 
decisions made regarding content, genre, structure, character, form, 
style, and language. 
● Comprehensive, fully-balanced and considered analysis and evaluation 
of individual performance/design skills demonstrated in the 
performance. 
● Demonstrates accomplished comprehensive ability to analyse and 
evaluate the realisation of creative intentions within the performance, 
with fully-balanced analysis and evaluation. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
24 
Assessment criteria for the devised performance − performers 
 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO2) Apply theatrical skills to realise artistic 
intentions in live performance (performers) 
 0 No rewardable material 
Level 1 1–3 ● Creates a basic individual performance, demonstrating limited ability to 
combine and apply vocal and physical skills. Delivery is often 
inappropriate and inconsistent. 
● Inconsistent vocal control demonstrated when applying use of clarity, 
pace, inflection, pitch and projection. 
● Inconsistent physical control when applying use of space, gesture, 
stillness and stance. 
● Limited ability to create character(s)/role(s) that supports the 
communication of creative intent to the audience, with obvious lapses 
in focus, energy and confidence that detract from the overall 
performance. Characterisation is uneven and lacks development and 
range. 
● Individual performance demonstrates limited understanding of style, 
genre, and theatrical conventions. 
Level 2 4–6 ● Creates a generally sound individual performance, demonstrating 
emerging ability to combine and apply vocal and physical skills. 
Delivery is generally appropriate and consistent. 
● Adequate vocal control demonstrated when applying use of clarity, 
pace, inflection, pitch and projection. 
● Adequate physical control demonstrated when applying use of space, 
gesture, stillness and stance. 
● Sound ability to create character(s)/role(s) that supports the 
communication of creative intent to the audience, with adequate focus, 
energy and confidence that generally contributes to the overall 
performance. Characterisation is partially developed and shows an 
emerging range of mood and emotions. 
● Individual performance demonstrates generally sound understanding 
of style, genre, and theatrical conventions. 
Any performance under the regulatory minimum performance 
time cannot progress beyond the top of Level 2. 
Level 3 7–9 ● Creates a coherent individual performance, demonstrating clear ability 
to combine and apply vocal and physical skills. Delivery is appropriate, 
consistent and purposeful. 
● Competent vocal control demonstrated when applying use of clarity, 
pace, inflection, pitch and projection. 
● Competent physical control demonstrated when applying use of space, 
gesture, stillness and stance. 
● Clear ability to create character(s)/role(s) that supports the 
communication of creative intent to the audience, with coherent focus, 
energy and confidence that contributes to the overall performance. 
Characterisation is developed and shows a range of mood and 
emotions. 
● Individual performance demonstrates coherent understanding of style, 
genre, and theatrical conventions. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
25 
 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO2) Apply theatrical skills to realise artistic 
intentions in live performance (performers) 
Level 4 10–12 ● Creates a secure individual performance, demonstrating convincing 
ability to combine and apply vocal and physical skills. Delivery is 
engaging and effective throughout. 
● Secure and sustained vocal control demonstrated when applying use of 
clarity, pace, inflection, pitch and projection. 
● Secure and sustained physical control demonstrated when applying 
use of space, gesture, stillness and stance. 
● Effective ability to create character(s)/role(s) that supports the 
communication of creative intent to the audience, with sustained 
focus, energy and confidence that enhance the overall performance. 
In-depth characterisation shows effective refinement and a convincing 
range of moods and emotions. 
● Individual performance demonstrates secure understanding of style, 
genre, and theatrical conventions. 
Level 5 13–15 ● Creates an assured individual performance, demonstrating 
accomplished ability to combine and apply vocal and physical skills. 
Delivery is highly engaging, dynamic, and skilful throughout. 
● Comprehensive and skilful vocal control demonstrated when applying 
use of clarity, pace, inflection, pitch and projection. 
● Comprehensive and skilful physical control demonstrated when 
applying use of space, gesture, stillness and stance. 
● Accomplished ability to create character(s)/role(s) that supports the 
communication of creative intent to the audience, with comprehensive 
focus, energy, confidence and commitment that are integral to the 
overall performance. Assured characterisation shows an accomplished 
level of refinement and range of moods and emotions. 
● Individual performance demonstrates comprehensive understanding of 
style, genre, and theatrical conventions. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
26 
Assessment criteria for the devised design realisation: designers 
 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO2) Apply theatrical skills to realise artistic 
intentions in live performance (designers) 
 0 No rewardable material 
Level 1 1–3 ● Creates a basic design, demonstrating limited ability to combine and 
apply design skills. Design often inappropriate and inconsistent. 
● Inconsistent use of visual/audio elements to enhance mood, 
atmosphere and style and create impact. 
● Limited ability to design creatively within time and resource 
constraints. 
● Limited ability to create a design that supports the performers and the 
communication of creative intent to the audience, with obvious lapses 
in design considerations that detract from the production value. Design 
is uneven and lacks development and creativity. 
● Design shows basic consideration of the practical application of 
materials and production elements in performance. 
Level 2 4–6 ● Creates a generally sound design, demonstrating emerging ability to 
combine and apply skills. Design is generally appropriate and 
consistent. 
● Adequate use of visual/audio elements to enhance mood, atmosphere 
and style and create impact. 
● Adequate ability to design creatively within time and resource 
constraints. 
● Sound ability to create a design that supports the performers and 
communication of creative intent to the audience, with adequate 
attention to design considerations that generally contribute to the 
production value. Design is partially developed and shows emerging 
creativity.  
● Design shows generally sound understanding of the practical 
application of materials and production elements in performance. 
Any design realisation under the regulatory minimum 
performance time cannot progress beyond the top of Level 2. 
Level 3 7–9 ● Creates a coherent design, demonstrating a clear ability to combine 
and apply skills. Design is appropriate, consistent and purposeful. 
● Competent use of visual/audio elements to enhance mood, 
atmosphere and style and create impact. 
● Competent ability to design creatively within time and resource 
constraints. 
● Clear ability to create a design that supports the performers and the 
communication of creative intent to the audience, with consistent 
attention to design considerations that contribute to the production 
value. Design is developed and creative. 
● Design shows coherent understanding of the practical application of 
materials and production elements in performance. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
27 
 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO2) Apply theatrical skills to realise artistic 
intentions in live performance (designers) 
Level 4 10–12 ● Creates a secure design, demonstrating a convincing ability to employ 
and combine skills. All aspects of design are engaging and effective. 
● Secure and sustained use of visual/audio elements to enhance mood, 
atmosphere and style and create impact. 
● Secure and sustained ability to design creatively within time and 
resource constraints. 
● Effective ability to create a design that supports the communication 
of creative intent to the audience, with consistent attention to design 
considerations that enhance the production value. In-depth design 
shows effective refinement and convincing creativity. 
● Design shows secure understanding of the practical application of 
materials and production elements in performance. 
Level 5 13–15 ● Creates an assured design, demonstrating an accomplished ability to 
employ and combine skills. All aspects of design are highly engaging, 
dynamic and skilful. 
● Comprehensive and skilful use of visual/audio elements to enhance 
mood, atmosphere and style and create impact. 
● Comprehensive and skilful ability to design creatively within time and 
resource constraints. 
● Accomplished ability to create a design that supports the 
communication of creative intent to the audience, with 
comprehensive attention to design considerations that that are 
integral to the production value. Assured design shows an 
accomplished level of refinement and innovation. 
● Design shows a comprehensive understanding of the practical 
application of materials and production elements in performance. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
28 
Security and backups 
It is the centre’s responsibility to keep the work that students have submitted for 
assessment secure. 
Secure storage is defined as a securely-locked cabinet or cupboard. Where students are 
producing artefacts, secure storage is defined as a classroom studio or workshop that is 
locked or supervised from the end of one session to the start of the next.  
The rules on storage also apply to electronic data. For example, centres should collect 
memory sticks for secure storage between sessions or restrict student access to specific 
areas of the centre’s IT network. 
For materials stored electronically, centres are strongly advised to utilise firewall protection 
and virus-checking software, and to employ an effective backup strategy, so that an  
up-to-date archive of students’ evidence is maintained. 
Further information 
For up-to-date advice on teacher involvement and administration of non-examination 
assessments, please refer to the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ) document Instructions 
for conducting non-examination assessments (new GCE and GCSE specifications) available 
on the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
29 
Component 2: Performance from Text 
Overview 
Performance texts have been at the core of drama since the inception of theatre. The need 
to hand down stories has been fundamental to human development and for thousands of 
years, people have written, performed, watched and enjoyed innumerable plays.  
Understanding a performance text is fundamental to the subject, as this provides students 
with opportunities to explore plot, structure, narrative and stories from around the world and 
from different time periods. It encourages them to develop empathy skills, as they consider 
different characters and develop methods of communicating ideas and themes.  
This component deals with developing knowledge, understanding and skills in exploring and 
performing from a performance text. Students will interpret this text and rehearse and refine 
two key extracts, leading to a final performance. They will demonstrate and use a wide range 
of acting and/or design skills to communicate their interpretation in performance.  
Content 
There are two areas of focus. 
1) Interpreting and exploring two key extracts from a chosen performance text. 
2) Performing or realising a design of two key extracts from this text. 
Students may complete this component as a performer or designer or as a combination of 
both.  
The design roles are: 
● costume design 
● lighting design 
● set design 
● sound design. 
Centres wanting to offer design roles to students should refer to Appendix 3: Design roles 
minimum resource requirements for centres. 
Text and extract choice 
Centres can choose any performance text as long as it meets the following criteria. 
● It must have been professionally commissioned or professionally produced and be at least 
45 minutes in length. 
● It offers students the opportunity to demonstrate exploratory range and depth. 
● It offers students the opportunity to access the demands of this component as a 
performer and/or designer. 
● It must have a degree of a challenge, in terms of appropriateness of content, themes and 
contexts to enable students to achieve at GCSE and access the Assessment Objective. 
● It must provide a contrast to the text studied for Component 3 (see pages 6–8) and 
cannot be any prescribed text from the Component 3 lists. 
Centres are reminded that they must complete a form regarding the text choices, please 
refer to page 6 for details. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
30 
Key extracts 
Students must study two key extracts from their chosen performance text.  
For the purposes of this qualification, a key extract is defined as a scene or a moment that 
is significant to the text as a whole and at least 10 minutes in length when performed.  
Students may participate in the two key extracts as a performer or designer or as a 
combination of both.  
For each extract students may perform/design in a monologue, duologue or group – the 
choice is open to centres. The approaches that could be followed are, for example: 
 
Student A Example approach 
Extract 1 Performs a monologue 
Extract 2 Performs in group  
 
Student B Example approach 
Extract 1 Performs in group 
Extract 2 Performs in group  
 
Student C Example approach 
Extract 1 Designs for a monologue 
Extract 2 Performs in a duologue  
 
Students are not required to perform the same character or role in both key extracts. 
Whole cohorts do not need to use the same performance texts. 
Selecting a key extract 
This can take the form of a continuous dialogue/scene, or edited extracts, for example 
abridging the extract to match the number of performers taking part. 
For the monologue/duologue, the extract chosen may be edited to provide the required 
amount of material, but must provide a coherent monologue or duologue.  
NB: Text can be edited through removal of characters/content/lines, as long as the meaning 
and shape/sequence of the text is maintained. Dialogue cannot be added or altered in the 
text. 
Each selected extract will be assessed independently and it should be clear where each 
extract begins and ends. 
Students are required to perform/realise a design for all or part of these key extracts, 
following the extract timings requirements below.  
Centres must choose one of the approaches listed below when selecting the two key 
extracts. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
31 
 
Approach Example 
1. Select two separate key 
moments/scenes from the same text. 
 
Too Much Punch For Judy, Mark Wheeller 
Extract 1:  
The crash and immediate aftermath. 
Extract 2:  
PC Caton informs Vi of the crash. 
2. S elect two consecutive key 
moments/scenes from the same text. 
Blood Brothers, Willy Russell 
Extract 1:  
Mrs Lyon’s breakdown and demand to move 
away to the countryside. 
Extract 2:  
Mickey and Eddie say their goodbyes; Mrs 
Johnstone says a private goodbye to Eddie. 
 
Requirements per key extract 
Each student needs to participate in two key extracts as a performer/designer. The timings 
given below are for one key extract performance/design realisation. 
Monologue and duologue 
The regulatory requirements for monologue and duologue performances are that they must 
complete a minimum monologue performance time of 2 minutes and a minimum duologue 
performance time of 3 minutes per key extract. 
 
Number of performers Minimum performance 
time per key extract 
Maximum performance 
time per key extract 
1 performance student 
(monologue) 
2 minutes 3 minutes 
2 performance students 
(duologue) 
3 minutes 5 minutes 
 
Group performance 
A group must be between three and six performance students. In addition, there can be up 
to one designer per role, per group.  
The regulatory requirements for groups are that they must complete a minimum 
performance time of 4 minutes per key extract.  
The recommended minimum performance times have been provided to ensure that each 
student within the group has sufficient time to access all levels of the assessment criteria. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
32 
 
Group size Recommended 
minimum performance 
time per key extract 
Maximum performance 
time per key extract 
3–4 performance students (group) 10 minutes 12 minutes 
5–6 performance students (group) 13 minutes 15 minutes 
 
Centres should be aware that performance times that are between the regulatory minimum 
(4 minutes) and the recommended minimum (10 or 13 minutes) may not allow students to 
evidence their skills fully in order to access all levels of the assessment criteria. 
All students will be assessed as individuals. 
Meeting the performance timings 
For students (performance and design) who do not meet the regulatory minimum 
performance requirement of 2, 3 and/or 4 minutes, the examiner will use their professional 
judgement against the AO2 assessment criteria based on what the student has achieved and 
then the total mark will be reduced proportionally according to how many seconds the work 
is under length. 
The proportional time penalty will be applied by Pearson Edexcel after the work has been 
marked by the examiner, using the conversion tables in Appendix 6. 
Examiners will be required to stop marking after the maximum performance time has 
passed. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
33 
Requirements for performances/design realisations 
All performances/design realisations should take place in front of an appropriate audience 
and must be recorded. Centres are free to identify their own suitable audience and venue for 
the performance, this could include: 
● performance to the rest of the class or another class within the centre 
● performance to an invited external audience. 
Teachers should adopt a facilitating role and may direct. They may direct and give guidance 
during the practical work and the preparation for performance(s) but not during the 
performance(s). 
When directing, teachers are allowed to: 
● interpret and structure the text as written to meet the demands of the examination 
(time limits etc.) 
● suggest solutions to artistic and creative problems referring to the assessment criteria if 
appropriate 
● make artistic and creative decisions referring to the assessment criteria if appropriate 
(however, they should not make direct judgements about the assessment criteria or 
allocate marks). 
Performance roles 
Performers must gain knowledge and understanding to explore how meaning is 
communicated through:  
● themes, issues, performance conventions 
● genre, structure, form, style, language and stage directions  
● character relationships  
● character development. 
Performers must develop skills in: 
● how meaning is communicated and interpreted through: 
o the use of voice, physical and non-verbal techniques (such as facial expression and 
gesture) 
o use of space and spatial relationships  
o the presentation of characters/roles 
o relationships between performer and audience 
o production elements, such as set (including props), costume, lighting and sound. 
Also: 
● characterisation  
● voice: use of clarity, pace, inflection, pitch and projection  
● physicality: use of space, gesture, facial expression, stillness and stance  
● communicating creative intent to audience 
● communication with other performers and/or with the audience. 
Performers must understand how performance is created from a text. They should 
demonstrate the skills through:  
● developing interpretations independently and collaboratively 
● the development of specific artistic intentions  
● learning lines, rehearsing, amending and refining text extracts in progress for 
performance  
● performing to an audience. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
34 
Students should take into consideration any health and safety implications as appropriate. 
Design roles 
Designers must work collaboratively within a group of performers within their chosen area of 
design.  
Where a student is assessed in a design role, it is their design skill that is the focus of the 
assessment, rather than their technical competence in the operation or use of equipment. 
The performance(s) must provide sufficient opportunity for design students to meet the 
demands of this component.  
There is a maximum of one designer per role, per group.  
Designers must gain knowledge and understanding to explore how meaning is communicated 
through: 
● genre, structure, character, form, style, and language  
● performance conventions 
● use of space and spatial relationships  
● relationship between performer and audience 
● production elements. 
Designers must understand how text-based performance is created. They should 
demonstrate the skills through:  
● developing interpretations independently and collaboratively 
● the development of specific artistic intentions 
● rehearsing, amending and refining text extracts in progress for performance.  
Designers must also develop skills in: 
● making appropriate judgements during the development process  
● interpreting content, narrative, style and form  
● responding and adapting designs in response to rehearsal work (to be done collaboratively 
with the teacher-director) 
● using and applying design skills to contribute to the performance as a whole 
● demonstrating the ability to apply design skills effectively within the context of the 
performance  
● communicating intention to an audience. 
Designs should take into consideration performer/audience relationships and any health and 
safety implications and performer usage as appropriate.   
A list of the requirements for each design skill for this component is given on the next page. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
35 
 
Component 2 - Requirements for design skills 
Requirements  Costume design Lighting design Set design Sound design 
Requirements 
per extract 
 
Group: final costume designs for 
one character, incorporating 
hair, makeup and mask 
considerations if appropriate.  
This should take into 
consideration performer/ 
audience relationships, health 
and safety implications and 
performer usage as appropriate. 
All sourcing must be based 
wholly on the student’s 
design(s). 
Group: final lighting design 
incorporating grid plans and a 
lantern schedule that indicates 
the use of at least two different 
lighting states.  
This should take into 
consideration performer/ 
audience relationships, health 
and safety implications and 
performer usage as appropriate. 
Group: drawings of the final 
design to be realised in the 
performance space including any 
relevant props.  
This should take into 
consideration performer/ 
audience relationships, health 
and safety implications and 
performer usage as appropriate.  
Group: source sheet 
showing at least two sound 
cues –original, live or found 
sound effects as 
appropriate.  
This should take into 
consideration performer/ 
audience relationships, 
health and safety 
implications and performer 
usage as appropriate. 
Mono or duo: final costume 
design for one character, 
incorporating hair, makeup and 
mask considerations if 
appropriate.  
This should take into 
consideration performer/ 
audience relationships, health 
and safety implications and 
performer usage as appropriate. 
Mono or duo: final lighting 
design incorporating grid plans 
and a lantern schedule that 
indicates the use of at least two 
different lighting states.  
This should take into 
consideration performer/ 
audience relationships, health 
and safety implications and 
performer usage as appropriate. 
Mono or duo: drawings of the 
final designs to be realised in 
the performance space.  
This should take into 
consideration performer/ 
audience relationships, health 
and safety implications and 
performer usage as appropriate.   
Mono or duo: source sheet 
showing the at least two 
sound cues –original, live or 
found sound effects as 
appropriate. 
This should take into 
consideration performer/ 
audience relationships, 
health and safety 
implications and performer 
usage as appropriate. 
Additional 
documentation  
For both performances: a 
costume plot or list of 
costumes/accessories worn by 
each performer indicating any 
changes as appropriate. 
For both performances: a 
lighting plot or cue sheet 
showing at least four different 
lighting states as appropriate.  
For both performances: a ground 
plan of the performance space, 
including entrances and exits, 
audience positioning and stage 
furniture (as appropriate).  
For both performances: a 
cue sheet showing the 
source, order, length and 
output level of each cue.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
36 
 
Component 2 - Requirements for design skills 
continued 
Requirements  Costume design Lighting design Set design Sound design 
Supervision The student must supervise the 
construction and/or sourcing of 
the designed costumes as 
appropriate. 
The student must supervise the 
rigging, focusing, programming 
(if applicable) and operating of 
the design as appropriate. 
The student must supervise the 
construction, painting, hiring  
and/or finding of scenic elements 
required to meet the 
requirements of their design as 
appropriate. 
The student must 
supervise the production 
of the final sound design 
which they have created 
and recorded using live 
and/or sampled material 
as appropriate.  
Performance A realisation of the costume 
design in both performances. 
A realisation of the lighting 
design in both performances. 
A realisation of the set design in 
both performances. 
A realisation of the sound 
design in both 
performances. 
 
NB: Centres are reminded that any appropriate evidence produced in line with the requirements above should also be made available to the visiting 
examiner when they make their visit.  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
37 
Assessment information 
This component is externally assessed by a visiting examiner or by an examiner assessing 
the recorded live performance. It is worth 48 marks and AO2 is assessed. 
First assessment: 2018 
The performance(s) must be recorded by the centre and unedited. Please refer to 
Appendix 4: Best practice when recording performance. This recorded evidence is to be sent 
to the examiner. 
Centres must select two key extracts and each extract is worth 24 marks each. Each 
selected extract will be assessed independently and it should be clear where each extract 
begins and ends. 
Teachers can give support and guidance at the development stage but not during the 
performance(s). 
All centres must provide their examiner, before the visit/date of recording, with the following 
information: 
● a declaration that all key extracts studied by students meet the requirements to be from a 
scene or a moment that is significant to the text as a whole and at least 10 minutes in 
length when performed. 
● indication of group numbers and performance lengths 
● character/design role information for each student to be assessed 
● the performance text(s) chosen for Component 3 (in order for the contrasting text 
requirement to be checked) 
● a brief written explanation by each student of the intention for each performance or 
design.  
For guidance, the explanation must include the following: 
for performance students (100–200 words per character played) 
● what role(s) are you playing? 
● what is happening to your character(s) in the key extract? 
● what are your character’s objectives/motivations/feelings? 
● how are you interpreting this character(s) in performance? (i.e. vocal, physical, 
communication of intent). 
For design students (100–200 words per extract designed for) 
● what design role are you fulfilling? 
● what is your central design concept in the key extract? 
● how have you interpreted this key extract through your design? 
● what are you hoping to communicate to the audience? 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
38 
Non-assessed individuals 
Non-assessed individuals should be used only when: 
● the total number of students in the cohort does not meet the minimum group size 
requirement  
● a student has withdrawn from the performance near to the assessment date 
● a student is absent on the day of the assessment. 
Non-assessed individuals may be used to read out the lines of the absent student(s) to 
support the performance group. Please note that a non-assessed individual may be a class 
peer, student from a different year group or a member of staff. Assessed and non-assessed 
individuals must be clearly identified at the start of the recorded evidence to aid assessment. 
Permission must be sought from Pearson in advance for the inclusion of non-assessed 
individuals. Please email your requests to drama.assessment@pearson.com. Please upload to 
Learner Work Transfer when submitting assessment materials.  
Assessment criteria 
Visiting examiners will use the following assessment criteria to mark students’ work. Each 
mark grid identifies which Assessment Objective is being targeted. 
The visiting examiner will mark each extract out of 24, using the following criteria and add 
these marks together to give a total out of 48. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
39 
Assessment criteria for performers 
 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO2) Apply theatrical skills to realise artistic 
intentions in live performance (performers) 
Vocal and physical skills 
 0 No rewardable material or performances below the regulatory minimum 
time 
Level 1 1–2 ● Vocal skills are underdeveloped, demonstrating limited understanding 
of how creative choices communicate meaning to the audience. Vocal 
delivery is often inappropriate and inconsistent. 
● Basic technical control in the use of vocal techniques (clarity, pace, 
inflection, pitch, projection). Vocal performance lacks variation and 
range. 
● Physical skills are underdeveloped, demonstrating limited 
understanding of how creative choices communicate meaning to the 
audience. Physical delivery is often inappropriate and inconsistent. 
● Basic technical control in the use of physical techniques (gesture, 
facial expression, stillness, stance, contact, use of space and spatial 
relationships). Physical performance lacks variation and range. 
Level 2 3–4 ● Vocal skills are sound, demonstrating an adequate understanding of 
how creative choices communicate meaning to the audience. Vocal 
delivery is generally appropriate and consistent. 
● Sound technical control in the use of vocal techniques (clarity, pace, 
inflection, pitch, projection). Vocal performance shows general 
variation and range. 
● Physical skills are sound, demonstrating an adequate understanding 
of how creative choices communicate meaning to the audience. 
Physical delivery is generally appropriate and consistent. 
● Sound technical control in the use of physical techniques (gesture, 
facial expression, stillness, stance, contact, use of space and spatial 
relationships). Physical performance shows general variation and 
range. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
40 
 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO2) Apply theatrical skills to realise artistic 
intentions in live performance (performers) 
Vocal and physical skills 
Level 3 5–6 ● Vocal skills are secure, demonstrating an effective understanding of 
how creative choices communicate meaning to the audience. Vocal 
delivery is appropriate and consistent throughout. 
● Secure technical control in the use of vocal techniques (clarity, pace, 
inflection, pitch, projection). Vocal performance shows competent 
variation and range. 
● Physical skills are secure, demonstrating an effective understanding 
of how creative choices communicate meaning to the audience. 
Physical delivery is appropriate and consistent throughout. 
● Secure technical control in the use of physical techniques (gesture, 
facial expression, stillness, stance, contact, use of space and spatial 
relationships). Physical performance shows competent variation and 
range. 
Level 4 7–8 ● Vocal skills are assured, demonstrating a comprehensive 
understanding of how creative choices communicate meaning to the 
audience. Vocal delivery is engaging and dynamic throughout. 
● Accomplished technical control in the use of vocal techniques (clarity, 
pace, inflection, pitch, projection). Vocal performance shows 
comprehensive variation and range. 
● Physical skills are assured, demonstrating a comprehensive 
understanding of how creative choices communicate meaning to the 
audience. Physical delivery is engaging and dynamic throughout. 
● Accomplished technical control in the use of physical techniques 
(gesture, facial expression, stillness, stance, contact, use of space 
and spatial relationships). Physical performance shows 
comprehensive variation and range. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
41 
 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO2) Apply theatrical skills to realise artistic 
intentions in live performance (performers) 
Characterisation and communication 
 0 No rewardable material or performances below the regulatory minimum 
time 
Level 1 1–2 ● Characterisation demonstrates basic understanding of the role and its 
context within the performance. 
● Characterisation is uneven and lacks clarity, with obvious lapses in 
focus and confidence. 
● Limited rapport and communication with audience/other performers. 
Level 2 3–4 ● Characterisation demonstrates a sound understanding of the role and 
its context within the performance. 
● Characterisation is generally consistent and sound, demonstrating 
adequate focus and confidence. 
● Sound rapport and communication with audience/other performers. 
Level 3 5–6 ● Characterisation demonstrates a secure understanding of the role and 
its context within the performance. 
● Characterisation is consistent and secure, demonstrating effective 
focus and confidence. 
● Effective rapport and communication with audience/other performers. 
Level 4 7–8 ● Characterisation demonstrates a comprehensive understanding of the 
role and its context within the performance. 
● Characterisation is accomplished, skilful and highly engaging, 
demonstrating comprehensive and assured focus, confidence and 
commitment. 
● Assured rapport and communication with audience/other performers. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
42 
 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO2) Apply theatrical skills to realise artistic 
intentions in live performance (performers) 
Artistic intention and style/genre/theatrical conventions 
 0 No rewardable material or performances below the regulatory minimum 
time 
Level 1 1–2 ● Basic contribution to the realisation of the artistic intention in 
performance. 
● Performance demonstrates limited control and understanding in 
relation to style, genre and theatrical conventions. 
● Demonstrates a basic interpretation of the text in performance. 
● Individual performance is undeveloped and has limited impact, 
lacking energy and ease. 
Level 2 3–4 ● Clear contribution to the realisation of the artistic intention in 
performance. 
● Performance demonstrates clear control and understanding in relation 
to style, genre and theatrical conventions. 
● Demonstrates a coherent interpretation of the text in performance. 
● Individual performance is generally developed and has clear impact, 
showing emerging energy and ease. 
Level 3 5–6 ● Effective contribution to the realisation of the artistic intention in 
performance. 
● Performance demonstrates secure control and understanding in 
relation to style, genre and theatrical conventions. 
● Demonstrates a convincing and sustained interpretation of the text in 
performance. 
● Individual performance is developed, thoughtful and sympathetic, 
creating effective impact and showing sustained energy and ease. 
Level 4 7–8 ● Assured contribution to the realisation of the artistic intention in 
performance. 
● Performance demonstrates assured and sustained control and 
understanding in relation to style, genre and theatrical conventions. 
● Demonstrates an accomplished and comprehensive interpretation of 
the text in performance. 
● Individual performance is refined, articulate and dynamic, creating 
significant impact with ability to drive the piece, showing 
accomplished energy and ease. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
43 
Assessment criteria for designers 
 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO2) Apply theatrical skills to realise artistic 
intentions in live performance (designers) 
Design skills 
 0 No rewardable material or designs below the regulatory minimum time 
Level 1 1–2 ● Creates an underdeveloped and often inappropriate and inconsistent 
design, demonstrating limited understanding of how creative choices 
communicate meaning to the audience. 
● Basic use of visual/audio elements to enhance mood, atmosphere and 
style and create impact. 
● Basic ability to combine and apply design skills to design creatively 
within time and resource constraints.  
● Design shows limited understanding of the practical application of 
materials and production elements in performance. 
Level 2 3–4 ● Creates a sound and generally appropriate and consistent design, 
demonstrating adequate understanding of how creative choices 
communicate meaning to the audience. 
● Sound use of visual/audio elements to enhance mood, atmosphere 
and style and create impact.  
● Sound ability to combine and apply design skills to design creatively 
within time and resource constraints. 
● Design shows adequate understanding of the practical application of 
materials and production elements in performance. 
Level 3 5–6 ● Creates a secure, appropriate and consistent design, demonstrating 
effective understanding of how creative choices communicate 
meaning to the audience. 
● Secure use of visual/audio elements to enhance mood, atmosphere 
and style and create impact.  
● Secure ability to combine and apply design skills to design creatively 
within time and resource constraints. 
● Design shows effective understanding of the practical application of 
materials and production elements in performance. 
Level 4 7–8 ● Creates an assured, engaging and dynamic design, demonstrating 
comprehensive understanding of how creative choices communicate 
meaning to the audience. 
● Accomplished use of visual/audio elements to enhance mood, 
atmosphere and style and create impact.  
● Assured ability to combine and apply design skills to design creatively 
within time and resource constraints. 
● Design shows comprehensive understanding of the practical 
application of materials and production elements in performance. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
44 
 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO2) Apply theatrical skills to realise artistic 
intentions in live performance (designers) 
Communication and contribution to performance as whole 
 0 No rewardable material or designs below the regulatory minimum time 
Level 1 1–2 ● Design shows a basic understanding of its context and purpose within 
the performance. 
● Design concept is uneven and lacks clarity, demonstrating 
inappropriate connections and choices made in relation to content of 
performance. 
● Design lacks cohesion with content of performance, demonstrating 
limited communication and collaboration with performers. 
Level 2 3–4 ● Design shows a sound understanding of its context and purpose 
within the performance. 
● Design concept is generally consistent, demonstrating sound 
connections and choices made in relation to content of performance. 
● Design has adequate cohesion with content of performance, 
demonstrating sound communication and collaboration with 
performers. 
Level 3 5–6 ● Design shows a secure understanding of its context and purpose 
within the performance. 
● Design concept is consistent and secure demonstrating effective 
connections and choices made in relation to content of performance. 
● Design has sustained cohesion with content of performance, 
demonstrating effective communication and collaboration with 
performers. 
Level 4 7–8 ● Design shows a comprehensive understanding of its context and 
purpose within the performance. 
● Design concept is accomplished, skilful and highly engaging, 
demonstrating comprehensive connections and assured choices made 
in relation to content of performance. 
● Design has comprehensive cohesion with content of performance, 
demonstrating assured communication and collaboration with 
performers. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
45 
 
Level Mark Descriptor (AO2) Apply theatrical skills to realise artistic 
intentions in live performance (designers) 
Artistic intentions and style/genre/theatrical conventions 
 0 No rewardable material or designs below the regulatory minimum time 
Level 1 1–2 ● Design makes a basic contribution to the realisation of artistic 
intentions. 
● Design demonstrates limited control and understanding in relation to 
style, genre and theatrical conventions. 
● Design demonstrates basic interpretation of the text, inconsistently 
supporting the performance of the extract. 
● Design is underdeveloped with obvious lapses in design 
considerations that detract from the overall production value. 
Level 2 3–4 ● Design makes a clear contribution to the realisation of artistic 
intentions. 
● Design shows clear control and understanding in relation to style, 
genre and theatrical conventions. 
● Design demonstrates coherent interpretation of the text, and is 
generally consistent in supporting the performance of the extract. 
● Design is generally developed with coherent design considerations 
that have clear impact on the overall production value. 
Level 3 5–6 ● Design makes an effective contribution to the realisation of artistic 
intentions. 
● Design shows secure control and understanding in relation to style, 
genre and theatrical conventions. 
● Design demonstrates convincing and sustained interpretation of the 
text, consistently supporting the performance of the extract. 
● Design is developed and thoughtful with secure design considerations 
that have an effective impact on the overall production value. 
Level 4 7–8 ● Design makes an assured and sustained contribution to the 
realisation of artistic intentions. 
● Design shows assured control and understanding in relation to style, 
genre and theatrical conventions. 
● Design demonstrates an accomplished and comprehensive 
interpretation of the text, showing sustained and assured support for 
the performance of the extract. 
● Design is refined and dynamic with design considerations that have a 
significant impact and enhance the overall production value. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
46 
Component 3: Theatre Makers in Practice 
Overview 
This component focuses on the work of theatre makers and the theatrical choices that are 
made by crucial members of the creative and production team in order to communicate ideas 
to an audience. As theatre makers, students will develop their knowledge and understanding 
of the ways in which drama can create meaning for an audience through performance. 
Students will explore practically how a complete performance text might be interpreted and 
realised from ‘page to stage’. This exploration will give students an insight into how texts 
may be brought to life for an audience and the creative roles within this process.  
Students will also analyse and evaluate their experience of a live theatre performance as 
informed members of the audience. They will develop skills to recognise the meaning created 
in the theatre space in order to communicate ideas to an audience. This will give them a 
more critical and varied approach to their own work as theatre makers. 
Content 
There are two areas of focus. 
1. S tudy of one complete performance text. 
2. A live theatre evaluation. 
Text choice 
Centres have a choice when selecting what live theatre visits to make. However, for Section 
A they must select one performance text. The texts have been grouped into two time 
periods and categorised by genre and playwright. List A consists of pre-1954 texts and List B 
represents post-2000 texts.  
List A (pre-1954) 
Performance text Genre Prescribed edition* 
A Doll’s House, Henrik Ibsen 
(adapted by Tanika Gupta) 
Historical drama Methuen Drama (Bloomsbury) 
ISBN 9781350261075 
An Inspector Calls,  
J B Priestley 
Social thriller/mystery Heinemann 
ISBN 9780435232825 
Antigone, Sophocles (adapted 
by Roy Williams) 
Tragedy Methuen Drama (Bloomsbury) 
ISBN 9781350260849 
Government Inspector,  
Nikolai Gogol (adapted by 
David Harrower) 
Black comedy Faber & Faber 
ISBN 9780571280490 
The Crucible, Arthur Miller Historical drama Methuen Drama Student Edition  
ISBN 9781350245778 
Twelfth Night,  
William Shakespeare 
Romantic comedy New Longman Shakespeare 
ISBN 9780582365780 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
47 
List B (post-2000) 
Performance text Genre Prescribed edition* 
100, Diene Petterle,  
Neil Monaghan and  
Christopher Heimann 
Ensemble story-telling Nick Hern Books 
ISBN 9781854597373 
1984, George Orwell,  
Robert Icke and  
Duncan Macmillan 
Political satire Oberon Plays 
ISBN 9781783190614 
Blue Stockings, Jessica Swale  Historical drama Nick Hern Books 
ISBN 9781848423299 
DNA, Dennis Kelly Black comedy Oberon Plays 
ISBN 9781840029529  
(school edition)/ 
9781350188044 (student edition)
†  
The Free9, In-Sook Chappell Tragedy/ensemble 
story-telling 
Methuen Drama (Bloomsbury) 
ISBN 9781350261037 
Gone Too Far!, Bola Agbaje Social drama Methuen Drama (Bloomsbury) 
ISBN 9781350258433 
*The prescribed editions will be used to reproduce extracts for examination purposes. Centres are free 
to choose a different edition for teaching purposes. 
† The 9781350188044 student edition will replace the current 9781840029529 school edition in terms of 
reproduction of extracts for examination purposes. 
Contrast requirement 
The performance text chosen for this component must be in contrast with the text used for 
performance in Component 2 and centres must inform Pearson of their choices, please see 
pages 6–8 for more details. 
The study of one performance text 
Students must study a complete performance text and then will respond to an unseen 
extract from their chosen performance text in the exanimation. The unseen extract will be 
from a scene or moment that is significant to the text as whole. Extracts will be between  
80–100 lines long (this includes spoken dialogue and stage directions). Please note 
performance texts are not permitted in the examination.  
Students must practically consider the ways and develop ideas in which performers, directors 
and designers create impact and meaning through the elements of performance, including: 
● acting style and purpose, including vocal and physical skills 
● set and props, including stage furniture and personal props 
● lighting and sound, including colour and music 
● costume, makeup and masks as appropriate 
● use of stage space and spatial relationships, including levels and entrance points  
● intended impact and meaning for the audience. 
Students must contribute to exploration of the performance text, so that they are able to 
offer possible interpretations from the perspective of performer, director or designer.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
48 
Practical work should involve gaining knowledge and understanding to explore: 
● the playwright’s use of meaning, genre, structure, character, form, style, language and 
stage directions for communication between performer and audience 
● vocal and physical interpretation of character 
● design elements, including staging and visual communication, costume, lighting, set and 
sound  
● sketches and drawings to represent stage space 
● performance style and theatrical devices. 
Knowledge and understanding 
Students are required to: 
● understand the practices used in twenty-first century theatre-making 
● understand production elements and theatrical conventions 
● understand the role of theatre makers in contemporary practice including performers, 
directors and designers 
● understand how the meaning of a text might be interpreted and communicated to an 
audience 
● understand social, historical and/or cultural contexts including the theatre conventions of 
the period which the text was created and performed*  
● use appropriate vocabulary and subject-specific terminology. 
Skills 
Students must develop the ability to: 
● analyse and evaluate the work of theatre-makers 
● recognise specific challenges for performers, directors and designers based on their own 
experiences in exploring the chosen text  
● analyse and evaluate the ways in which different performance and production elements 
are brought together to create theatre 
● use subject-specific terminology in discussing their work as theatre makers. 
Students must also be aware of, and be able to use appropriate subject-specific terminology.  
Live theatre evaluation 
Students will reflect on their experience as an informed member of an audience at a live 
theatre performance, enabling them to demonstrate knowledge and understanding of 
performance through analysis and evaluation.  
When choosing a performance the following should be taken into consideration: 
● it must not be a prescribed text from Component 3 
● it should ideally demonstrate a range of production elements, for example costume, set, 
sound, lighting 
● it should present opportunities for students to analyse and evaluate the work of key 
theatre makers, performers, directors and designers 
● it must provide opportunities for students to use subject-specific terminology. 
For the purposes of this qualification, live theatre means being a member of the audience in 
the same performance space as the performers. It does not include any performance that is 
sung-through in its entirety. 
*For those List A texts that have been adapted, namely: A Doll’s House, Antigone, and 
Government Inspector we require students to consider the theatrical conventions of the 
period in relation to the original text. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
49 
The performance can be an amateur or professional production as long as the choice enables 
students to access the demands of this component. 
It is desirable for students to see as much live theatre as possible throughout the course, 
although only one performance will be written about in the examination. 
Centres are reminded that they must submit a live performance statement to Pearson 
(please see page 8 for details). If there are extreme extenuating circumstances regarding 
the access to live theatre for this component, then centres are required to contact 
drama.assessment@pearson.com. 
Notes 
Students are allowed to bring in theatre evaluation notes of up to a maximum of 500 words. 
These notes must be focused on one performance only and include the details of the title, 
venue and date seen. These notes should help them to demonstrate knowledge and 
understanding as an informed member of the audience. 
These notes may include reference to: 
● performers, including performers in specific roles 
● design considerations, including the use of costume, set, lighting and sound  
● the director’s concept/interpretation and the chosen performance style 
● impact on the audience, including, specifically, on the student, and how this was achieved 
● the use of the theatre space 
● how ideas were communicated during the performance. 
Sketches, drawings and diagrams may also be included in the notes and used to support the 
response to the question if required. 
No pre-published material, including programmes and photographs, may be taken into the 
examination or form part of the notes.  
Notes may be handwritten or word processed but the total word limit must not be exceeded. 
Notes must not be submitted with the examination paper, but retained by the centre and 
kept until after post-results services deadline. 
The notes must be attached to the form provided in Appendix 2. 
Knowledge and understanding 
Students are required to: 
● recognise and understand how theatrical choices are used by theatre makers to create 
impact  
● understand how the meaning of a text can be interpreted and communicated to an 
audience 
● use appropriate vocabulary and subject-specific terminology. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
50 
Skills 
Students must develop the ability to: 
● analyse and evaluate the work of theatre makers 
● form critical judgements about live theatre based on their understanding of drama and 
theatre 
● analyse and evaluate the ways in which different performance and production elements 
are brought together to create theatre 
● analyse and evaluate the work of others. 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2018.  
● The written examination is 1 hour and 45 minutes. 
● The assessment is out of 60 marks. 
● Students must answer all questions related to the performance text they have studied for 
Section A. For Section B they answer both questions on the performance they have seen. 
● Section A: Bringing Texts to Life 
o Consists of one question in five parts that students must answer based on an unseen 
extract from the chosen performance text. Students answer from the perspective of 
performer, director and designer. 
o Worth 45 marks.  
o AO3 is assessed. 
o All extracts will be provided in a source booklet. 
o Performance texts are not allowed in the examination as extracts will be provided. 
● Section B: Live Theatre Evaluation  
o Consists of two questions that students must answer on the live theatre performance 
they have seen.  
o Worth 15 marks.  
o AO4 is assessed. 
o Students may take in notes, however these notes must be attached to the form 
provided in Appendix 2. 
● Option 3A covers the List A performance texts and option 3B covers the List B 
performance texts.  
● These optional codes will be operational in 2022 to cover the new performance text 
additions. Centres will need to use the correct entry code to ensure that they receive the 
correct Question Paper. 
Synoptic assessment  
Synoptic assessment requires students to work across different parts of a qualification and to 
show their accumulated knowledge and understanding of a topic or subject area. 
Synoptic assessment enables students to show their ability to combine their skills, knowledge 
and understanding with breadth and depth of the subject.  
This component assesses synopticity, drawing on the knowledge, understanding and skills 
learnt from the Components 1 and 2. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
51 
Sample assessment materials  
A sample paper and mark scheme for this component can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Drama Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Assessment Objectives 
 
Students must: % in 
GCSE 
AO1 Create and develop ideas to communicate meaning for theatrical 
performance. 
20 
AO2 Apply theatrical skills to realise artistic intentions in live 
performance. 
30 
AO3 Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of how drama and 
theatre is developed and performed. 
30 
AO4 Analyse and evaluate their own work and the work of others. 20 
Total 100 
 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
Component Assessment Objectives Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives AO1% AO2% AO3% AO4% 
Component 1: Devising  20 10 0 10 40% 
Component 2: 
Performance from Text 
0 20 0 0 20% 
Component 3: Theatre 
Makers in Practice 
0 0 30 10 40% 
Total for GCSE 20 30 30 20 100% 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
52 
3 Administration and general information 
Entries 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for this qualification can be found in 
our UK Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations officers and is 
available on our website: qualifications.pearson.com 
Discount code and performance tables 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more than one GCSE, or other Level 2 
qualifications with the same discount code, will have only the grade for their ‘first entry’ 
counted for the purpose of the school and college performance tables (please see 
Appendix 10: Codes). For further information about what constitutes ‘first entry’ and full 
details of how this policy is applied, please refer to the DfE website: 
www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-education 
Students should be advised that if they take two GCSEs with the same discount code, 
schools and colleges they wish to progress to are likely to take the view that this 
achievement is equivalent to only one GCSE. The same view may be taken if students take 
two GCSEs or other Level 2 qualifications that have different discount codes but have 
significant overlap of content. Students or their advisers who have any doubts about their 
subject combinations should check with the institution they wish to progress to before 
embarking on their programmes. 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, 
special consideration and malpractice 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality policy requires all students to 
have equal opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our qualifications 
to be awarded in a way that is fair to every student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the Equality Act 2010) are not, 
when they are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in comparison to 
students who do not share that characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification and that 
this achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their peers. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be available in English. All student work must be in 
English.  
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with special 
educational needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to:  
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the assessment.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
53 
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an individual 
student with a disability, without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding bodies comply with the duty under the 
Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students will 
then know what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for assessment.  
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable adjustments 
where a person with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in undertaking an 
assessment. The awarding organisation is required to take reasonable steps to overcome 
that disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be unique to that individual and 
therefore might not be in the list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of factors, 
which will include: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding 
organisation, timeframes or affects the security or integrity of the assessment. This is 
because the adjustment is not ‘reasonable’. 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student’s mark or grade to 
reflect temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the examination/ 
assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a material effect on a 
candidate’s ability to take an assessment or demonstrate their level of attainment in  
an assessment. 
In relation to live theatre access for Component 3, any extenuating circumstances requests 
which come through via special arrangement, will be dealt with on a case by case basis. 
Further information 
For up-to-date advice on teacher involvement and administration of non-examination 
assessments, please refer to the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ) document Instructions 
for conducting non-examination assessments (new GCE and GCSE specifications) available 
on the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
54 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that compromises or seeks to 
compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in controlled assessments discovered before the candidate has signed 
the declaration of authentication form does not need to be reported to Pearson. 
Candidate malpractice found in non-examined assessment after the declaration of 
authenticity has been signed, and in examinations must be reported to Pearson on a JCQ 
Form M1 (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form should be 
emailed to candidatemalpractice@pearson.com. Please provide as much information and 
supporting documentation as possible. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate 
sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report candidate malpractice constitutes staff or centre malpractice.  
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and maladministration of 
our qualifications. As with candidate malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is any act that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of assessment or undermines the integrity 
of the qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. Centres should be aware that if they 
do not submit the online forms relating to contrasting text requirements or the live 
performance statement, then this may result in centre malpractice/maladministration. If there 
are extenuating circumstances that prevent students from seeing live theatre performance, 
centres need to apply for special arrangements and if centres fail to do this, it may result in 
centre malpractice/maladministration. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported 
immediately, before any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson on a  
JCQ Form M2(a) (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form, 
supporting documentation and as much information as possible should be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions 
lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the document 
General and Vocational Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments Policies and Procedures, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice. 
Centre marking training will be organised by Pearson and will include training on the 
administrative requirements and best practice so as to avoid potential maladministration 
and/or malpractice. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
55 
Examiners and moderators for the non-examination assessment components will be trained 
in the administrative arrangements that are required of centres. The following examples of 
possible centre maladministration or malpractice should be brought to the attention of 
Pearson: 
● incorrect group sizes 
● incorrect times allocated to groups 
● recordings not being made 
● recordings not sent to examiner 
● recordings sent in unusable format 
● candidate costume making candidates hard to identify 
● candidates not identified on recordings 
● inappropriate use of non-assessed candidates 
● extremely small roles allocated to candidates. 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to comply with the requirements of 
Ofqual’s General Conditions of Recognition. 
The raw marks for Components 1, 2 and 3 in this qualification will be scaled by Pearson to 
represent the relative weighting of 40% for Component 1, 20% for Component 2 and 40% 
for Component 3.  Any marks submitted by the centre should be in raw marks based on the 
assessment grids for Component 1. 
 
Component Weighting Raw marks Scaling factor Scaling mark 
Component 1 40% 60 1.6 96 
Component 2 20% 48 1.0 48 
Component 3 40% 60 1.6 96 
 
This GCSE qualification will be graded and certificated on a nine-grade scale from 9 to 1 
using the total subject mark where 9 is the highest grade. Individual components are not 
graded.  
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum judged by Pearson to be of 
sufficient standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U result.  
The first certification opportunity for this qualification will be 2018. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
56 
Student recruitment and progression 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this qualification. 
Progression 
Students can progress from this qualification to: 
● A Level in Drama and Theatre  
● related vocational qualifications such as BTEC Level 3 Performing Arts 
● Extended Project Level 3 Unit 3 Performance.  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
57 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Non-examination assessment authentication sheet 
(Component 1) 58 
Appendix 2: Live theatre evaluation notes form (Component 3) 59 
Appendix 3: Design roles minimum resource guidance for centres 60 
Appendix 4: Best practice when recording performance 61 
Appendix 5: Guidance on selecting suitable material for students 63 
Appendix 6: Mark penalty tables for performances/design realisations 
not meeting the minimum assessment time – Component 2 64 
Appendix 7: Diversity and Inclusion statement 66 
Appendix 8: The context for the development of this qualification 68 
Appendix9: Transferable skills 70 
Appendix 10: Codes 71 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
58 
Appendix 1: Non-examination assessment 
authentication sheet (Component 1) 
 
The authentication form must be completed and submitted digitally along with the portfolio. 
Please scan it and then insert at the front of each candidate’s portfolio. The form requires 
information on the portfolio produced by each candidate and the performance/design 
realisation undertaken for Component 1. The form also requires the marks awarded for the 
portfolio and for the performance/design realisation. There is a section for teacher and 
candidate declarations in relation to the work submitted. 
Please see our website for the most up-to-date version of this form.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
59 
Appendix 2: Live theatre evaluation notes 
form (Component 3) 
 
This form must be completed and attached to the live theatre evaluation notes produced by 
each candidate. The form provides instructions on how to complete the notes and what 
happens after the notes are completed and what to do with them on the day of the 
examination. There is a section for teacher and candidate declarations in relation to the notes 
submitted. 
Please see our website for the most up-to-date version of this form:  
https://qualifications.pearson.com/en/qualifications/edexcel-gcses/drama-2016.html 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
60 
Appendix 3: Design roles minimum resource 
guidance for centres 
Centres intending to offer design routes to students need to ensure they have the resources 
and appropriate equipment to support these students, so that they can meet the demands of 
this qualification.  
Centres must provide a performance space appropriate to the performance which has 
adequate space for technicians and well as performers and audience. 
The student is in the role of the designer – not the technician, wardrobe manager, costume 
maker, carpenter or craftsperson – though they will have to be involved in the execution of 
the design. 
To ensure compliance with safety standards, health and safety risk assessments should be 
completed. 
 
Design role Resource guidance 
Costume design ● Students will have to work within specified budget constraints to 
realise their design. 
● Students should have access to an appropriate range of construction 
materials and, if required, the equipment needed to manufacture the 
costumes. The ability to manufacture the costume is not a 
specification requirement but students need to be involved in the 
execution of the design. 
● Students may source individual elements for their costume 
design(s), however no complete costume can be sourced. 
Lighting design Students need access to: 
● a minimum of three different types of lantern 
● lighting bars or stands with T bars from which to hang lanterns 
● a minimum of 12 independently controllable channels 
● a lighting console – this may be manual or programmable but should 
allow for cross fading and facilitate two pre-set operations. 
Set design   ● Students will have to work within specified budget constraints to 
realise their design. 
● They should have access to an appropriate range of construction 
materials and, if required, the equipment needed to manufacture the 
set. The ability to manufacture the set is not a specification 
requirement, although students need to be involved in the execution 
of the design. 
● Set and construction materials may come from the centre’s stock or 
can be hired or purchased. 
Sound design Students need access to: 
● a sound reproduction system 
● sound-processing devices 
● at least two different types of microphone 
● access to pre-recorded sound sources. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
61 
Appendix 4: Best practice when recording 
performance  
The following guidance applies for the non-examination assessment component when 
recorded evidence is required for assessment purposes.  
The purpose of the recording is to evidence all marks awarded, therefore all recordings must 
be made under examination conditions.  
It must be understood that the performances and the recording of these are for examination 
purposes only. Any performances or recordings of performances undertaken by centres 
outside of the context of the examination must seek copyright permission for works in 
copyright.  
1. All recordings must be complete and unedited for each performance. 
2. The camera must be positioned to ensure the best possible and unobstructed recording 
is made of the performance, as it would be seen by the marker/examiner.  
3. Each student should introduce themselves at the start of each recording. They should 
provide the following information: 
• name and candidate number 
• details of the performance or design role. 
Before the assessment: 
4. Check resources for the recording. 
• ensure that the camera being used has appropriate facilities for adjusting recorded 
sound levels – particularly if the camera is to be positioned some distance from the 
students.  
• check that the picture recorded by the camera is clear enough to identify individual 
students.  
• ensure that memory cards have sufficient space for each recording. 
• check the camera battery is charged and a power lead is plugged in/available if 
needed. 
5. Clear student identification. 
• plan with students costumes that will support identification on the recording, for 
example, different coloured t-shirts or jackets; distinct costume or prop items. 
• test how these costumes look on camera from an identification point of view, 
particularly for students in large groups.  
• when watching work prior to the marking, check that students’ use of stage space can 
be captured by the camera. 
• make any preparation for identification needed, for example: 
- A4 sheets stating student name and number in a large font for students to hold up 
to camera as part of the introduction 
- full length group photographs or static shot of students in costume (for visiting 
examiner assessment) 
- labelled screen shots of students in performance (for moderator assessment) 
• ensure that students have had an opportunity to practice giving clear, well-paced 
introductions stating both name and candidate number. 
• make a note on the appropriate paperwork of costume/costume changes for each 
candidate. 
NB: Centres must not allow students to be costumed very similarly for example, all in black, 
as this is not supportive of the assessment process.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
62 
Students are assessed as individuals and as such, it is vital that they can be identified 
individually throughout all assessed performances. 
6. Test the camera. 
• record a small section of work (perhaps a dress rehearsal) using the actual camera 
needed for the performance with students speaking in the performance space. 
• check that an audio signal has been recorded and that students can be seen without 
obstruction and heard clearly. 
• adjust camera position and/or recording levels as needed. 
At the beginning of the assessment: 
7. Position the camera as practised. 
8. Recording must begin with all students in a full length group shot, as they appear in 
performance. 
9. Film each performance, beginning with the student introductions. Each student must 
then introduce themselves, with a clear pace and at audible volume, stating name, 
student number and role(s). Students must also describe and/or show any costume 
changes. 
NB: The performance for that group must follow the introductions in a single recording. 
During the performance: 
10. Check that recording is taking place for each group and that students are fully visible 
on screen. 
11. Check available power/battery/memory as needed in between the examination 
performances. 
After the examination: 
12. Check the recordings, ensuring that each group has been recorded with audio. 
13. Ensure that all recordings are backed up as well as transferred to the appropriate 
format for assessment. 
14. Recording should be saved with the centre number, qualification title and the relevant 
component number. 
15. Ensure that the recordings are kept secure until sent to Pearson and any backups kept 
safely until after EARs (enquiries about results). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
63 
Appendix 5: Guidance on selecting suitable 
material for students 
The following guidance is to be taken into consideration when selecting stimuli material(s) for 
Component 1: Devising, and performance text(s) for Component 2: Performance from Text. 
In selecting material, centres are advised that the following is deemed inappropriate for this 
age group: 
● violence acted out against another character that dwells on the infliction of pain or injury 
● gratuitous violence 
● frequent use of strong language and swearing 
● explicit portrayals of sexual activity 
● scenes of sexual violence 
● nudity 
● scenes promoting drug taking 
● material that could be considered offensive on the grounds of race, religion or gender. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
64 
Appendix 6: Mark penalty tables for 
performances/design realisations not 
meeting the minimum assessment time – 
Component 2  
The proportional time penalty will be applied, by Pearson Edexcel, after the work has been 
marked by the examiner, using the conversion tables below.  
Examiners will be required to only apply the assessment criteria as presented on pages  
40–46. 
The penalty is proportional to the performance length. 
 
2-minute minimum for 
monologue 
Total time 
(minutes and 
seconds) 
Percentage 
applied to 
final mark 
1:45 to 1:59 87.50% 
1:30 to 1:44 75.00% 
1:15 to 1:29 62.50% 
1:00 to 1:14 50.00% 
0:45 to 0:59 37.50% 
0:30 to 0:44 25.00% 
0:15 to 0:29 12.50% 
0:00 to 0:14 0.00% 
 
3-minute minimum for 
duologue 
Total time 
(minutes and 
seconds) 
Percentage 
applied to 
final mark 
2:45 to 2:59 91.67% 
2:30 to 2:44 83.33% 
2:15 to 2:29 75.00% 
2:00 to 2:14 66.67% 
1:45 to 1:59 58.33% 
1:30 to 1:44 50.00% 
1:15 to 1:29 41.67% 
1:00 to 1:14 33.33% 
0:45 to 0:59 25.00% 
0:30 to 0:44 16.67% 
0:15 to 0:29 8.33% 
0:00 to 0:14 0.00% 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
65 
 
4-minute minimum for group 
performance 
Total time 
(minutes and 
seconds) 
Percentage 
applied to 
final mark 
3:45 to 3:59 93.75% 
3:30 to 3:44 87.50% 
3:15 to 3:29 81.25% 
3:00 to 3:14 75.00% 
2:45 to 2:59 68.75% 
2:30 to 2:44 62.50% 
2:15 to 2:29 56.25% 
2:00 to 2:14 50.00% 
1:45 to 1:59 43.75% 
1:30 to 1:44 37.50% 
1:15 to 1:29 31.25% 
1:00 to 1:14 25.00% 
0:45 to 0:59 18.75% 
0:30 to 0:44 12.50% 
0:15 to 0:29 6.25% 
0:00 to 0:14 0.00% 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
66 
Appendix 7: Diversity and Inclusion 
statement 
We are committed to listening, learning and working together with all of you to support the 
delivery of a broad and inclusive drama curriculum. We are proud to work with students, 
teachers and the drama community to help drive change. To join the conversation and share 
your feedback, please get in touch with our subject advisor via 
TeachingPerformingArts@pearson.com.  
The following external partners have helped shape our qualification content and support our 
commitment to ensuring students have the opportunity to study a representative and 
inclusive drama curriculum. 
 
Bola Agbaje 
Playwright and screenwriter 
Carolyn Bradley 
Head of Drama and education consultant 
In-Sook Chappell 
Playwright 
Sam Cairns and Lizzie Crump 
Co-Directors, Cultural Learning Alliance 
Clint Dyer 
Deputy Artistic Director, National Theatre 
mezze eade 
Drama consultant 
Nadia Fall 
Artistic Director, Theatre Royal Stratford  
East 
Romana Flello 
Participation Manager, Royal Court Theatre 
Tanika Gupta MBE 
Playwright and screenwriter 
Simeilia Hodge-Dallaway 
Founder and CEO at Beyond The Canon 
Founder and Former Artistic Director at 
Artistic Directors of the Future 
Co-Founder at Black Lives Black Words 
International Project and Curatorial Consultant 
at Manchester International Festival. 
Chris Lawson 
Artistic Director, Oldham Coliseum Theatre 
Karen Latto 
Co-Founder, Open Drama UK 
Rufus Norris 
Artistic Director, National Theatre 
Chris Lawson  
Artistic Director, Oldham Coliseum Theatre  
Rachel O’Riordan 
Artistic Director and CEO, Lyric  
Hammersmith Theatre 
Matthew Nichols   
Drama education consultant and author  
Roy Williams 
Playwright 
National Drama  
Subject association for Drama teachers and 
theatre educators.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
67 
 
London Theatre Consortium 
This is a partnership of 14 of following London’s not-for-profit producing theatres: 
● Almeida Theatre 
● Battersea Arts Centre 
● Bush Theatre 
● Donmar Warehouse 
● Gate Theatre 
● Hampstead Theatre 
● Kiln Theatre 
● Lyric Hammersmith Theatre 
● Royal Court Theatre 
● Soho Theatre 
● Stratford East 
● Unicorn Theatre 
● The Yard 
● Young Vic 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
68 
 
Appendix 8: The context for the 
development of this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] and our 
ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
● reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with those 
taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
● consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including subject 
associations, higher-education academics and teachers to ensure this qualification is 
suitable for a UK context 
● reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in their 
documents GCSE (9 to 1) Qualification Level Conditions and Requirements and GCSE Subject 
Level Conditions and Requirements for Drama, published in May 2015. 
 
 
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification Principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
● demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning and 
measuring higher-order skills 
● rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and valid 
assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in end users of the knowledge, skills and 
competencies of certified students 
● inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students develop at 
different rates and have different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
● empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills, see Appendix 9. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
69 
 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
May 2014 
“ The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important change to the 
education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications will assist them in 
helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an ‘Expert 
Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or because of 
our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the world as diverse as 
Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification development 
process that has included: 
● extensive international comparability of subject content against the highest-performing 
jurisdictions in the world 
● benchmarking assessments against UK and overseas providers to ensure that they are at 
the right level of demand 
● establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-specific 
expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
● subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future oriented. The 
design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, meaning learner outcomes 
have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a learner’s 
success in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident that we have 
supported the development of qualifications that are outstanding for their coherence, 
thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as representing world-class best 
practice. 
”    
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Lee Sing Kong  
Director, National Institute of Education, 
Singapore 
  
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
  
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
 
All titles correct as of May 2014 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
70 
Appendix9: Transferable skills 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently flagged the 
need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable them to respond with 
confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines skills, or 
competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that can be learned and 
that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform an activity or task and can be 
built upon and extended through learning.’ [1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected and 
evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this process, we 
identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the most evidence-based and 
robust skills framework. We adapted the framework slightly to include the Program for 
International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT Literacy and Collaborative Problem Solving 
(CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves: [2]  
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve general 
cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and communicate. [3]  
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, oral communication, written communication, assertive 
communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, service 
orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared understanding, 
taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team organisation. 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work stress, 
adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, and physical 
adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual teams, 
work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and able to acquire 
new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher education, 
as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the teaching and learning of 
this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning materials, developed with 
stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
 
[1]  OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012) 
[2]  Koenig, J. A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop 
(National Academies Press, 2011) 
[3]  PISA – The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy (2011) 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Drama 
Specification – Issue 6 – August 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
71 
Appendix 10: Codes 
 
Type of code Use of code Code 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for 
performance tables is assigned a discount 
code indicating the subject area to which 
it belongs. 
Discount codes are published by the DfE. 
Please see the GOV.UK 
website* 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an 
Ofqual Regulated Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) code. 
The RQF code is known as a Qualification 
Number (QN). This is the code that 
features in the DfE Section 96 and on the 
LARA as being eligible for 16–18 and 19+ 
funding, and is to be used for all 
qualification funding purposes. The QN 
will appear on students’ final certification 
documentation. 
The QN for this 
qualification is: 
601/8491/7 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to 
enter students for a qualification. Centres 
will need to use the entry codes only 
when claiming students’ qualifications. 
GCSE – 1DR0 
 
Component codes These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be 
entered for individual components. 
Component 1: 1DR0/01 
Component 2: 1DR0/02 
Component 3: 1DR0/3A 
1DR0/3B 
 
* GOV.UK website 
 
DB200225 9781446926314_GCSE2016_L12_DRAMA_ISSUE_6.DOC.1–79/0 
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office: 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121