Specification
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9 - 1) in Geography A (1GA0)
First teaching from September 2016
First certification from 2018 Issue 5
GCSE (9-1)
Geography A
 
About Pearson 
Pearson is the world's leading learning company, operating in countries around the world. We provide 
content, assessment and digital services to learners, educational institutions, employers, governments 
and other partners globally. We are committed to helping equip learners with the skills they need to 
enhance their employability prospects and to succeed in the changing world of work. We believe that 
wherever learning flourishes, so do people.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
This specification is Issue 5. Key changes are summarised on the next page. We will inform centres of 
any changes to this issue. The latest issue can be found on our website. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References to third party materials made in this specification are made in good faith. Pearson does not 
endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may be subject to change, 
or any opinions expressed therein. (Materials may include textbooks, journals, magazines and other 
publications and websites.) 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
ISBN 978 1 446 93206 3 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2025 
 
 
Summary of Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE in Geography A 
specification Issue 5 changes 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this current issue Page number 
The exam time for Paper 1 has been increased from 1 hour 30 minutes to  
1 hour 45 minutes. This change takes effect for 2026 exams. 
3 and 15 
 
If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, contact us via our website  
at: qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/contact-us.html. 
 
Contents 
1 Introduction 1 
Why choose Edexcel GCSE Geography A? 1 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this qualification 2 
Qualification at a glance 3 
2 Subject content and assessment information 5 
Component 1: The Physical Environment 7 
Component 2: The Human Environment 16 
Component 3: Geographical Investigations: Fieldwork and UK Challenges 26 
Geographical skills 31 
Mathematics and Statistics Skills 32 
Assessment Objectives 33 
3 Administration and general information 34 
Entries 34 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special consideration and 
malpractice 34 
Student recruitment and progression 36 
Appendix 1: Fieldwork Statement 39 
Appendix 2: Definitions 40 
Appendix 3: Exam command word definitions 41 
Appendix 4: The context for the development of this qualification 42 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 44 
Appendix 6: Codes 45 
 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
1 
1 Introduction 
Why choose Edexcel GCSE Geography A? 
We’ve listened to feedback from all parts of the geography subject community, including 
hundreds of fellow teachers. We’ve used this opportunity of curriculum change to redesign a 
qualification that is engaging and relevant to today’s geographers – a qualification that 
enables your students to explore the world, the challenges it faces and their own place in it, 
and to help prepare them to succeed in their chosen pathway. 
Clear and coherent structure – our qualification has a straightforward structure with three 
components – The Physical Environment, The Human Environment and Geographical 
Investigations: Fieldwork and UK Challenges. 
Straightforward assessments that are accessible for all abilities – there are three 
externally examined papers that provide gradual progression in demand throughout the 
topics. Across all three assessments there is consistent use of 13 different command words 
so that students know what to expect. 
Engaging and manageable fieldwork – fieldwork environments are aligned with the core 
content of the course so that the experience of fieldwork can reinforce and enlighten learning 
in the classroom and learning in the classroom can underpin learning in the field. Fieldwork 
tasks will remain for the lifetime of the specification so there is less time spent on planning 
and administration and more time to bring geography to life in the field. 
Provides an engaging real-world focus – students are encouraged to apply their 
knowledge and understanding to real-life 21st century UK challenges.  
Continuous progression – the new specification content introduces students to physical or 
human geography first and then people-environment processes and interactions in the 
context of place at a range of scales. Building on this, via geographical investigation, 
students draw on their wider knowledge and understanding of UK geography to explore 
geographical issues. 
Develops a holistic understanding of geography – content is written to show 
geographical overview and geographical depth. Geographical skills are integrated throughout 
all parts of the course so that students use them in context.  
Supports progression to A Level – the compulsory and optional topic content provides the 
opportunity to lay foundations of knowledge and understanding that can be further 
developed at A Level. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
2 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this 
qualification 
Planning  
● Our Getting Started guide gives you an overview of the new GCSE qualifications to help 
you to get to grips with the changes to content and assessment and to help you 
understand what these changes mean for you and your students. 
● We will give you an editable course planner and scheme of work that you can adapt to 
suit your department.  
● Our mapping documents highlight key differences between the new and 2012 
qualifications.  
Teaching and learning  
There will be lots of free teaching and learning support to help you deliver the new 
qualifications, including: 
● topic packs for every topic, including teaching and learning ideas on new and more 
challenging topics and skills and geographical literacy 
● support for embedding geographical skills and fieldwork in teaching. 
Preparing for exams  
We will also provide a range of resources to help you prepare your students for the 
assessments, including: 
● additional assessment materials to support formative assessments and mock exams  
● marked exemplars of student work with examiner commentaries.  
ResultsPlus 
ResultsPlus provides the most detailed analysis available of your students’ exam 
performance. It can help you identify the topics and skills where further learning would 
benefit your students.  
Get help and support 
Our subject advisor service, led by Jon Wolton, and online communities will ensure you 
receive help and guidance from us and that you can share ideas and information with other 
teachers. You can sign up to receive e-newsletters from Jon to keep up to date with 
qualifications and product and service news.  
Learn more at qualifications.pearson.com 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
3 
Qualification at a glance 
Content and assessment overview 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Geography A consists of three externally-
examined papers.  
Students must complete all assessments in May/June in any single year. 
Component 1: The Physical Environment (*Paper 1 code: 1GA0/01) 
Written examination: 1 hour and 45 minutes 
37.5% of the qualification 
94 marks 
Content overview 
● Topic 1: The changing landscapes of the UK – including optional sub-topics from which 
students choose two from three, 1A: Coastal landscapes and processes, 1B: River 
landscapes and processes and 1C: Glaciated upland landscapes and processes. 
● Topic 2: Weather hazards and climate change 
● Topic 3: Ecosystems, biodiversity and management  
Assessment overview 
An externally-assessed written exam with three 30-mark sections. Of the 94 raw marks 
available, up to 4 marks are awarded for spelling, punctuation, grammar and use of specialist 
terminology.  
Section A: The changing landscapes of the UK  
Section B: Weather hazards and climate change 
Section C: Ecosystems, biodiversity and management 
In Section A, students answer Question 1 and choose two from optional questions  
(Question 2 Coastal landscapes and processes, Question 3 River landscapes and processes, 
Question 4 Glaciated upland landscapes and processes). Students answer all questions from 
Sections B and C. 
The exam includes multiple-choice questions, short open, open response, calculations and  
8-mark extended writing questions. 
 
Component 2: The Human Environment (*Paper 2 code: 1GA0/02) 
Written examination: 1 hour and 30 minutes 
37.5% of the qualification 
94 marks  
Content overview 
● Topic 4: Changing cities 
● Topic 5: Global development 
● Topic 6: Resource management – including optional sub-topics from which students choose 
one from two, 6A: Energy resource management and 6B: Water resource management  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
4 
 
Component 2: The Human Environment (*Paper 2 code: 1GA0/02) 
Assessment overview 
An externally-assessed written exam with three 30-mark sections. Of the 94 raw marks 
available, up to 4 marks are awarded for spelling, punctuation, grammar and use of specialist 
terminology. 
Section A: Changing cities  
Section B: Global development 
Section C: Resource management  
Students answer all questions from Sections A and B. In Section C, students answer one from 
two optional questions (Energy resource management or Water resource management).  
The exam includes multiple-choice questions, short open, open response, calculations and  
8-mark extended writing questions. 
 
Component 3: Geographical Investigations: Fieldwork and UK Challenges  
(*Paper 3 code: 1GA0/03) 
Written examination: 1 hour and 30 minutes 
25% of the qualification 
64 marks 
Content overview 
● Topic 7: Geographical investigations − fieldwork 
● Topic 8: Geographical investigations − UK challenges  
Assessment overview 
An externally-assessed written exam with three sections. Of the 64 raw marks available, up to 
4 marks are awarded for spelling, punctuation, grammar and use of specialist terminology. 
Section A: Geographical investigations – physical environments 
Students choose one from two optional questions (Rivers or Coasts).  
Section B: Geographical investigations – human environments 
Students choose one from two optional questions (Central/Inner Urban Area or Rural 
Settlements).  
Section C: UK challenges 
● The exam includes multiple-choice questions, short open, open response, calculations,  
8-mark and 12-mark extended writing questions. 
 
*See Appendix 6: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to this 
qualification.  
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
5 
2 Subject content and assessment 
information 
The subject content sets out the knowledge, understanding and skills relevant to this 
qualification. Together with the assessment information it provides the framework within 
which centres create their programmes of study, so ensuring progression from Key Stage 3 
national curriculum requirements and the possibilities for development into A Level. 
Qualification aims and objectives 
GCSE specifications for the discipline of geography give students the opportunity to 
understand more about the world, the challenges it faces and their place within it. This GCSE 
course will deepen understanding of geographical processes, illuminate the impact of change 
and of complex people-environment interactions, highlight the dynamic links and 
interrelationships between places and environments at different scales, and develop 
students’ competence in using a wide range of geographical investigative skills and 
approaches. Geography enables young people to become globally and environmentally 
informed and thoughtful, enquiring citizens.  
The aims and objectives of this qualification are to enable students to build on their Key 
Stage 3 knowledge and skills to:  
● develop and extend their knowledge of locations, places, environments and processes, and 
of different scales, including global; and of social, political and cultural contexts (know 
geographical material) 
● gain understanding of the interactions between people and environments, change in 
places and processes over space and time, and the interrelationship between geographical 
phenomena at different scales and in different contexts (think like a geographer) 
● develop and extend their competence in a range of skills including those used in fieldwork, 
in using maps and Geographical Information Systems (GIS) and in researching secondary 
evidence, including digital sources; and develop their competence in applying sound 
enquiry and investigative approaches to questions and hypotheses (study like a 
geographer) 
● apply geographical knowledge, understanding, skills and approaches appropriately and 
creatively to real world contexts, including fieldwork, and to contemporary situations and 
issues; and develop well-evidenced arguments drawing on their geographical knowledge 
and understanding (applying geography). 
Geographical Skills 
Students are required to develop a range of geographical skills, including mathematics and 
statistics skills, throughout their course of study. These skills may be assessed across any of 
the examined papers. The full list of geographical skills is provided on page 32. Some 
geographical skills are specific to particular topic content, these are numbered within the 
content and indicated in the ‘integrated skills’ sections within the topics throughout the 
content pages. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
6 
Subject content structure 
The subject content has been written so that each topic in Component 1 and 2 is introduced 
by way of a geographical overview before progressing into geographical depth. Geographical 
overview content aims to develop students’ broad, holistic understanding of the topic 
theme at a larger scale. Geographical depth content aims to develop students’ detailed 
knowledge and understanding of processes and interactions in a particular smaller 
scale place or context.   
Case Studies and located examples 
All students must study three in-depth case studies: 
● In Topic 4 Changing cities, a case study of a major UK city  
● In Topic 4 Changing cities, a case study of a major city in a developing country or an 
emerging country  
● In Topic 5 Global development, a case study of development in a developing country or an 
emerging country.  
In addition to the three in-depth case studies, throughout the course it is a requirement to 
draw on located examples from developing, emerging and developed countries. Any located 
examples must be set within the broader contextual knowledge of the country. In order to 
make it clear where a located example should be developed, a 
 symbol has been used.  
Programmes of study could identify located examples within the countries selected for the 
three in-depth case studies.   
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
7 
Component 1: The Physical Environment 
Overview 
This component brings together physical geography and people-environment processes and 
interactions. The component is divided into three sections: 
● Topic 1: The changing landscapes of the UK – an overview of the distribution and 
characteristics of the UK’s changing landscapes and detailed studies of two from three 
landscapes, 1A: Coastal landscapes and processes, 1B: River landscapes and processes or 
1C: Glaciated upland landscapes and processes 
● Topic 2: Weather hazards and climate change – an overview of the global circulation of 
atmosphere and climate change over time and a detailed study of tropical cyclones and a 
drought 
● Topic 3: Ecosystems, biodiversity and management – an overview of the distribution and 
characteristics of global and UK ecosystems and a detailed study of tropical rainforests 
and deciduous woodlands. 
Content 
Topic 1: The changing landscapes of the UK 
 
Overview of the UK’s physical landscape 
Key idea Detailed content 
1.1  There are 
geological 
variations within 
the UK 
a.  Characteristics and distribution of the UK’s main rock types: 
sedimentary (chalk, sandstone) igneous (basalt, granite), 
metamorphic (schists, slates). (1) 
b. The role of geology and past tectonic processes in the 
development of upland (igneous and metamorphic rocks) and 
lowland (sedimentary rocks) landscapes. (2) 
1.2  A number of 
physical and 
human 
processes work 
together to 
create distinct 
UK landscapes 
a. How distinctive upland and lowland landscapes result from the 
interaction of physical processes (glacial erosion and 
deposition, weathering and climatological, post-glacial river 
and slope processes). (3) 
b. How distinctive landscapes result from human activity 
(agriculture, forestry, settlement) over time. (4) 
Integrated skills:  
(1) Geological maps 
(2) Using simple geological cross sections to show the relationship between geology and 
relief 
(3) Locating key physical features (uplands, lowland basins, rivers) on outline UK maps 
(4) Recognition of physical and human geography features on 1:25000 and 1:50000 OS 
maps. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
8 
Optional sub topic 1A: Coastal landscapes and processes  
Two optional sub topics from 1A or 1B or 1C. 
 
Key idea Detailed content 
1.3  A variety of 
physical 
processes 
interact to 
shape coastal 
landscapes 
a.  The physical processes at work on the coast: weathering 
(mechanical, chemical, biological), mass movement (sliding 
and slumping), erosion (abrasion, hydraulic action, attrition 
and solution), transport (traction, saltation, suspension, 
solution and longshore drift) and deposition. 
b. Influence of geological structure (concordant/discordant, joints 
and faults), rock type (hard/soft rock) and wave action 
(destructive and constructive waves) on landforms (5) 
c. How the UK’s weather and climate (seasonality, storm 
frequency and prevailing winds) affect rates of coastal erosion 
and retreat, and impact on landforms and landscape. (6) 
1.4  Coastal erosion 
and deposition 
create 
distinctive 
landforms within 
the coastal 
landscape 
a. The role of erosional processes in the development of 
landforms: headlands and bays, caves, arches, cliffs, stacks, 
wave cut platforms. (7) 
b. The role of depositional processes in the development of 
landforms: bars, beaches and spits. (7) 
1.5  Human activities 
can lead to 
changes in 
coastal 
landscapes 
which affect 
people and the 
environment 
a.  How human activities (urbanisation, agriculture and industry) 
have affected landscapes and the effects of coastal recession 
and flooding on people and the environment. (8) 
b. The advantages and disadvantages of different coastal 
defences used on the coastline of the UK (hard engineering, 
sea walls, groynes and rip rap and soft engineering, beach 
nourishment and managed retreat) and how they can lead to 
change in coastal landscapes. (8) 
1.6  Distinctive 
coastal 
landscapes are 
the outcome of 
the interaction 
between 
physical and 
human 
processes 
a.  The significance of the location of one named 
 distinctive 
coastal landscape within the UK (discordant, concordant, 
coastline of deposition, coastal retreat) including how it has 
been formed and the most influential factors in its change. (7) 
Integrated skills:  
(5) Use of BGS Geology maps (paper or online) to link coastal form to geology 
(6) Using UK weather and climate data and calculation of mean rates of erosion using a 
multi-year data set 
(7) Recognition of coastal landforms on 1:25000 and 1:50000 OS maps 
(8) Use of 1:25000 and 1:50000 OS maps, and GIS, to investigate the impact of human 
intervention 
 = located example. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
9 
Optional sub topic 1B: River landscapes and processes 
 
Key idea Detailed content 
1.7  A variety of 
physical 
processes 
interact to 
shape river 
landscapes 
a.  The physical processes at work in the river landscape: 
weathering (mechanical, chemical and biological), mass 
movement (sliding and slumping), erosion (abrasion, hydraulic 
action, attrition and solution), transport (traction, saltation, 
suspension and solution) and deposition. 
b. How river landscapes contrast between the upper courses, mid 
courses and lower courses of rivers and why channel shape 
(width, depth), valley profile, gradient, discharge, velocity and 
sediment size and shape change along the course of a named 
 UK river. (9)    
c. How the UK’s weather (short-term events such as storms and 
droughts) and climate affect river processes and impact on 
landforms and landscapes. (10) 
1.8  Erosion and 
deposition 
interacting with 
geology create 
distinctive 
landforms in 
river landscapes 
a. The role of erosion processes and the influence of geology in 
the development of landforms: interlocking spurs, waterfalls, 
gorges and river cliffs. (11) 
b. The role of depositional processes in the formation of flood 
plains, levees and point bars.  
c. The interaction of deposition and erosion processes in the 
development of landforms (meanders, oxbow lakes).  
1.9  Human activities 
can lead to 
changes in river 
landscapes 
which affect 
people and the 
environment 
a.  How human activities and changes in land use (urbanisation, 
agriculture and industry) have affected river processes that 
impact on river landscapes; the physical and human causes 
and effects of river flooding. (12) 
b. Advantages and disadvantages of different defences used on 
UK rivers  (hard engineering– dams, reservoirs and 
channelisation and soft engineering– flood plain zoning and 
washlands) and how they can lead to change in river 
landscapes. (13) 
1.10  Distinctive river 
landscapes are 
the outcome of 
the interaction 
between 
physical and 
human 
processes 
a. The significance of the location of one named 
 distinctive UK 
river landscape (upland/lowland), how it has been formed and 
the most influential factors in its change. 
 
Integrated skills:  
(9) Use of BGS Geology maps (paper or online) to link river long profiles to geology 
(10) Using UK weather and climate data  
(11) Recognition of river landforms on 1:25000 and 1:50000 OS maps 
(12) Drawing simple storm hydrographs using rainfall and discharge data 
(13) Use of 1:25000 and 1:50000 OS maps, and GIS, to investigate the impact of human 
intervention 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
10 
Optional sub topic 1C: Glaciated upland landscapes and processes 
 
Key idea Detailed content 
1.11 A variety of 
physical 
processes 
interact to 
shape glaciated 
upland 
landscapes 
a.  Glacial processes that once operated in the glaciated upland 
landscape: glacial erosion (plucking, abrasion), transport (on 
or within the ice) and deposition. 
b. Physical processes that operate on the relict upland glacial 
landscapes of today: mechanical weathering (freeze thaw), 
mass movement (soil movement,  and rock falls/slides). 
c. How past climate and current UK weather and climate 
(seasonal and diurnal variations in weather) affect processes 
that impact on glaciated upland landscapes. (14) 
1.12 Glacial erosion 
and deposition 
create 
distinctive 
landforms within 
glaciated upland 
landscapes 
a. The role of erosional processes in the development of 
landforms (truncated spurs, corries, glacial troughs, glacial 
lake/tarns, arêtes, hanging valleys and roche moutonnées). 
(15) 
b. The role of depositional processes in the development of 
landforms (ground and terminal moraines). (15) 
c. The interaction of deposition and erosion processes in the 
development of landforms (crag and tail and drumlins). (15) 
1.13 Human activities 
can lead to 
changes in 
glaciated upland 
landscapes 
a.  How human activity (farming, forestry, settlement) has 
impacted on physical processes in glaciated upland landscapes.  
(16) 
b. Advantages and disadvantages of development (water storage 
and supply, renewable energy, recreation and tourism, 
conservation) and how they can lead to change in glaciated 
upland landscapes. (16) 
1.14 Distinctive 
glaciated upland 
landscapes are 
the outcome of 
the interaction 
between 
physical and 
human 
processes 
a.  The significance of the location of one named 
 distinctive 
glaciated upland landscape in the UK (karst limestone/ 
igneous/metamorphic), how it has been formed and the most 
significant factors in its change. 
Integrated skills:   
(14) Using UK weather and climate data 
(15) Recognition glaciated upland landforms on 1:25000 and 1:50000 OS maps 
(16) Use of 1:25000 and 1:50000 OS maps, and GIS, to investigate the impact of human 
intervention 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
11 
Topic 2: Weather hazards and climate change 
 
Key idea Detailed content 
2.1  The atmosphere 
operates as a 
global system 
transferring 
heat and energy 
a.  The features of the global atmospheric circulation. 
b. How circulation cells and ocean currents transfer and 
redistribute heat energy across the Earth. 
2.2  The global 
climate was 
different in the 
past and 
continues to 
change due to 
natural causes 
a. How climate has changed in the past over different time 
scales: glacial and interglacial periods during the Quaternary 
period. 
b. Causes (Milankovitch cycles, solar variation, volcanism) and 
evidence (ice cores, pollen records, tree rings, historical 
sources) for natural climate change. 
2.3  Global climate is 
now changing 
as a result of 
human activity 
a. How human activities (industry, transport, energy, farming) 
produce greenhouse gases (carbon dioxide, methane) that 
cause the enhanced greenhouse effect. 
b. Negative effects that climate change is having on the 
environment and people (changing patterns of crop yield, 
rising sea levels and retreating glaciers). 
2.4  The UK has a 
distinct climate 
which has 
changed over 
time 
a. Climate of the UK today and changes over the last 1000 years. 
(1) 
b. Spatial variations in temperature, prevailing wind and rainfall 
within the UK. 
c. The significance of the UK’s geographic location in relation to 
its climate. 
Tropical cyclones  
2.5 Tropical 
cyclones are 
extreme 
weather events 
that develop 
under specific 
conditions and 
in certain 
locations 
a.  How the global circulation of the atmosphere leads to tropical 
cyclones (hurricanes and typhoons) in source areas and the 
sequence of their formation. (2) 
b. Characteristics, frequency and geographical distribution of 
tropical cyclones and how these change over time. 
2.6  There are 
various impacts 
of and 
responses to 
natural hazards 
caused by 
tropical cyclones 
depending on a 
country’s level 
of development 
a.  Reasons why tropical cyclones are natural weather hazards 
(high winds, intense rainfall, storm surges, coastal flooding and 
landslides). (3) 
b. Different social, economic and environmental impacts that 
tropical cyclones can have on a named developed*
  and a 
named emerging* or developing* country 
 . 
c. Different responses to tropical cyclones of individuals, 
organisations and governments in a named developed
  and a 
named emerging or developing country 
 . (4) 
*See Appendix 2: Definitions 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
12 
 
Key idea Detailed content 
Drought  
2.7  The causes of 
drought are 
complex with 
some locations 
more vulnerable 
than others 
a.  Characteristics of arid environments compared to the extreme 
weather conditions associated with drought. 
b. Different causes of the weather hazard of drought: 
meteorological, hydrological, and human (agricultural,  
dam building, deforestation). 
c. Why the global circulation makes some locations more 
vulnerable to drought as a natural hazard than others and how 
this changes over time. (5) 
2.8  The impacts of, 
and responses 
to drought vary 
depending on a 
country’s level 
of development 
a.  Reasons why droughts are hazardous. 
b. How the impacts of drought on people and ecosystems can 
vary for a named developed 
  and a named emerging or 
developing country 
 . (6) 
c. Different responses to drought from individuals, organisations 
and governments in a named developed 
  and a named 
emerging or developing country 
 . 
Integrated skills:  
(1) Use and interpretation of line graphs/bar charts showing climate change 
(2) Use of GIS to track the movement of tropical cyclones 
(3) Use of weather and storm surge data to calculate Saffir-Simpson magnitude 
(4) Use of social media source, satellite images and socio-economic data to assess impact 
(5) Use and interpretation of graphs showing medium term rainfall trends 
(6) Use and interpretation of socio-economic data 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
13 
Topic 3: Ecosystems, biodiversity and management 
 
Key idea Detailed content 
3.1  Large-scale 
ecosystems are 
found in 
different parts 
of the world and 
are important  
a.  Distributions and characteristics of the world’s large-scale 
ecosystems (tropical, temperate and boreal forests, tropical 
and temperate grasslands, deserts and tundra). (1) 
b. The role of climate and local factors (soils and altitude) in 
influencing the distribution of different large-scale ecosystems. 
(2) 
3.2  The biosphere is 
a vital system 
 
a. How the biosphere provides resources for people (food, 
medicine, building materials and fuel resources) but is also 
increasingly exploited commercially for energy, water and 
mineral resources. 
3.3  The UK has its 
own variety of 
distinctive 
ecosystems that 
it relies on 
a. Distribution and characteristics of the UK’s main terrestrial 
ecosystems (moorlands, heaths, woodlands, wetlands). (3) 
b. Importance of marine ecosystems to the UK as a resource and 
how human activities are degrading them. 
Tropical rainforests 
3.4  Tropical 
rainforests show 
a range of 
distinguishing 
features 
a. Biotic and abiotic characteristics of the tropical rainforest 
ecosystem (climate, soils, water, plants, animals and humans). 
b. The interdependence of biotic and abiotic characteristics 
(climate, soils, water, plants, animals and humans) and the 
nutrient cycle (Gersmehl model). (4) 
c. Why rainforests have very high biodiversity and how plants 
(stratified layers, buttress roots, drip tips) and animals (strong 
limbs, modified wings and beaks, camouflage) are adapted to 
that environment. 
3.5  Tropical 
rainforest 
ecosystems 
provide a range 
of goods and 
services, some 
of which are 
under threat 
a.  Examples of goods and services provided by tropical rainforest 
ecosystems (food stuffs, medicines, timber and recreation). 
b. How climate change presents a threat to the structure, 
functioning and biodiversity of tropical rainforests. 
c. Economic and social causes of deforestation (conversion to 
agriculture, resource extraction, population pressure). (5) 
d. Political and economic factors (governance, commodity value 
and ecotourism) that have contributed to the sustainable 
management of a rainforest in a named region 
 . 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
14 
 
Key idea Detailed content 
Deciduous woodlands 
3.6  Deciduous 
woodlands show 
a range of 
distinguishing 
features 
a.  Abiotic and biotic characteristics of the deciduous woodland 
ecosystem (climate, soil, water, plants, animals and humans). 
b. The interdependence of biotic and abiotic characteristics 
(climate, soil, water, plants, animals and humans) and the 
nutrient cycle (Gersmehl model). 
c. Why deciduous woodlands have moderate biodiversity and how 
plants (leaf size and structure, water conservation in winter) 
and animals (migration, hibernation and food storage) are 
adapted to that environment. 
3.7  Deciduous 
woodland 
ecosystems 
provide a range 
of goods and 
services, some 
of which are 
under threat 
a.  Examples of goods and services provided by deciduous 
woodland ecosystems (timber, fuel, conservation and 
recreation). 
b.  How climate change presents a threat to the structure, 
function and biodiversity of the deciduous woodland 
ecosystem. 
c.  Economic and social causes of deforestation (urbanisation and 
population growth, timber extraction and agricultural change). 
(6) 
d.  Different approaches to the sustainable use and management 
of deciduous woodlands in a named region 
 .  
Integrated skills:  
(1) Use of world maps to show the location of global biomes 
(2) Comparing climate graphs for different biomes 
(3) Interpret GIS maps 
(4) Use and interpretation of nutrient cycle diagrams and food webs diagrams 
(5) Use and interpretation of line graphs showing the range of future global population 
projections, and population in relation to likely available resources 
(6) Use of GIS to identify the pattern of forest loss. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
15 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2018.  
● The assessment is 1 hour and 45 minutes. 
● The assessment consists of three sections. 
● The assessment is out of 94 marks.  
● The paper will assess spelling, punctuation, grammar and use of specialist terminology 
which will contribute 4 marks towards the overall marks for this paper. 
● Each question is set in a context.  
● Students must answer two from three optional questions (Coastal landscapes and 
processes, River landscapes and processes or Glaciated upland landscapes and processes) 
in Section A. Students must answer all questions from Sections B and C. 
● The exam includes multiple-choice questions, short open, open response, calculations and  
8-mark extended writing questions. 
● Extended writing questions will assess students’ ability to develop extended written 
arguments and to draw well-evidenced and informed conclusions about geographical 
questions and issues. 
● Calculators will be used in the examination. 
Sample assessment materials  
A sample paper and mark scheme for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Geography A Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
16 
Component 2: The Human Environment 
Overview 
This component brings together human geography and people-environment issues. The 
component is divided into three sections: 
● Topic 4: Changing cities – this covers an overview of global urban processes and trends 
and detailed case studies of a major UK city and a major city in a developing or emerging 
country 
● Topic 5: Global development – this covers an overview of the causes and consequences of 
uneven global development and a detailed case study of challenges that affect a 
developing or emerging country 
● Topic 6: Resource management – this covers an overview of the global and UK distribution 
of food, energy and water and one detailed study of either energy resource management 
or water resource management at different scales. 
Content 
Topic 4: Changing cities 
 
Overview of urban patterns and processes 
Key idea Detailed content 
4.1  Urbanisation is 
a global process 
a.  Contrasting trends in urbanisation over the last 50 years in 
different parts of the world (developed, emerging and 
developing countries).  
b.  How and why urbanisation has occurred at different times and 
rates in different parts of the world (developed, emerging and 
developing countries) and the effects. 
4.2  The degree of 
urbanisation 
varies across 
the UK 
a.  Distribution of urban population in the UK and the location of 
its major urban centres. 
b. Factors causing the rate and degree of urbanisation to differ 
between the regions of the UK. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
17 
 
Case Study of a major* UK city 
Key idea Detailed content 
4.3  The context of 
the chosen UK 
city influences 
its functions and 
structure 
a.  Site, situation and connectivity of the chosen UK city in a 
national (cultural and environmental), regional and global 
context. 
b. Chosen UK city’s structure (Central Business District (CBD), 
inner city, suburbs, urban-rural fringe) in terms of its functions 
and building age. 
4.4  The chosen UK 
city is being 
changed by 
movements of 
people, 
employment 
and services 
a.  The sequence of urbanisation, suburbanisation, counter-
urbanisation and re-urbanisation processes and their distinctive 
characteristics for the chosen UK city. (2) 
b. Causes of national and international migration and the impact 
on different parts of the chosen UK city (age structure, 
ethnicity, housing, services). (3) 
4.5  Globalisation 
and economic 
change create 
challenges for 
the chosen UK 
city that require 
long-term 
solutions 
a. Key population characteristics of the chosen UK city’s that is 
available from the Census and reasons for population growth 
or decline. (4) 
b.  Causes of deindustrialisation (globalisation, de-centralisation, 
technological advances and developments in transport) and 
impacts on the chosen UK city. 
c. How economic change is increasing inequality in the city and 
the differences in quality of life. 
d.  Recent changes in retailing and their impact on the chosen UK 
city: decline in the Central Business District (CBD), growth of 
edge- and out-of-town shopping and increasing popularity of 
internet shopping). 
e.  The range of possible strategies aimed at making urban living 
more sustainable and improving quality of life (recycling, 
employment, education, health, transport, affordable and 
energy-efficient housing) for the chosen UK city. (5) 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
18 
 
Case Study of a major city in a developing country* or an emerging 
country* 
Key idea Detailed content 
4.6  The context of 
the chosen 
developing 
country or 
emerging 
country city 
influences its 
functions and 
structure 
a.  Site, situation and connectivity of the chosen city in a national 
(cultural and environmental), regional and global context. 
b. The chosen city’s structure (Central Business District (CBD), 
inner city, suburbs, urban-rural fringe) in terms of its functions 
and building age. 
4.7  The character of 
the chosen 
developing 
country or 
emerging 
country city is 
influenced by its 
fast rate of 
growth 
a.  Reasons for past and present trends in population growth 
(rates of natural increase, national and international migration, 
economic investment and growth). (1) 
b. Causes of national and international migration and the impact 
on different parts of the chosen city (age structure, ethnicity, 
housing, services). (6) 
c.  How the growth of the chosen city is accompanied by 
increasing inequality (areas of extreme wealth versus poverty) 
and reasons for differences in quality of life. 
4.8  Rapid growth, 
within the 
chosen 
developing 
country or 
emerging 
country city, 
results in a 
number of 
challenges that 
need to be 
managed 
a.  Challenges resulting from the chosen city’s rapid urbanisation: 
variable quality and provision of infrastructure, services and 
housing;  under-employment and informal employment; 
pollution . (7) 
b. Advantages and disadvantages of both bottom-up and top-
down approaches to managing the chosen city’s challenges and 
improving the quality of life for its people.  
c.  The role of government policies in improving the quality of life 
(social, economic and environmental) within the chosen city. 
Integrated skills: 
(1) Use and interpretation of line graphs and calculating of rate of change/annual or decadal 
percentage growth 
(2) Using satellite images to identify different land use zones in urban areas 
(3) Using a combination of population pyramids, choropleth maps and GIS 
(4) Using Census output area data for 2011 
(5) Calculating the ecological footprint of people in the city, and comparing it to other 
locations 
(6) Using GIS/satellite images, historic images and maps to investigate spatial growth 
(7) Using quantitative and qualitative information to judge the scale of variations in quality 
of life. 
*See Appendix 2: Definitions 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
19 
Topic 5: Global development 
 
Key idea Detailed content 
5.1  Definitions of 
development vary 
as do attempts to 
measure it 
a.  Contrasting ways of defining development, using economic 
criteria and broader social and political measures. 
b. Different factors contribute to the human development of a 
country: economic, social, technological, cultural, as well as 
food and water security. 
c. How development is measured in different ways: Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP) per capita, the Human 
Development Index, measures of inequality and indices of 
political corruption. (1) 
5.2  The level of 
development 
varies globally 
a.  Global pattern of development and its unevenness between 
and within countries, including the UK. (2) 
b. Factors (physical, historic and economic) that have led to 
spatial variations in the level of development globally and 
within the UK. 
5.3  Uneven global 
development has 
had a range of 
consequences 
a.  Impact of uneven development on the quality of life in 
different parts of the world: access to housing, health, 
education, employment, technology, and food and water 
security. 
5.4  A range of 
strategies has 
been used to try 
to address uneven 
development 
a.  The range of international strategies (international aid and 
inter-governmental agreements) that attempt to reduce 
uneven development. 
b. Difference between top-down (government or transnational 
corporation (TNC) led) and bottom-up development projects 
(community led). Their advantages and limitations in the 
promotion of development. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
20 
 
Case Study of development in a developing country*or an emerging 
country* 
Key idea Detailed content 
5.5  The level of 
development of 
the chosen 
developing or 
emerging country 
is influenced by its 
location and 
context in the 
world 
a.  Location and position of the chosen country in its region and 
globally. 
b. Broad political, social, cultural and environmental context of 
the chosen country in its region and globally. 
c. Unevenness of development within the chosen country (core 
and periphery) and reasons why development does not take 
place at the same rate across all regions. 
5.6  The interactions of 
economic, social 
and demographic 
processes 
influence the 
development of 
the chosen 
developing or 
emerging country 
a.  Positive and negative impacts of changes that have occurred 
in the sectors (primary, secondary, tertiary and quaternary) 
of the chosen country’s economy. (3) 
b. Characteristics of international trade and aid and the chosen 
country’s involvement in both. (4) 
c. Changing balance between public investment (by 
government) and private investment (by TNCs and smaller 
businesses) for the chosen country. 
d.  Changes in population structure and life expectancy that 
have occurred in the last 30 years in the chosen country. (5) 
e. Changing social factors (increased inequality, growing 
middle class and improved education) in the chosen country. 
5.7  Changing 
geopolitics and 
technology impact 
on the chosen 
developing or 
emerging country 
a.  How geopolitical relationships with other countries affect the 
chosen country’s development: foreign policy, defence, 
military pacts, territorial disputes. 
b. How technology and connectivity support development in 
different parts of the chosen country and for different groups 
of people. (6) 
5.8  There are positive 
and negative 
impacts of rapid 
development for 
the people and 
environment of 
the chosen 
developing or 
emerging country 
a.  Positive and negative social, economic and environmental 
impacts of rapid development for the chosen country and its 
people. 
b. How the chosen country’s government and people are 
managing the impacts of its rapid development to improve 
quality of life and its global status. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
21 
 
Integrated skills:  
(1) Comparing the relative ranking of countries using single versus composite development 
measures 
(2) Interpreting choropleth maps 
(3) Using numerical economic data to profile the chosen country 
(4) Using proportional flow line maps to visualize trade patterns and flows 
(5) Interpreting population pyramids 
(6) Using socio-economic data to calculate difference from the mean, for core and periphery 
regions. 
*See Appendix 2: Definitions 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
22 
Topic 6: Resource management 
 
Overview of the global and UK distribution of food, energy and water 
Key idea Detailed content 
6.1  A natural 
resource is any 
feature or part 
of the 
environment 
that can be 
used to meet 
human needs 
a.  Natural resources can be defined and classified in different 
ways (biotic, abiotic, renewable and non-renewable). 
b. Ways in which people exploit environments in order to obtain 
water, food and energy (extraction of fossil fuels, fishing, 
farming and deforestation). 
c. How environments are changed by this exploitation (reduced 
biodiversity, soil erosion and reduced water and air quality). 
6.2  The patterns of 
the distribution 
and 
consumption of 
natural 
resources varies 
on a global and 
a national scale 
a. Global and UK variety and distribution of natural resources 
(soil and agriculture, forestry, fossil fuels, water supply, rock 
and minerals). (1) 
b. Global patterns of usage and consumption of food, energy and 
water. (2) 
Integrated skills. (1) Use and interpretation of UK and world maps showing the 
distribution of resources; (2) Using different choropleth maps and data visualisations such 
as Gapminder. 
 
Optional sub topic 6A: Energy resource management  
One optional sub topic from either 6A or 6B. 
 
Key idea Detailed content   
6.3  Renewable and 
non-renewable 
energy 
resources can 
be developed 
a.  Energy resources can be classified as renewable and  
non-renewable. 
b. Advantages and disadvantages of the production and 
development of one non-renewable energy resource. 
c. Advantages and disadvantages of the production and 
development of one renewable energy resource. 
6.4  To meet 
demand, 
countries use 
energy 
resources in 
different 
proportions. 
This is called 
the energy mix 
a. The composition of the UK’s energy mix. 
b. How global variations in the energy mix are dependent on a 
number of factors: population, wealth and the availability of 
energy resources. (1) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
23 
 
Key idea Detailed content 
6.5  There is 
increasing 
demand for 
energy that is 
being met by 
renewable and 
non-renewable 
resources 
a. How and why global demand and supply has changed over the 
past 100 years due to human intervention: world population 
growth, increased wealth and technological advances. (2) 
b. How non-renewable energy resources (coal, oil, natural gas 
and uranium) are being developed and how this can have both 
positive and negative impacts on people and the environment. 
c. How renewable energy resources (hydro-electric power (HEP), 
wind power and solar power) are being developed and how this 
can have both positive and negative impacts on people and the 
environment. 
d. How technology (fracking) can resolve energy resource 
shortages. 
6.6  Meeting the 
demands for 
energy 
resources can 
involve 
interventions by 
different 
interest groups 
a. How attitudes to the exploitation and consumption of energy 
resources vary with different stakeholders (individuals, 
organisations and governments). 
6.7  Management 
and sustainable 
use of energy 
resources are 
required at a 
range of spatial 
scales from local 
to international 
a. Why renewable and non-renewable energy resources require 
sustainable management. (3) 
b. Different views held by individuals, organisations and 
governments on the management and sustainable use of 
energy resources. 
c. How one developed country  and one emerging country or 
developing country
  have attempted to manage their energy 
resources in a sustainable way. 
Integrated skills.  
(1) Use and interpretation of world maps showing the distribution of energy resources 
(2) Use and interpretation of line graphs showing the range of future global population 
projections, and population in relation to likely available energy resources 
(3) Calculation of carbon and ecological footprints. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
24 
Optional sub topic 6B: Water resource management 
 
Key idea Detailed content 
6.8  The supply of fresh 
water supply varies 
globally 
a.  Global distribution of fresh water. 
b. How the availability of fresh water varies on a global, 
national and local scale. 
c. Why some parts of the world have a water surplus or a 
water deficit. (1) 
d. How and why the supply and demand for water has 
changed in the past 50 years due to human intervention. 
(2) 
6.9  There are 
differences between 
the water 
consumption 
patterns of 
developing countries 
and developed 
countries 
a. The proportion of water used by agriculture, industry and 
domestic in developed countries and emerging or 
developing countries. 
b. Why there are differences in water usage between 
developed countries and emerging or developing countries. 
6.10 Countries at 
different levels of 
development have 
water supply 
problems 
a. Why the UK has water supply problems (imbalances of the 
supply and demand for rainfall, seasonal imbalances and 
an ageing infrastructure: sewage and water pipes). 
b. Why emerging or developing countries have water  supply 
problems (access to only untreated water, pollution of 
water courses and low annual rainfall). 
6.11 Meeting the 
demands for water 
resources could 
involve technology 
and  interventions 
by different interest 
groups 
a. How attitudes to the exploitation and consumption of water 
resources vary with different stakeholders (individuals, 
organisations and governments). (3) 
b.  How technology (desalination) can resolve water resource 
shortages. 
6.12 Management and 
sustainable use of 
water resources are 
required at a range 
of spatial scales 
from local to 
international 
a. Why water resources require sustainable management. 
b. Different views held by individuals, organisations and 
governments on the management and sustainable use of 
water resources. 
c. How one developed country 
  and one emerging or 
developing country 
  have attempted to manage their 
water resources in a sustainable way. 
Integrated skills:  
(1) Use and interpretation of UK and world maps showing the distribution of freshwater 
resources supply and demand 
(2) Use and interpretation of line graphs showing the range of future global population 
projections, and population in relation to likely available water resources 
(3) Use and interpretation of UK and World relative water stress maps. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
25 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2018.  
● The assessment is 1 hour and 30 minutes. 
● The assessment consists of three sections. 
● The assessment is out of 94 marks. 
● The paper will assess spelling, punctuation, grammar and use of specialist terminology 
which will contribute 4 marks towards the overall marks for this paper. 
● Each question is set in a context.  
● Students must answer all questions from Sections A and B. Students must answer one 
from two optional questions (Energy resource management or Water resource 
management) in Section C.  
● The exam includes multiple-choice questions, short open, open response, calculations and 
8-mark extended writing questions. 
● Extended writing questions will assess students’ ability to develop extended written 
arguments and to draw well-evidenced and informed conclusions about geographical 
questions and issues. 
● Calculators will be used in the examination. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and mark scheme for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Geography A Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
26 
Component 3: Geographical Investigations: Fieldwork 
and UK Challenges  
Overview 
This component brings together practical geographical enquiry into physical and human 
processes and environments and the interactions between the two. The component is divided 
into two sections: 
● Topic 7: Geographical investigations − fieldwork. Two geographical investigations each 
involving fieldwork and research. There is a choice of one from two environments in 7A: 
Investigating physical environments (rivers or coasts) and one from two environments 
7B: Investigating human environments (central/inner urban area or rural settlements). 
● Topic 8: Geographical investigations − UK challenges. Students are required to draw 
across their knowledge and understanding of the UK, from the physical and human 
geography drawn from Components 1 and 2, in order to investigate a contemporary 
challenge for the UK. Students are required to have a geographical overview of the four 
UK challenges in Topic 8 from which the assessment context will be drawn.   
Topic 7: Geographical investigations − fieldwork 
The experience of fieldwork helps students to develop new geographical insights into the two 
contrasting environments required for this qualification and to apply their geographical 
knowledge, understanding and skills to these environments.  
One environment must be chosen from a river landscape or a coastal landscape and one 
from a central/inner urban area or rural settlement. Fieldwork must be outside the classroom 
and school/college grounds. It does not have to take place in the UK necessarily, but the 
examination for this will always treat fieldwork within the context of the UK. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
27 
Contexts for fieldwork - focus, purpose, content and skills 
The table below specifies the minimum types and range of fieldwork (including qualitative, 
quantitative and secondary data) required for the options available. 
7A: Investigating physical environments (rivers landscapes OR coastal 
landscapes) 
 
Task: River landscapes – investigation of change in a river channel. 
Enquiry process 
point 
General focus and details of fieldwork 
1. Formulating 
Enquiry 
questions 
Students must have an opportunity to develop understanding of 
the kinds of questions that can be investigated through fieldwork in 
river environments. Students must have an opportunity to develop 
a question(s) based on their location and the task. 
2. Fieldwork 
methods 
Fieldwork data collection must include at least: 
● one quantitative fieldwork method to measure river discharge 
● one qualitative fieldwork method to record landforms that make 
up the river landscape. 
Human interaction: students must develop their understanding of 
the implications of river processes for people living in the 
catchment area. 
3. Secondary data 
sources  
● A flood risk map e.g. Environment Agency flood risk map. 
● One other secondary source. 
 
Task: Coastal landscapes – investigation of coastal processes through landscape evidence 
Enquiry process 
point 
General focus and details of fieldwork 
1. Formulating 
Enquiry 
questions 
Students must have an opportunity to develop understanding of 
the kinds of question that can be investigated through fieldwork in 
coastal environments. Students must have an opportunity to 
develop a question(s) based on their location and the task. 
2.  Fieldwork 
methods (for 
coastal 
landscapes) 
Fieldwork data collection must include at least: 
● one quantitative fieldwork method to measure beach 
morphology and sediment characteristics.   
● one qualitative fieldwork method to record landforms that make 
up the coastal landscape.  
Human interaction: students must develop their understanding of 
the implications of coastal processes for people living in the coastal 
environment. 
3.  Secondary data 
sources  
● A geology map e.g. BGS Geology of Britain viewer. 
● One other secondary source. 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
28 
7B: Investigating human environments(central/inner urban area OR  
rural settlements) 
Task: Changing city environments – investigating change in central/inner urban area(s) 
Enquiry process 
point 
General focus and details of fieldwork 
1. Formulating 
Enquiry 
questions 
Students must have an opportunity to develop understanding of 
the kinds of question that can be investigated through fieldwork in 
urban environments. Students must have an opportunity to 
develop a question(s) based on their location and the task. 
2. Fieldwork 
methods and 
techniques 
Fieldwork data collection must include at least: 
● one qualitative fieldwork method to record the quality of the 
urban environment  
● one quantitative fieldwork method to measure land use function. 
Physical interaction: students must develop their understanding of 
the interaction between physical landscape features, the 
central/inner urban area and residents and visitors. 
3. Secondary data 
sources  
The use of at least two different secondary sources of data, 
including: 
● Census data e.g. Office for National Statistics (ONS) website  
● one other chosen by the centre. 
 
Task: Changing rural environments – investigating change in rural settlements 
Enquiry process 
point 
General focus and details of fieldwork 
1. Formulating 
Enquiry 
questions 
Students must have an opportunity to develop understanding of 
the kinds of question that can be investigated through fieldwork in 
rural environments. Students must have an opportunity to develop 
a question(s) based on their location and the task. 
2. Fieldwork 
methods and 
techniques 
Fieldwork data collection must include at least: 
● one qualitative fieldwork method to record the views of people 
on the quality of the rural environment 
● one quantitative fieldwork method to measure flows of people 
within a rural settlement. 
Physical interaction: students must develop their understanding of 
the interaction between physical landscape features, rural 
settlements and residents and visitors. 
3. Secondary data 
sources  
The use of at least two different secondary sources of data, 
including: 
● Census data e.g. Office for National Statistics (ONS) 
Neighbourhood Statistics – neighbourhood summary report 
● one other chosen by the centre.  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
29 
Topic 8: Geographical investigations − UK challenges 
In this topic, students are required to draw on their knowledge and understanding of the 
physical and human characteristics of the UK from Components 1 and 2, and use their 
geographical skills, to investigate a contemporary challenge for the UK. The UK challenge will 
be drawn from one or more of four themes below. 
 
The UK 
Challenges 
Detailed content Related topics 
8.1 The UK’s 
resource 
consumption 
and 
environmental 
sustainability 
challenge 
a. Changes in the UK’s population in the next 50 
years and implications on resource 
consumption. 
b. Pressures of growing populations on the UK’s 
ecosystems. 
c. Range of national sustainable transport 
options for the UK. 
2.3a; 3.3; 3.6a, c; 
4.1a; 4.4b; 4.5b, 
c, d, e; 5.2; 6.1; 
6.2a 
8.2 The UK 
settlement, 
population and 
economic 
challenges 
a. The ‘two-speed economy’ and options for 
bridging the gap between south east and the 
rest of the UK. 
b. Costs and benefits of greenfield development 
and the regeneration of brownfield sites. 
c. UK net migration statistics and their reliability 
and values and attitudes of different 
stakeholders towards migration.  
4.2b; 4.4a, b; 
4.5b, c, d, e; 5.2; 
5.4b 
8.3 The UK’s 
landscape 
challenges 
a. Approaches to conservation and development 
of UK National Parks 
b. Approaches to managing river and coastal UK 
flood risk. 
1.5; 1.9; 1.13 
8.4 The UK’s 
climate change 
challenges 
a. Uncertainties about how global climate 
change will impact on the UK’s future climate. 
b. Impacts of climate change on people and 
landscapes in UK 
c. Range of responses to climate change in the 
UK at a local and national scale. 
1.4b; 1.7b; 1.11b; 
2.3b; 2.4a; 3.3; 
3.6b; 4.5b; 6.2 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
30 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2018.  
● The assessment is 1 hour and 30 minutes. 
● The assessment consists of three sections. 
● The assessment is out of 64 marks. 
● The paper will assess spelling, punctuation, grammar and use of specialist terminology 
which will contribute 4 marks towards the overall marks for this paper. 
● Students must answer one from the optional questions in Section A (river landscapes or 
Coastal landscapes and processes) and one from the optional questions in Section B 
(central inner urban area or rural settlements). Students must answer all questions from 
Section C. 
● The exam includes multiple-choice questions, short open, open response, calculations,  
8-mark and 12-mark extended writing questions. 
● Extended writing questions will assess students’ ability to develop extended written 
arguments and to draw well-evidenced and informed conclusions about geographical 
questions and issues. 
● Calculators will be used in the examination. 
In the examination in any given year, students will be assessed on at least two of the six 
enquiry stages below, across both their investigations: 
Stage in 
the enquiry 
process 
Description 
1 Understanding of the kinds of question capable of being investigated through 
fieldwork and an understanding of the geographical enquiry processes 
appropriate to investigate these. 
2 Understanding of the range of techniques and methods used in fieldwork, 
including observation and different kinds of measurement. 
3 Processing and presenting fieldwork data in various ways including maps, GIS, 
graphs and diagrams (hand drawn and computer-generated). 
4 Analysing and explaining data collected in the field using knowledge of relevant 
geographical case studies and theories. 
5 Drawing evidenced conclusions and summaries from fieldwork transcripts and 
data. 
6 Reflecting critically on fieldwork data, methods used, conclusions drawn and 
knowledge gained. 
Sample assessment materials  
A sample paper and mark scheme for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Geography A Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Authentication of fieldwork  
Centres must complete the Fieldwork Statement in Appendix 1. This form must be completed 
as evidence that students have undertaken appropriate fieldwork as part of their programme 
of study for this qualification. Pearson will publish the final deadline date for submission of 
this form on our website each year. Failure to return the Fieldwork Statement on time will 
constitute malpractice on the part of the Centre, see page 36. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
31 
Geographical skills 
Students are required to develop a range of geographical skills throughout their course of 
study. These skills may be assessed across any of the examined components. The full list of 
geographical skills is given below. Some geographical skills are specific to particular subject 
content; these are indicated in the ‘integrated skills’ sections within the topics throughout the 
specification. 
Atlas and map skills: 
● recognise and describe distributions and patterns of both human and physical features  at 
a range of scales using a variety of maps and atlases 
● draw, label, annotate, understand and interpret sketch maps 
● recognise and describe patterns of vegetation, land use and communications 
infrastructure, as well as other patterns of human and physical landscapes 
● describe and identify the site, situation and shape of settlements. 
Graphical skills: 
● label, annotate and interpret different diagrams, maps, graphs, sketches and photographs 
● use and interpret aerial, oblique, ground and satellite photographs from a range of 
different landscapes 
● use maps in association with photographs and sketches and understand links to directions. 
Data and information research skills: 
● use online census sources to obtain population and local geo-demographic information. 
Investigative skills: 
● identify questions or issues for investigation, develop a hypothesis and/or key questions 
● consider appropriate sampling procedures (systematic vs random vs stratified) and sample 
size 
● consider health and safety and undertake risk assessment 
● select data collection methods and equipment to ensure accuracy and reliability, develop 
recording sheets for measurements and observation 
● use of ICT to manage, collate, process and present information, use of hand-drawn 
graphical skills to present information in a suitable way 
● write descriptively, analytically and critically about findings 
● develop extended written arguments, drawing well evidenced and informed conclusions 
about geographical questions and issues. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
32 
Mathematics and Statistics Skills 
These skills are taken from the document Geography GCSE subject content published by the 
Department for Education (DfE) April 2014. These skills may be assessed across any of the 
examined components. Some mathematics and statistics skills are specific to particular 
subject content; these are indicated in the ‘integrated skills’ sections within the topics 
throughout the specification. 
Cartographic skills: 
● use and understand gradient, contour and spot height on OS maps and other isoline maps 
(e.g. weather charts, ocean bathymetric charts) 
● interpret cross sections and transects  
● use and understand coordinates, scale and distance 
● describe and interpret geo-spatial data presented in a GIS framework framework  
(e.g. analysis of flood hazard using the interactive maps on the Environment Agency 
website). 
Graphical skills: 
● select and construct appropriate graphs and charts to present data, using appropriate 
scales and including bar charts, pie charts, pictograms, line charts, histograms with equal 
class intervals 
● interpret and extract information from different types of graphs and charts including any 
of the above and others relevant to the topic (e.g. triangular graphs, radial graphs, wind 
rose diagrams, proportional symbols) 
● interpret population pyramids, choropleth maps and flow-line maps. 
Numerical skills: 
● demonstrate an understanding of number, area and scale and the quantitative 
relationships between units  
● design fieldwork data collection sheets and collect data with an understanding of accuracy, 
sample size and procedures, control groups and reliability  
● understand and correctly use proportion and ratio, magnitude and frequency (e.g. 1:200 
flood events) and logarithmic scales  
● draw informed conclusions from numerical data. 
Statistical skills: 
● use appropriate measures of central tendency, spread and cumulative frequency (median, 
mean, range, quartiles and inter-quartile range, mode and modal class)  
● calculate percentage increase or decrease and understand the use of percentiles 
● describe relationships in bivariate data: sketch trend lines through scatter plots; draw 
estimated lines of best fit; make predictions; interpolate and extrapolate trends 
● be able to identify weaknesses in selective statistical presentation of data. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
33 
Assessment Objectives 
 
Students must: % in GCSE 
AO1 Demonstrate knowledge of locations, places, processes, 
environments and different scales. 
15 
AO2 Demonstrate geographical understanding of: 
● concepts and how they are used in relation to places, 
environments and processes; 
● the inter-relationships between places, environments 
and processes. 
25 
AO3 Apply knowledge and understanding to interpret, analyse 
and evaluate geographical information and issues and to 
make judgements. 
35 
(10% applied to 
fieldwork context(s)) 
AO4 Select, adapt and use a variety of skills and techniques to 
investigate questions and issues and communicate 
findings. 
25 
(5% used to respond to 
fieldwork data and 
contexts) 
Total 100% 
 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
Paper 
Assessment Objectives Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives AO1 % AO2 % AO3 % AO4 % 
Paper 1: The Physical 
Environment 
6.7 11.3 11.3 8.3 37.5% 
Paper 2: The Human 
Environment 
6.7 11.3 11.3 8.3 37.5% 
Paper 3: Geographical 
Investigations: Fieldwork and 
UK Challenges 
1.6 2.4 12.4 8.4 25% 
Total for GCSE 15% 25% 35% 25% 100% 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
34 
3 Administration and general information 
Entries 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for this qualification can be found in 
our UK Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations officers and is 
available on our website: qualifications.pearson.com 
Forbidden combinations and discount code 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more than one GCSE, or other Level 2 
qualifications with the same discount code, will have only the grade for their 'first entry' 
counted for the purpose of the School and College Performance Tables (please see 
Appendix 6: Codes). For further information about what constitutes 'first entry' and full 
details of how this policy is applied, please refer to the DfE website: www.education.gov.uk 
Students should be advised that, if they take two GCSEs with the same discount code, 
schools and colleges to which they wish to progress are very likely to take the view that they 
have achieved only one of the two GCSEs. The same view may be taken if students take two 
GCSE or other Level 2 qualifications that have different discount codes but which have 
significant overlap of content. Students or their advisers who have any doubts about their 
subject combinations should check with the institution to which they wish to progress before 
embarking on their programmes. 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, 
special consideration and malpractice 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality policy requires all students to 
have equal opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our qualifications 
to be awarded in a way that is fair to every student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the Equality Act 2010) are not, 
when they are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in comparison to 
students who do not share that characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification and that 
this achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their peers. 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with special 
educational needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to:  
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the assessment.  
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an individual 
student with a disability, without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding bodies comply with the duty under the 
Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students will 
then know what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for assessment.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
35 
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable adjustments 
where a person with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in undertaking an 
assessment. The awarding organisation is required to take reasonable steps to overcome 
that disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be unique to that individual and 
therefore might not be in the list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of factors, 
which will include: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding 
organisation, timeframes or affects the security or integrity of the assessment. This is 
because the adjustment is not ‘reasonable’. 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student's mark or grade to 
reflect temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the examination/ 
assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a material effect on a 
candidate’s ability to take an assessment or demonstrate their level of attainment in  
an assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to apply for access arrangements 
and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special 
consideration, please refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk. 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that compromises or seeks to 
compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in examinations must be reported to Pearson using a JCQ M1 Form 
(available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form can be emailed to 
candidatemalpractice@pearson.com. Please provide as much information and supporting 
documentation as possible. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies 
with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice constitutes staff or centre malpractice. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
36 
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and maladministration of 
our qualifications. As with candidate malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is any act that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the 
integrity of the qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported 
immediately, before any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson on  
a JCQ M2(a) Form (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form, 
supporting documentation and as much information as possible can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com. Note that the final decision regarding  
appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More-detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the document 
JCQ General and Vocational Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice. 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to comply with the requirements of 
Ofqual's General Conditions of Recognition. 
This GCSE qualification will be graded and certificated on a nine-grade scale from 9 to 1 
using the total subject mark where 9 is the highest grade. Individual papers are not graded.  
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum judged by Pearson to be of 
sufficient standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U result. 
The first certification opportunity for this qualification will be 2018. 
Student recruitment and progression 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
This qualification has been built to progress from the geographical knowledge, understanding 
and skills in the geography programmes of study for the National Curriculum in England. 
Although the qualification does not directly assess geographical knowledge, understanding 
and skills of the content geography programmes of study for the National Curriculum in 
England it assumes that this geographical knowledge, understanding and skills have been 
developed lower down the key stages.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
37 
Progression 
Students can progress from this qualification to a number of different qualifications at 
Level 3, including GCE in Geography, Geology, Environmental Sciences, Travel and Tourism, 
and Leisure and Recreation. 
With this rounded qualification that helps students to understand the world around them 
they can, usually with further training, progress to employment.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
38 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Fieldwork Statement 39 
Appendix 2: Definitions 40 
Appendix 3: Exam command word definitions 41 
Appendix 4: The context for the development of this qualification 42 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 44 
Appendix 6: Codes 45 
 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
39 
 
Appendix 1: Fieldwork Statement 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography 1GA0/1GB0 
Centre name:  
 
 
Centre number:  
All candidates must carry out fieldwork, outside of the classroom and school grounds, on at 
least two occasions.   
Details of fieldwork 
Fieldwork occasion 1 
Specification topic links: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fieldwork date:____________________ 
 
Location:___________________________ 
 
Number of students:___________________ 
Key issues/questions investigated: 
 
 
 
 
Fieldwork occasion 2 
Specification topic links: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fieldwork date:____________________ 
 
Location:___________________________ 
 
Number of students:___________________ 
Key issues/questions investigated: 
 
Head teacher declaration 
I confirm that the fieldwork occasions recorded above have been carried out in accordance 
with Pearson Edexcel GCSE Geography fieldwork requirements and that all candidates 
entered through our centre have had the opportunity to attend. 
 
Head teacher name:  
Head teacher signature:  Date:  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
40 
Appendix 2: Definitions 
This lists terms used in this specification and their definition. 
 
Term Definition 
Developing country Country with low human development* (LHD), a poor 
country  
Emerging country Country with high or medium human development* (HMHD) 
Developed country Country with very high human development* (VHHD) 
Major city City with population of at least 200,000 inhabitants 
 
*Human Development as measured by the Human Development Index (HDI). For further 
information on which countries are categorised as Low, Medium, High and Very High Human 
Development by HDI please see this website: http://hdr.undp.org, alternatively please email 
TeachingGeography@pearson.com for further information on the definitions used within this 
document.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
41 
Appendix 3: Exam command word 
definitions 
This table lists the command words that could be used in the examinations for this 
qualification and their definitions. 
 
Command word Definition 
Identify/State/Name  Recall or select one or more pieces of information. 
Define State the meaning of a term. 
Calculate Produce a numerical answer, showing relevant working. 
Draw/plot Create a graphical representation of geographical information. 
Label  Add a label/labels to a given resource, graphic or image. 
Describe  Give an account of the main characteristics of something or the steps 
in a process. Statements in the response should be developed but do 
not need to include a justification or reason. 
Compare Find the similarities and differences of two elements given in a 
question. Each response must relate to both elements, and must 
include a statement of their similarity/difference. 
Explain  Provide a reasoned explanation of how or why something occurs.  An 
explanation requires a justification/exemplification of a point. Some 
questions will require the use of annotated diagrams to support 
explanation. 
Suggest  Apply understanding to provide a reasoned explanation of how or 
why something may occur. A suggested explanation requires a 
justification/exemplification of a point. 
Examine Break something down into individual components/processes and say 
how each one individually contributes to the question’s theme/topic 
and how the components/processes work together and interrelate. 
Assess  Use evidence to determine the relative significance of something. 
Give consideration to all factors and identify which are the most 
important. 
Discuss  Explore the strengths and weaknesses of different sides of an 
issue/question. Investigate the issue by reasoning or argument. 
Evaluate  Measure the value or success of something and ultimately provide a 
substantiated judgement/conclusion. Review information and then 
bring it together to form a conclusion, drawing on evidence such as 
strengths, weaknesses, alternatives and relevant data. 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
42 
Appendix 4: The context for the 
development of this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] and our 
ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
● reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with those 
taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
● consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including learned bodies, 
subject associations, higher-education academics, teachers and employers to ensure this 
qualification is suitable for a UK context . 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in their 
documents GCSE (9 to 1) Qualification Level Conditions and Requirements and GCSE Subject 
Level Conditions and Requirements for Geography, published in April 2014. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification Principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
● demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning and 
measuring higher-order skills 
● rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and valid 
assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in end users of the knowledge, skills 
and competencies of certified students 
● inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students develop at 
different rates and have different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
● empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills, see Appendix 5. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
43 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
May 2014 
  The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important change to the 
education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications will assist them in 
helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an ‘Expert 
Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or because of 
our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the world as diverse as 
Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification development 
process that has included: 
● Extensive international comparability of subject content against the highest-performing 
jurisdictions in the world 
● Benchmarking assessments against UK and overseas providers to ensure that they are at 
the right level of demand 
● Establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-specific 
expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
● Subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future oriented. The 
design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, meaning learner outcomes 
have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a learner’s 
success in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident that we have 
supported the development of qualifications that are outstanding for their coherence, 
thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as representing world-class best 
practice.     
  
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Lee Sing Kong  
Director, National Institute of Education, 
Singapore 
  
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
  
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
 
All titles correct as at May 2014  
“ 
” 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
44 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently flagged the 
need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable them to respond with 
confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines skills, or 
competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that can be learned and 
that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform an activity or task and can be 
built upon and extended through learning.’
[1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected and 
evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this process, we 
identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the most evidence-based and 
robust skills framework. We adapted the framework slightly to include the Program for 
International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT Literacy and Collaborative Problem Solving 
(CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves[2]: 
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve general 
cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and communicate[3]. 
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, oral communication, written communication, assertive 
communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, service 
orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared understanding, 
taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team organisation. 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work stress, 
adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, and physical 
adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual teams, 
work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and able to acquire 
new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher education, 
as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the teaching and learning of 
this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning materials, developed with 
stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
 
[1] OECD (2012), Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (2012): 
http://skills.oecd.org/documents/OECDSkillsStrategyFINALENG.pdf 
[2] Koenig, J. A. (2011) Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop, National Research Council 
[3] PISA (2011) The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy, PISA 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Geography A 
Specification – Issue 5 – September 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
45 
Appendix 6: Codes 
 
Type of code Use of code Code 
Discount codes Every qualification is assigned to a 
discount code indicating the subject area 
to which it belongs. This code may 
change. 
Discount codes are published by DfE. 
Please see the GOV.UK 
website* 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an 
Ofqual Regulated Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) code. 
The RQF code is known as a Qualification 
Number (QN). This is the code that 
features in the DfE Section 96 and on the 
LARA as being eligible for 16–18 and 19+ 
funding, and is to be used for all 
qualification funding purposes. The QN will 
appear on students’ final certification 
documentation. 
The QN for this 
qualification is: 
601/8134/5 
 Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to 
enter students for a qualification. Centres 
will need to use the entry codes only when 
claiming students’ qualifications. 
GCSE – 1GA0 
Paper codes These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be 
entered for individual components. 
Paper 1: 1GA0/01 
Paper 2: 1GA0/02 
Paper 3: 1GA0/03 
*www.gov.uk/government/publications/key-stage-4-qualifications-discount-codes-and-point-
scores 
 
 
 
DB140824 9781446932063_GCSE2016_L12_GEOGRAPHY_A_ISSUE4.DOC.1–52/0 
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office: 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121