Specification 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9 - 1) in Art and Design
Art, Craft and Design (1AD0)  Fine Art (1FA0) 
Graphic Communication (1GC0)  Textile Design (1TE0) 
Three-dimensional Design (1TD0)  Photography (1PY0)  
First teaching from September 2016
First certification from 2018 Issue 2
GCSE (9-1)
Art and Design
 
About Pearson 
Pearson is the world's leading learning company operating in countries around the world. We provide 
content, assessment and digital services to learners, educational institutions, employers, governments 
and other partners globally. We are committed to helping equip learners with the skills they need to 
enhance their employability prospects and to succeed in the changing world of work. We believe that 
wherever learning flourishes, so do people.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This specification is Issue 2. Key changes are summarised on the next page. We will inform centres of any 
changes to this issue. The latest issue can be found on our website. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References to third party materials made in this specification are made in good faith. Pearson does not 
endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may be subject to change, or 
any opinions expressed therein. (Materials may include textbooks, journals, magazines and other 
publications and websites.) 
 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
 
ISBN 978 1 446 92587 4 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2024 
 
 
Summary of Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1)  
in Art and Design Issue 2 changes 
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this current issue  
 
Page 
number  
Removal of Susan Young’s name as subject advisor has been changed to Our Art and 
Design subject advisor service will ensure you receive help and guidance when you 
need it. 
3 
Page 42 of the specification has been removed and replaced with the following text 
and a link out to the candidate authentication form. 
 
Appendix 2: Art and Design Authentication Sheet 
Both the student and the teacher must sign the Authentication Sheet, declaring that 
the work submitted for assessment has been carried out without assistance other 
than that which is acceptable according to the rules of the specification. 
Each component submitted for assessment must be accompanied by a completed 
Teacher Mark Sheet and a signed copy of the Authentication Sheet. 
Please download the authentication form from our website. 
 
42 
 
Earlier issue(s) show(s) previous changes. 
If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, contact us via our website at: 
qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/contact-us.html. 
 

 
Contents 
1 Introduction 2 
Why choose Edexcel GCSE Art and Design? 2 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this qualification 3 
Qualification at a glance 4 
2 Subject content and assessment information 6 
Art, Craft and Design 11 
Fine Art 12 
Graphic Communication 14 
Textile Design 16 
Three-dimensional Design 18 
Photography 20 
Component 1: Personal Portfolio 22 
Component 2: Externally Set Assignment 24 
Assignment setting, taking and marking 27 
Assignment setting 27 
Assignment taking 27 
Marking, standardisation and moderation 28 
Assessment Objectives 31 
Applying the assessment grid 32 
Assessment grid 33 
3 Administration and general information 35 
Entries 35 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special consideration and malpractice 35 
Student recruitment and progression 38 
Appendix 1: Art and Design Teacher Mark Sheet 40 
Appendix 2: Art and Design Authentication Sheet 42 
Appendix 3: Codes 43 
Appendix 4: The context for the development of this qualification 44 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 46 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
2 
1 Introduction 
Art and Design equips students with the skills to enjoy, produce and engage with the visual 
arts throughout their lives, and it has immense value as a GCSE subject. 
GCSE Art and Design provides the opportunity for students to: 
● explore both contemporary and historical sources of art, craft and design first hand 
through, for example: 
o visiting museums, galleries, art shows and fairs 
o experiencing audio-visual productions, including still and moving imagery 
o their surroundings and environments. 
● take an individual approach to their art, craft and design making 
● develop the skill of selecting their best and most appropriate work for presentation. 
Why choose Edexcel GCSE Art and Design? 
We’ve listened to feedback from all parts of the art education community and used this 
opportunity of curriculum change to design a qualification that supports a wide range of 
student interests, learning styles and aspirations for progression. 
Flexibility – the qualification allows you to design a course of study that appeals to your 
students and that draws on your department’s expertise and resources. 
More choice – you will find more areas of study within each endorsed title than in the 
legacy specification, giving you more choice when designing your course. 
Straightforward structure – students study the same title for both components. 
Continuous progression – students develop knowledge, understanding and skills when 
completing their Personal Portfolio, which they then go on to use and refine when completing 
the Externally Set Assignment. 
Supports progression to A level – the GCSE and the A Level have a common structure 
and titles, and follow a similar approach to the Externally Set Assignment and the 
assessment grid to ensure smooth progression to A Level at the end of the GCSE course. 
Develops transferable skills – students will learn to: 
● apply a creative approach to problem solving 
● consider and develop original ideas from initiation to realisation 
● analyse critically their own work and the work of others 
● express individual thoughts and choices confidently 
● take risks, experiment and learn from mistakes. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
3 
Supporting you in planning and implementing 
this qualification 
Planning 
● Our Getting Started guide gives you an overview of the new GCSE Art and Design 
qualification to help you familiarise yourself with the qualification, and to understand what 
the changes mean for you and your students. 
● We will give you an editable course planner and a scheme of work that you can adapt 
to suit your department. 
● Our mapping documents highlight the key differences and similarities between this 
qualification and the 2009 qualifications. 
Teaching and learning 
There will be lots of free teaching and learning support to help you deliver this qualification, 
including: 
● a Personal Portfolio guide 
● an Externally Set Assignment guide 
● a student guide. 
Understanding the standard 
We will provide a comprehensive bank of exemplar student work and examiner 
commentaries to help you understand the standard. Exemplar student work will cover a 
range of achievements. 
We will also provide teacher marking training to help you understand how to apply the 
newly-designed assessment grid to your students’ work. 
Get help and support 
Our Art and Design subject advisor service will ensure you receive help and guidance when 
you need it. You can sign up to receive e-updates to keep up to date with qualification news, 
as well as information about support and resources for teaching and learning. 
Learn more at qualifications.pearson.com. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
4 
Qualification at a glance 
Content and assessment overview 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Art and Design consists of two internally 
assessed and externally moderated components. 
● Component 1: Personal Portfolio (internally set) 
● Component 2: Externally Set Assignment. 
This qualification can be achieved by following one of the six titles detailed on pages 11–21. 
Students must complete all assessment in May/June in any single year. 
 
Component 1: Personal Portfolio 
*Component codes: 1AD0/01, 1FA0/01, 1GC0/01, 1TE0/01, 1TD0/01, 1PY0/01  
60% of the qualification 
72 marks (18 marks for each of the four Assessment Objectives) 
Content overview 
● Students must work within one of the following titles: Art, Craft and Design; Fine Art; 
Graphic Communication; Textile Design; Three-dimensional Design; Photography. 
● Students undertaking Art, Craft and Design must create work associated with areas of 
study chosen from at least two of the endorsed titles. Students undertaking one of the 
endorsed titles must create work associated with at least one area of study for that title. 
● Students create a personal portfolio of work that demonstrates the knowledge, 
understanding and skills on page 7. 
● Centres are free to devise any theme(s), project(s) or task(s) appropriate to their 
students and resources. They may each have a separate focus or be interconnected. 
● This component allows students opportunities to: 
o develop and explore ideas  
o research primary and contextual sources  
o experiment with media, materials, techniques and processes  
o present personal response(s) to theme(s) set by the centre. 
● The proportion of the 120 guided learning hours spent on this component should reflect its 
60% weighting. 
Assessment overview 
● Students’ work must comprise supporting studies and personal response(s). 
● Students’ work must show evidence of all four Assessment Objectives. 
● All work is internally set and is internally marked using the assessment grid on pages 32 
and 33 and internally standardised. 
● A sample of work is externally moderated by a visiting moderator. 
● All marks must be submitted before moderation.  
● First assessment is in May/June 2018 
 
*See Appendix 3: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to this 
qualification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
5 
 
Component 2: Externally Set Assignment 
*Component codes: 1AD0/02, 1FA0/02, 1GC0/02, 1TE0/02, 1TD0/02, 1PY0/02  
40% of the qualification 
72 marks (18 marks for each of the four Assessment Objectives) 
Content overview 
● The Externally Set Assignment (ESA) represents the culmination of the GCSE course as it 
draws together all the knowledge, understanding and skills developed in Component 1. 
● Students must continue to work in the same title as they did for the Personal Portfolio. 
● Art, Craft and Design students are required to create work associated with at least one 
area of study for this component. 
● Students must present personal response(s) to an externally set broad-based thematic 
starting point, set by Pearson in the ESA paper. 
● This component allows students opportunities to: 
o develop and explore ideas  
o research primary and contextual sources 
o experiment with media, materials, techniques and processes 
o present personal response(s) to the externally-set theme. 
Assessment overview 
● The ESA paper will be released on 2 January each year and may be given to students as 
soon as it is released. 
● Centres are free to devise their own preparatory period of study prior to the start of the 
10-hour sustained focus period. 
● The 10-hour sustained focus period under examination conditions may take place over 
multiple sessions (a maximum of four within three consecutive weeks). 
● Students’ work must comprise preparatory studies and personal response(s). 
● Preparatory studies will comprise a portfolio of development work based on the ESA 
broad-based thematic starting point. 
● During the 10-hour period of sustained focus under examination conditions, students will 
work unaided to produce personal response(s), with reference to their preparatory 
studies, in response to the ESA broad-based thematic starting point. 
● Students’ work must show evidence of all four Assessment Objectives. 
● All work is internally marked using the assessment grid on pages 32 and 33 and internally 
standardised. 
● A sample of work is externally moderated by a visiting moderator. 
● All marks must be submitted before moderation. 
● First assessment is in May/June 2018. 
 
*See Appendix 3: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to this 
qualification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
6 
2 Subject content and assessment 
information 
GCSE Art and Design titles 
This qualification can be followed through the broad-based title of Art, Craft and Design or 
through one of five endorsed titles: Fine Art; Graphic Communication; Textile Design;  
Three-dimensional Design; Photography. When students are entered for an endorsed title, 
they will follow the areas of study in that endorsed title for both components. Students 
undertaking the Art, Craft and Design title are required to create work associated with areas 
of study chosen from at least two of the five endorsed titles for Component 1.  For 
Component 2, Art, Craft and Design students are required to create work associated with at 
least one area of study. This ensures that in the qualification as a whole, there is a breadth 
and flexibility in content and approach commensurate in demand with other titles. 
● Art and Design (Art, Craft and Design) 
● Art and Design (Fine Art) 
● Art and Design (Graphic Communication) 
● Art and Design (Textile Design) 
● Art and Design (Three-dimensional Design) 
● Art and Design (Photography) 
Qualification aims and objectives 
This GCSE Art and Design qualification requires students to: 
● actively engage in the creative process of art, craft and design in order to develop as 
effective and independent learners, and as critical and reflective thinkers with enquiring 
minds 
● develop creative, imaginative and intuitive capabilities when exploring and making 
images, artefacts and products 
● become confident in taking risks and learn from experience when exploring and 
experimenting with ideas, processes, media, materials and techniques 
● develop critical understanding through investigative, analytical, experimental, practical, 
technical and expressive skills 
● develop and refine ideas and proposals, personal outcomes or solutions with increasing 
independence 
● acquire and develop technical skills through working with a broad range of media, 
materials, techniques, processes and technologies with purpose and intent 
● develop knowledge and understanding of art, craft and design in historical and 
contemporary contexts, societies and cultures 
● develop an awareness of the different roles and individual work practices evident in the 
production of art, craft and design in the creative and cultural industries 
● develop an awareness of the purposes, intentions and functions of art, craft and design in 
a variety of contexts and as appropriate to students’ own work 
● demonstrate safe working practices in art, craft and design. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
7 
Knowledge and understanding 
This qualification requires students to demonstrate the knowledge and understanding listed 
below through practical application of skills to realise personal intentions relevant to their 
chosen title(s) and related area(s) of study. 
Students will be required to know and understand: 
● how sources inspire the development of ideas, drawing on: 
o the work and approaches of artists, craftspeople or designers from contemporary 
and/or historical contexts, periods, societies and cultures 
o contemporary and/or historical environments, situations or issues 
o other relevant sources researched by the student in the chosen qualification title and 
area(s) of study 
● the ways in which meanings, ideas and intentions can be communicated through visual 
and tactile language, using formal elements, including: 
o colour 
o line 
o form 
o tone 
o texture 
● the characteristics, properties and effects of using different media, materials, techniques 
and processes, and the ways in which they can be used in relation to students’ own 
creative intentions and chosen area(s) of study 
● the different purposes, intentions and functions of art, craft and design in a variety of 
contexts and as appropriate to students’ own work. 
Skills 
Students will be required to demonstrate the ability to: 
● develop their ideas through investigations informed by selecting and critically analysing 
sources 
● apply an understanding of relevant practices in the creative and cultural industries to their 
work 
● refine their ideas as work progresses through experimenting with media, materials, 
techniques and processes 
● record their ideas, observations, insights and independent judgements, visually and 
through written annotation, using appropriate specialist vocabulary, as work progresses 
● use visual language critically as appropriate to their own creative intentions and chosen 
area(s) of study through effective and safe use of: 
o media 
o materials 
o techniques 
o processes 
o technologies 
● use drawing skills for different needs and purposes, appropriate to the context 
● realise personal intentions through the sustained application of the creative process. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
8 
Drawing and other materials processes 
All students must use drawing to support the development process within each chosen area 
of study. However, students are not required to demonstrate technical mastery of drawing 
skills unless this is relevant to their area of study. 
Drawing is at the heart of art, craft and design – from initial sketches and detailed 
observations to wild mark-making and expressive lines – and forms a core element of the 
practice of artists, craftspeople and designers. 
Students need to: 
● be aware that drawing takes many forms, from two-dimensional mark-making to lines 
made using materials to define three-dimensional space 
● develop a range of drawing techniques and processes in order to communicate developing 
ideas clearly. 
Drawing in the context of this qualification is taken to mean the following: 
● recording the observed world, using mark-making in appropriate media 
● exploring ideas visually, through the act of mark-making 
● investigating, through the exploration of drawing media, new ways of expressing ideas, 
feelings or observations 
● experimenting with various tools, materials and techniques. 
Drawing will be assessed through all the Assessment Objectives. 
Further details are given in the title-specific sections on pages 11–21. 
Annotation 
Students will be expected to demonstrate the ability to record their ideas, observations, 
insights and independent judgements visually and through informative written annotation, 
using suitable specialist vocabulary. Written annotation should be purposeful, not descriptive. 
The purpose of integrated annotation is to allow students to: 
● analyse critically, evaluate and reflect on their own work and that of others 
● record notes on developments, experiments, ideas or visits. 
Annotation will be assessed through Assessment Objective 3. 
Digital media 
Students can work entirely in digital media or entirely in non-digital media, or in a mixture of 
both, provided the aims and Assessment Objectives are met.  
While digital media offers new possibilities for making art and design, many of the underlying 
principles are common to non-digital media. Formal elements apply in the same way, 
although there are fundamental differences between digitally and non-digitally produced 
images, such as the potential for different forms of interaction. Digital media presents a 
challenge to rethink the ways in which knowledge, understanding and skills are applied in art 
and design. Digital media can offer opportunities to extend the purposes of non-digital 
media. Digital media can function as a tool, a process, a method of dissemination and a 
means of interaction with any audience. 
Students can use digital media within any area of study. The title-specific sections on  
pages 11–21 give further guidance on how digital and non-digital media may be applied. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
9 
Critical and contextual knowledge and understanding 
A student’s ability to understand their own work critically and justify their ideas can be 
developed through practical visual analysis, annotation and using the spoken word in 
critiques, discussions or interviews. 
Students should contextualise their research and ideas, drawing inspiration from artists and 
designers. Students should also evaluate the art, craft and design they study, and develop 
an appreciation of the impact it has on their own work and that of others.  
This could be in relation to evolving historical and contemporary contexts, periods, societies, 
environments, cultures, artistic language, situations and issues. 
Comparability 
The emphasis in Art, Craft and Design is on an increased breadth of approach commensurate 
in demand with the other titles. 
Areas of study 
The areas of study define the specialist practices within each title. It is expected that 
students will use techniques and practices from across these areas of study. 
Synoptic assessment 
The Externally Set Assignment (ESA) represents the culmination of the GCSE course as it 
draws together all the knowledge, understanding and skills developed in Component 1. 
The Assessment Objectives are assessed holistically across all student evidence in each 
component. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
10 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
11 
GCSE titles and areas of study 
Art, Craft and Design 
Overview 
The GCSE in Art, Craft and Design is a broad and flexible course that requires students to 
develop an appreciation of the creative process through a practical response, using a variety 
of two-dimensional and three-dimensional media, materials, techniques and processes. 
Students should explore critically how artists, craftspeople and designers from diverse 
cultures, times and societies have arrived at solutions and communicated meaning using the 
formal elements. Students should use this knowledge when developing new ideas, recording 
observations and creating outcomes which fully realise their personal intentions. 
When undertaking work in Art, Craft and Design, students are expected to develop 
the knowledge, understanding and skills outlined on page 7. All knowledge, 
understanding and skills will be assessed in both components. 
Areas of study 
Work must demonstrate integrated knowledge, understanding and skills. 
Students undertaking the Art, Craft and Design title are required to create work associated 
with areas of study chosen from at least two of the five endorsed titles for Component 1.  
For Component 2, Art, Craft and Design students are required to create work associated with 
at least one area of study. This ensures that in the qualification as a whole, there is a 
breadth and flexibility in content and approach commensurate in demand with other titles. 
Art, Craft and Design students are not permitted to select both sculpture in Fine Art and 
sculpture in Three-dimensional design as their chosen areas of study, nor are they permitted 
to select both installation in Fine Art and installation in Photography as their chosen areas of 
study. Art, Craft and Design is a broad course of study, requiring students to develop an 
appreciation of the creative process through a practical response, using a variety of two-
dimensional and three-dimensional media, materials, techniques and processes. For this 
reason, Art, Craft and Design students are not permitted to select both sculpture in Fine Art 
and sculpture in Three-dimensional Design, nor are they permitted to select both installation 
in Fine Art and installation in Photography as their chosen areas of study. Selecting both 
sculpture or both installation as areas of study would not result in a broad enough course of 
study and would fail to give Art, Craft and Design students a broad enough experience. 
Pages 12–21 give information about the areas of study Art, Craft and Design students must 
choose from.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
12 
Fine Art 
Overview 
Fine Art may be defined as work developed primarily to communicate aesthetic, intellectual 
or purely conceptual ideas and meaning, rather than to serve a practical or commercial 
function. For example, work could be the outcome of personal experiences, thoughts and 
feelings, or simply to observe and record people, places and things in new and unique ways. 
Fine-art work will demonstrate an understanding and application of formal elements and 
creative skills, including mark-making. Students will use visual communication sensitively 
and thoughtfully to document their artistic journey and fully support their intentions.  
Students will also understand that Fine Art practitioners may work to client commissions or 
undertake self-directed projects. They will need good communication skills in order to liaise 
with clients, and promote and exhibit their own work. 
Knowledge, understanding and skills in Fine Art 
Students are required to develop the knowledge, understanding and skills outlined 
on page 7 when undertaking work in Fine Art. All knowledge, understanding and 
skills will be assessed in both components. 
There are many skills, techniques, materials, processes and concepts that are essential to all 
areas of study in Fine Art. In addition to any specialist requirements listed under the chosen 
area(s) of study, students should develop a practical knowledge and understanding of: 
● the use of formal elements and visual communication through a variety of approaches 
● the use of observational skills to record from sources and communicate ideas 
● characteristics of media and materials such as wet and dry, malleable, resistant and digital 
● properties of colour and light such as hue, tint, saturation and tone 
● the effects and creative potential of combining and manipulating different two-dimensional 
and three-dimensional materials and media 
● the use of digital and/or non-digital applications. 
Areas of study 
Work must demonstrate integrated knowledge, understanding and skills. Work is not limited 
to one area of study and students could develop work in at least one of the following areas 
of study. 
Drawing 
● The use of expressive and descriptive mark-making to record and communicate ideas. 
● The use of a range of drawing materials, media and techniques such as graphite, pastel, 
charcoal, ink, chalk, digital drawing applications and a range of drawing surfaces. 
Installation* 
● The use of controlled environments to create atmosphere, influence perception and 
communicate ideas. 
● The use of a range of installation materials, media and techniques such as film, projection, 
live performance, objects, text, audio elements, controlled lighting and designed interior 
and exterior spaces, static and interactive elements. 
*Art, Craft and Design students are not permitted to select both installation in Fine Art and installation in Photography 
as their chosen areas of study.
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
13 
Lens-/light-based media 
● The use of digital, film and/or video elements such as lighting, time, sound, editing, space 
and composition to communicate ideas. 
● The use of a range of lens- and light-based media, materials and techniques such as 
montage, mixed media, installation, animation, studio and location photography, pre-and 
post-production manipulation. 
Mixed media 
● The combining and manipulating of two-dimensional and three-dimensional media to 
communicate ideas. 
● The combination of a range of mixed media materials and techniques such as wet and dry 
media, collage, objects, textiles, two- and three-dimensional elements, digital and non-
digital applications. 
Land art 
● The creation of site-specific work that uses or accentuates the natural landscape or man-
made environment to create atmosphere and communicate ideas. 
● The use of a range of land art materials, tools and techniques such as natural resources, 
found objects, constructing formations, and manipulation of environmental elements. 
Printing 
● The creation of surfaces from which an image can be transferred to communicate ideas. 
● The use of a variety of materials, media and techniques such as linoleum, screen, intaglio, 
relief, lithography, drypoint, etching and monoprint, using a range of inks and printing 
surfaces. 
Painting 
● The use of expressive and descriptive mark-making to record and communicate ideas. 
● The use of a range of painting materials, tools and techniques such as gouache, 
watercolour, acrylic, oil, dyes, brushes, digital painting applications and a range of 
painting surfaces. 
Sculpture** 
● The creation of form through manipulation of three-dimensional materials to communicate 
ideas. 
● The use of a range of sculpting materials, tools and techniques such as carving,  
modelling, joining, constructing and reducing, and transposing two-dimensional images 
into three-dimensional forms. 
Drawing and other materials processes 
Drawing can be applied in all its forms across traditions and technologies, and it can be 
critical and accurate as well as explorative and experimental. Drawing takes many forms 
from two-dimensional mark-making, to lines made using materials to define  
three-dimensional space. 
Drawing is essential to recording from life, describing a mood or emotion, as well as 
capturing an expression, atmosphere or tension. 
 
**Art, Craft and Design students are not permitted to select both sculpture in Fine Art and sculpture in  
Three-dimensional design as their chosen areas of study. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
14 
Graphic Communication 
Overview 
Graphic Communication introduces students to a visual way of conveying information, ideas 
and emotions, using a range of graphic media, processes, techniques and elements such as 
colour, icons, images, typography and photographs. Students should conduct primary and 
secondary investigations during their design development, and explore traditional and/or 
new technologies. They should also consider the use of signs and symbols, and the balance 
between aesthetic and commercial considerations.  
Students will also understand that Graphic Design practitioners may work within a small 
team environment or work as freelance practitioners. They may be responsible for a 
particular aspect of the Design or Production process or for the entire design cycle. They will 
need good communication skills in order to liaise with clients and to promote themselves as 
graphic designers. 
Knowledge, understanding and skills in  
Graphic Communication 
Students are required to develop the knowledge, understanding and skills outlined 
on page 7 when undertaking work in Graphic Communication. All knowledge, 
understanding and skills will be assessed in both components. 
There are many skills, techniques, materials, processes and concepts that are essential to all 
areas of study in Graphic Communication. In addition to any specialist requirements listed 
under the chosen area(s) of study, students should develop a practical knowledge and 
understanding of: 
● the use of formal elements and visual communication through a variety of approaches 
● the use of observational skill to record from sources and communicate ideas 
● graphic materials and techniques such as traditional and digital graphics, printing and 
web-based technologies  
● properties of colour and light such as hue, tint, saturation and tone 
● the effects and creative potential of combining and manipulating different two-dimensional 
and three-dimensional materials and media 
● the use of digital and/or non-digital applications. 
Areas of study 
Work must demonstrate integrated knowledge, understanding and skills. Work is not limited 
to one area of study and students could develop work in at least one of the following areas 
of study. 
Advertising 
● The use of advertising to convey information for clients and audiences that promotes 
corporate identity. 
● The use of traditional graphic media and current technology.  
Communication graphics 
● The use of communication through graphics to develop solutions for worldwide identity. 
● The exploration of traditional and digital graphic media in both two- and three-dimensions.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
15 
Design for print 
● The use of design-based solutions in media for use in creating visual and written material 
for public distribution. 
● Developing solutions in both traditional print and digital technology. 
Illustration 
● The use of illustration and narrative to communicate factual, fictional and/or technical 
ideas for a particular purpose or audience. 
● The use of a range of illustration materials, tools and techniques such as digital 
applications, wet and dry processes and drawing, painting and printing techniques. 
Interactive design (including web, app and game) 
● The use of interactive technology such as web-based, mobile and other personal devices, 
television and games to communicate with and engage audiences. 
● The use of a range of interactive design materials, tools and techniques such as two- and 
three-dimensional graphics, digital applications and time-based media. 
Multi-media 
● The use of traditional and non-traditional media to communicate ideas for a range of 
purposes and audiences. 
● The combination of a range of multi-media materials, tools and techniques such as motion 
graphics, lens-based and digital video, animation and recording in screen-based 
technology. 
Package design 
● The functional design of 3D material to protect, promote and communicate brand identity 
for a range of products and purposes. 
● The use of a range of package design materials, tools and techniques such as traditional 
and non-traditional graphic media and construction processes and materials. 
Signage 
● The development of signage, which is both specific and worldwide in its application. 
● The use of digital and non-digital methods of making symbols and signs. 
Typography 
● The arrangement and manipulation of type traditional and non-traditional to communicate 
ideas and create visual interest. 
● The use of a range of typographic materials, tools, techniques and elements such as letter 
forms, fonts and typefaces, digital and non-digital methods.  
Drawing and other materials processes 
Drawing in Graphic Communication is inherent in the process from initial idea to final 
realisation of the product. Design roughs to final working drawings, including digital 
drawings, form part of the essential process of discovery. Students should create drawings 
from primary sources using a range of media, techniques and processes. Students should 
also be aware of new and emerging technologies, which can be used in the processes of 
drawing and mark-making. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
16 
Textile Design 
Overview 
Textile Design is a versatile practice that involves the creation, selection, manipulation and 
application of a range of materials such as fibres, yarns and fabrics, and processes such as 
weaving, knitting, stitching and printing to create designs and products. Textile designers 
work in multi-disciplinary ways to create ideas, materials and techniques for different 
applications. Textile designers also play an important role in the world of fashion, theatre, 
performance and retail.  
Students will also understand that Textile Design practitioners may work within a team 
environment in a large commercial manufacturing company, on a single aspect of the design 
or making process, or work as freelance practitioners on commissions or self-directed 
projects. They will need good communication skills in order to liaise with clients and to 
promote themselves as textiles designers and makers.  
Knowledge, understanding and skills in Textile Design 
Students are required to develop the knowledge, understanding and skills outlined 
on page 7 when undertaking work in Textile Design. All knowledge, understanding 
and skills will be assessed in both components. 
There are many skills, techniques, materials, processes and concepts that are essential to all 
areas of study in Textile Design. In addition to any specialist requirements listed under the 
chosen area(s) of study, students should develop a practical knowledge and understanding 
of: 
● the use of formal elements and visual communication through a variety of approaches 
● the use of observational skill to record from sources and communicate ideas 
● characteristics of materials such as natural and synthetic, functionality, recyclability and 
sustainability 
● properties of colour, texture and light 
● the effects and creative potential of combining and manipulating different two-dimensional 
and three-dimensional materials and media 
● the use of digital and/or non-digital applications. 
Areas of study 
Work must demonstrate integrated knowledge, understanding and skills. Work is not limited 
to one area of study and students could develop work in at least one of the following areas 
of study. 
Constructed textiles 
● Innovative manipulation and reworking of threads and fabrics. 
● The use of a range of constructed textiles materials, tools and techniques such as woven 
and stitched, materials and digital and non-digital processes. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
17 
Digital textiles 
● The design of textiles, employing digital techniques for use in creative and commercial 
industries such as fabric, carpet and wallpaper design. 
● The use of a range of digital textiles materials, tools and techniques such as traditional 
and non-traditional digital methods for recording and developing ideas in colour, 
construction, design, repeat pattern, surfaces and materials. 
Dyed fabrics 
● The use of natural and synthetic dyes. 
● The use of resist and applied techniques with natural and man-made fibres. 
Printed fabrics 
● The use of printed textiles to create bespoke pieces and haute couture. 
● The use of a range of printed textiles materials, tools and techniques such as monoprint, 
transfer-relief, relief print, wood-cut, lino-cut, silk-screen and digital printing on fabrics. 
Fashion design 
● The design and creation of clothing and fashion for creative and commercial audiences, 
clients and consumers. 
● The use of a range of fashion design techniques, materials and tools such as pattern 
cutting, adornment, accessories and illustration on fabrics and garments with 
consideration of sustainable materials, recycling and ethical manufacture.  
Installed textiles 
● The use of textiles to control and transform perception in a site-specific interior space.  
● The use of a range of installed textiles materials, tools and techniques such as padding, 
collage and assemblage. 
Soft furnishings 
● The design of constructed textiles for use in furnished interiors, utilising their tactile and 
physical qualities for intended purposes. 
● The creative use of the tactile and physical qualities of textiles in an interior space. 
Stitched and/or embellished textiles 
● The design of stitched and/or embellished textiles for use in creative and commercial 
industries such as fashion, costume and interiors. 
● The use of a range of stitched and/or embellished textiles materials, tools and techniques 
such as application and incorporation of media, objects and embellishments, hand and 
machine stitching. 
Drawing and other materials processes 
Drawing is an essential skill in the development process of Textile Design, from initial visual 
research, recording from primary sources, through to the translation of ideas into finished 
designs. Drawing in Textile Design can embrace a range of tools across all areas of study, 
and outcomes can be digital and/or non-digital. A range of drawing and mark-making 
methods will encourage students to consider multiple ways of reading, thinking and applying 
drawing in different contexts. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
18 
Three-dimensional Design 
Overview 
Three-dimensional Design is concerned with the designing, prototyping, modelling or making 
of functional and aesthetic consumer products, interiors and architecture. Students should 
engage with appropriate processes, materials and construction techniques, using maquettes, 
models and working drawings to help take their initial ideas through to realisation.  
Students will also understand that Three-dimensional Design practitioners may work within a 
small team environment or work as freelance practitioners. They may be responsible for a 
particular aspect of the Design or Production process or for the entire design cycle. They will 
need good communication skills in order to liaise with clients and to promote themselves as 
three-dimensional designers. 
Knowledge, understanding and skills in  
Three-dimensional Design 
Students are required to develop the knowledge, understanding and skills outlined 
on page 7 when undertaking work in Three-dimensional Design. All knowledge, 
understanding and skills will be assessed in both components. 
There are many skills, techniques, materials, processes and concepts that are essential to all 
areas of study in Three-dimensional Design. In addition to any specialist requirements listed 
under the chosen area(s) of study, students should develop a practical knowledge and 
understanding of: 
● the use of formal elements and visual communication through a variety of approaches 
● the use of observational skill to record from sources and communicate ideas 
● characteristics of materials such as resistance, malleability, recyclability and sustainability  
● the elements of three-dimensional design such as light, space, form, scale and proportion  
● the effects and creative potential of combining and manipulating different two-dimensional 
and three-dimensional materials and media 
● the use of digital and/or non-digital applications. 
Areas of study 
Work must demonstrate integrated knowledge, understanding and skills. Work is not limited 
to one area of study and students could develop work in at least one of the following areas 
of study. 
Architectural design 
● The use of the elements of three-dimensional design to develop and create building 
structures. 
● The use of a range of architectural design materials, tools and techniques such as digital 
and non-digital design methods, graphic and construction materials and the generation of 
plans, working diagrams and models with consideration of sustainability and related 
environmental issues. 
Interior design 
● The use of the elements of three-dimensional design to develop and create interior 
environments. 
● The use of a range of interior design materials, tools and techniques such as digital and 
non-digital design methods, graphic and construction materials, three-dimensional models 
and surface patterns/textures. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
19 
Product design 
● The generation and development of three-dimensional design ideas for consumer products 
with considerations for ergonomics and functionality. 
● The use of a range of product design materials, tools and techniques such as two-
dimensional and three-dimensional modelling, digital and non-digital design methods and 
surface considerations. Exhibition design 
● The design of both interior and exterior spaces for the purposes of exhibition and 
presentation. 
● The use of a range of exhibition design materials, tools and techniques such as two-
dimensional graphics and three-dimensional forms, construction techniques and 
presentation methods. 
Environmental/landscape design 
● The use of the elements of three-dimensional design to create exterior living, recreational 
and working environments. 
● The use of a range of environmental/landscape design materials, tools and techniques 
such as sculptural materials, digital and non-digital design methods, graphic and 
construction materials and the generation of plans, working diagrams and models with 
consideration of sustainability and environmental issues. 
Sculpture* 
● The design of sculptural work to meet a specific purpose or for an intended space or site. 
● The use of a range of sculptural materials, tools and techniques such as digital and  
non-digital design methods, models and sculptural media. 
Design for theatre, film and television 
● The use of traditional and non-traditional media to develop and create set, prop, and 
costumes designs for theatre, film and television. 
● The use of a range of design materials, tools and techniques such as digital and  
non-digital design methods, graphic and construction materials. 
Jewellery and body adornment 
● The development and construction of both individual and mass produced jewellery and 
body adornments. 
● The use of a range of jewellery and body adornment materials, tools and techniques such 
as metal, glass, textiles, wood and plastics, modelling, digital and non-digital design and 
recording methods. 
Ceramics 
● The creation of non-functional ceramic artefacts using both form and surface quality. 
● The use of a range of ceramics materials, tools and techniques such as modelling, casting, 
throwing and hand-building, glazing, surface decoration/texture and firing. 
Drawing and other materials processes 
Students of Three-dimensional Design need to demonstrate how a three-dimensional world 
can be translated into a two-dimensional one through technical and free-hand drawings. It is 
important to develop drawing skills to express a range of emotions, using different tools, 
materials and techniques. The formal elements should also be applied, especially those such 
as texture, colour and light. 
*Art, Craft and Design students are not permitted to select both sculpture in Fine Art and sculpture in  
Three-dimensional design as their chosen areas of study. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
20 
Photography 
Overview 
Photography may be defined as the creative journey through the process of lens- and  
light-based media. This could include work created using film, video, digital imaging or light 
sensitive materials. With the developments of new affordable lens-based technologies, 
students should attempt to use the photographic mediums to explore and create a body of 
work, which develops and refines both the process and the concept.  
Students will also understand that Photography practitioners may work to client commissions 
within a commercial photography studio, or work as freelance photographers. They will need 
photo manipulation and graphic design skills, and good communication skills in order to liaise 
with clients and to promote themselves as photographers. 
Knowledge, understanding and skills in Photography 
Students are required to develop the knowledge, understanding and skills outlined 
on page 7 when undertaking work in Photography. All knowledge, understanding 
and skills will be assessed in both components. 
There are many skills, techniques, materials, processes and concepts that are essential to all 
areas of study in Photography. In addition to any specialist requirements listed under the 
chosen area(s) of study, students should develop a practical knowledge and understanding 
of: 
● the use of formal elements to communicate a variety of approaches 
● the camera and its functions, including depth of field, shutter speed, focal points and 
viewpoints 
● the application of observational skills to record from sources and communicate ideas  
● the effects and creative potential of combining and manipulating different  
two-dimensional and three-dimensional materials and media 
● the use of digital and/or non-digital applications. 
Areas of study 
Work must demonstrate integrated knowledge, understanding and skills. Work is not limited 
to one area of study and students could develop work in at least one of the following areas 
of study. 
Documentary photography 
● The use of the photographic process to provide a narrative of events and/or situations. 
● The use of a range of documentary photography materials, tools and techniques such as 
compositional, proximity to the subject, focal points and the involvement of the 
photographer with the scene being documented. 
Photo-journalism 
● The use of the photographic process to record events as they happen to support the 
written word. 
● The use of a range of photo-journalism materials, tools and techniques such as 
manipulation of images for artistic effect through depth of field, shutter speed, focal points 
and viewpoints. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
21 
Studio photography 
● The use of a formal studio setting to control the environment for a variety of subject 
matters such as portraiture and still life. 
● The use of a range of studio photography materials, tools and techniques such as lighting 
and the use of light, props, posing and the arrangement of objects. 
Location photography 
● The use of subject matter found or placed to manipulate the formal elements within an 
existing environment. 
● The use of a range of location photography materials, tools and techniques such as 
lighting and light metering, developing site-specific shoot plans. 
Experimental imagery 
● The control of light and photographic processes to create non-traditional photographic 
outcomes. 
● The use of a range of experimental imagery materials, tools and techniques such as 
analogue and digital photography, manual manipulation and digital and non-digital 
processes and outcomes. 
Installation* 
● The creation and presentation of photographic artwork for a site-specific space to control 
and transform viewer perception. 
● The use of a range of installation imagery materials, tools and techniques such as location, 
projection, film, sound, scale and interactivity. 
Moving image: film, video and animation 
● The recording and use of moving image to communicate a visual narrative 
● The use of a range of moving image materials, tools and techniques such as storyboards, 
scripts, digital, non-digital mixed media methods 
Drawing and other materials processes 
The word photography could be taken to mean ‘a graphic representation with light’. In this 
way a photograph can take on the qualities of a drawing. Drawing methods such as pen or 
pencil on paper may enhance students’ development and understanding of photographic 
ideas, for example to plan shots, analyse and deconstruct their own imagery, or record ways 
in which practitioners have used formal elements and visual language. Students should use a 
variety of tools and materials, as appropriate, for recording their surroundings and source 
materials. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*Art, Craft and Design students are not permitted to select both installation in Fine Art and installation in Photography 
as their chosen areas of study. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
22 
Component 1: Personal Portfolio 
Content overview 
● Students must work within one of the following titles: Art, Craft and Design; Fine Art; 
Graphic Communication; Textile Design; Three-dimensional Design; Photography. 
● Students undertaking Art, Craft and Design must create work associated with areas of 
study chosen from at least two of the endorsed titles. Students undertaking one of the 
endorsed titles must create work associated with at least one area of study for that title. 
● Students create a personal portfolio of work that demonstrates the knowledge, 
understanding and skills on page 7. 
● Centres are free to devise any theme(s), project(s) or task(s) appropriate to their 
students and resources. They may each have a separate focus or be interconnected. 
● This component allows students opportunities to: 
o develop and explore ideas  
o research primary and contextual sources  
o experiment with media, materials, techniques and processes  
o present personal response(s) to theme(s) set by the centre. 
● The proportion of the 120 guided learning hours spent on this component should reflect its  
60% weighting. 
Assessment overview 
● Students’ work must comprise supporting studies and personal response(s). 
● Students’ work must show evidence of all four Assessment Objectives. 
● All work is internally set and is internally marked using the assessment grid on  
pages 32 and 33 and internally standardised. 
● A sample of work is externally moderated by a visiting moderator. 
● All marks must be submitted before moderation.  
● First assessment is in May/June 2018. 
Detailed description 
For the Edexcel GCSE in Art and Design, students must complete a Personal Portfolio of work 
in response to theme(s), project(s) or task(s) set by the centre. 
A Personal Portfolio is defined as a body of practical research and development, relevant to 
the chosen theme(s), project(s) or task(s), leading to one or more outcomes or to a variety 
of resolutions.  
Centres will devise theme(s), project(s) and/or task(s) in consultation with their students to 
ensure development of the required knowledge, understanding and skills stated in the 
specification content; coverage of Assessment Objectives; and personal creative 
engagement. Theme(s), project(s) or task(s), and resulting work, may be separate in focus 
or be interconnected. With a focus on building technical skill through exploring and 
experimenting with different types of media, processes and techniques, students will develop 
and refine ideas supported by contextual research, resulting in a personal portfolio of 
practical work. 
This component offers ample opportunities to devise programmes of study that require the 
development of students’ visual language to communicate personal ideas, meanings and 
responses. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
23 
Students should develop their personal ideas, and centres should ensure the authenticity of 
work submitted for assessment. Both the student and the teacher must sign the 
Authentication Sheet in Appendix 2, declaring that the work submitted for assessment has 
been carried out without assistance other than that which is acceptable according to the 
rules of the specification. 
Students must not be allowed to access their work once submitted for assessment. 
A student’s Personal Portfolio of work must show evidence of all four Assessment 
Objectives. The Assessment Objectives are interrelated, and centres should deliver them in 
a holistic way. Centres must ensure full coverage across Component 1 Personal Portfolio. 
Through this component, students must: 
● develop ideas through investigations, demonstrating critical understanding of sources 
(AO1) 
● refine work by exploring ideas, selecting and experimenting with appropriate media, 
materials, techniques and processes (AO2) 
● record ideas, observations and insights relevant to intentions as work progresses (AO3) 
● present a personal and meaningful response that realises intentions and demonstrates 
understanding of visual language (AO4). 
Component 1 should allow students to demonstrate the ability to construct a sustained line 
of reasoning, which is coherent, relevant, substantiated and logically structured.  All 
knowledge, skills, understanding and activities should therefore be relevant to the student’s 
creative journey.  The work undertaken for this component should be seen as part of a 
substantive project(s), rather than a series of disjointed tasks, and work should evidence all 
the Assessment Objectives holistically.  
Selection of work 
Supporting studies should show students’ development of ideas and progress through their 
work. Supporting studies may be evidenced through any appropriate means such as 
sketchbooks, notebooks, worksheets, design sheets, different scale rough studies, samples, 
swatches, test pieces, maquettes and digital material. 
The quality of the work submitted for assessment is key: students should be encouraged to 
select a focused body of work for submission that evidences: 
● the progression of their ideas and their work  
● the four Assessment Objectives  
● the coverage of the areas of study required by the specification. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
24 
Component 2: Externally Set Assignment 
Content overview 
● The Externally Set Assignment (ESA) represents the culmination of the GCSE course as it 
draws together all the knowledge, understanding and skills developed in Component 1. 
● Students must continue to work in the same title as they did for the Personal Portfolio. 
● Art, Craft and Design students are required to create work associated with at least one 
area of study for this component. 
● Students must present personal response(s) to an externally set broad-based thematic 
starting point, set by Pearson in the ESA paper. 
● This component allows students opportunities to: 
o develop and explore ideas  
o research primary and contextual sources 
o experiment with media, materials, techniques and processes 
o present personal response(s) to the externally-set theme. 
Assessment overview 
● The ESA paper will be released on 2 January each year and may be given to students as 
soon as it is released. 
● Centres are free to devise their own preparatory period of study prior to the start of the 
10-hour sustained focus period. 
● The 10-hour sustained focus period under examination conditions may take place over 
multiple sessions (a maximum of four within three consecutive weeks). 
● Students’ work must comprise preparatory studies and personal response(s). 
● Preparatory studies will comprise a portfolio of development work based on the ESA 
broad-based thematic starting point. 
● During the 10-hour period of sustained focus under examination conditions, students will 
work unaided to produce personal response(s), with reference to their preparatory 
studies, in response to the ESA broad-based thematic starting point. 
● Students’ work must show evidence of all four Assessment Objectives. 
● All work is internally marked using the assessment grid on pages 32 and 33 and internally 
standardised. 
● A sample of work is externally moderated by a visiting moderator. 
● All marks must be submitted before moderation. 
● First assessment is in May/June 2018. 
Detailed description 
The Externally Set Assignment (ESA) represents the culmination of the Edexcel GCSE Art and 
Design course as it draws together all the knowledge, understanding and skills developed in 
Component 1. 
The ESA consists of one externally set, broad-based thematic starting point, developed 
through a series of suggested starting points. Students must produce a personal response to 
the ESA theme. 
The ESA can be given to students as soon as it is released on 2 January. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
25 
Both the student and the teacher must sign the Authentication Sheet in Appendix 2, 
declaring that the work submitted for assessment has been carried out without assistance 
other than that which is acceptable according to the rules of the specification. 
Students should not be allowed to access their work once submitted for assessment. 
Students’ preparatory studies and personal response(s) produced in the 10-hour 
sustained focus period must show evidence of all four Assessment Objectives. 
Through this component, students must: 
● develop ideas through investigations, demonstrating critical understanding of sources 
(AO1) 
● refine work by exploring ideas, selecting and experimenting with appropriate media, 
materials, techniques and processes (AO2) 
● record ideas, observations and insights relevant to intentions as work progresses (AO3) 
● present a personal and meaningful response that realises intentions and demonstrates 
understanding of visual language (AO4). 
Component 2 should allow students to demonstrate the ability to construct a sustained line 
of reasoning, which is coherent, relevant, substantiated and logically structured.  All 
knowledge, skills, understanding and activities should therefore be relevant to the student’s 
creative journey.  The work undertaken for this component should be seen as part of a 
substantive project(s), rather than a series of disjointed tasks, and work should evidence all 
the Assessment Objectives holistically.  
Preparatory studies 
Preparatory studies should show students’ development of ideas and progress through their 
work. Preparatory studies may be evidenced through any appropriate means such as 
sketchbooks, notebooks, worksheets, design sheets, different scale rough studies, samples, 
swatches, test pieces, maquettes and digital material. 
Preparatory studies must conclude once the 10-hour period commences. From the 
commencement of the assessment period until its completion, and at all times in between, 
students must not add to or alter their preparatory studies. 
Students may only access their own preparatory studies during the 10-hour period of 
sustained focus. 
10-hour period of sustained focus 
During the 10-hour period of sustained focus, students will produce their final response(s) to 
the ESA, based on their preparatory studies, which could be a single artefact, a series or a 
group of artefacts. Students must work unaided under examination conditions during this 
time. The 10-hour period of sustained focus under examination conditions may take place 
over multiple sessions (a maximum of four within three consecutive weeks). Once the 
sustained focus period has started, all work, including the preparatory work and the personal 
response(s) for this component, must be retained by the centre under secure conditions and 
students must not have access to it, including between timed sessions. 
Students should plan the best use of the 10 hours to complete all response(s) within this 
time. Students must not access any of their work outside of assessment time.  
Students must not add to their supervised work between the supervised sessions for the 10-
hour period of sustained focus, and it is the responsibility of the centre to ensure that no 
additional work is brought in or out of each session. 
Work must not be added to or altered once submitted for assessment. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
26 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample Externally Set Assignment for this component can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Art and Design Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) 
document.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
27 
 Assignment setting, taking and marking 
Assignment setting 
Component 1: Personal Portfolio 
Centres must devise any appropriate theme(s), project(s) or task(s) in consultation with 
their students. They may each have a separate focus or be interconnected. The teacher 
should ensure that the theme(s), project(s) or task(s) allow the students to meet all four 
Assessment Objectives. 
Component 2: Externally Set Assignment 
The Externally Set Assignment is set by Pearson and will be released on 2 January in the 
year of assessment. The Externally Set Assignment will be available on our secure website 
on 2 January, and hard copies will be dispatched to centres based on estimated entries. 
Assignment taking 
Authenticity 
Students must work to develop a personal response to the internally set theme for 
Component 1 and the externally set theme for Component 2. Teacher knowledge of student 
work in progress will help to confirm the authenticity of individual submissions. 
In Component 2 students must produce work unaided during the final 10 hours of sustained 
focus. 
Students and teachers must sign the Authentication Sheet (see Appendix 2). 
Collaboration 
As part of the creative process, working with others may be of great benefit. However, 
teachers and centres must be satisfied that the work submitted for assessment is the 
student’s own, and both teacher and student must sign the authentication sheet to this 
effect. 
Feedback 
Teachers can help students to understand instructions, assessment criteria and controls. 
Teachers must not provide students with solutions. 
Resources 
Students must have equal access to IT resources. 
In Component 2: 
● during the final 10 hours of sustained focus, in situations where computer workstations 
are situated near one another, invigilators must ensure that students are working 
independently 
● internet access is prohibited under examination conditions and must be disabled on school 
workstations used during the 10 hours of sustained focus. Mobile devices with internet 
access are not permitted. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
28 
Storing students’ work 
Component 1: Personal Portfolio 
Work must not be added to or altered once submitted for assessment. Work submitted for 
assessment must be saved and kept securely until 20 September of the same year. 
Component 2: Externally Set Assignment 
Where students are completing the assignment over a number of sessions, at the end of 
each session their work must be saved and kept securely. This includes work in progress and 
the preparatory studies. It is the responsibility of the centre to ensure that no additional 
work is brought in or out of each session. 
Work must not be added to or altered once submitted for assessment. 
Work submitted for assessment must be saved and kept securely until 20 September of the 
same year. 
Time control 
Students have from 2 January until the commencement of the final 10 hours of sustained 
focus to prepare and develop work towards the Externally Set Assignment. During this period 
ongoing work for this component must not be shared with others through the use of online 
forums or social media. The 10-hour period of sustained focus may be divided into shorter 
sessions, up to a maximum of four sessions. The 10 hours of controlled assessment should 
be carried out over three consecutive weeks. 
Marking, standardisation and moderation 
Marking 
Teachers should mark all student work using the assessment grid on pages 32 and 33. We 
have provided a teacher mark sheet in Appendix 1, which is also available to download from 
the Pearson website. The teacher mark sheets should be copied and used as necessary when 
marking each student's work. A sheet should be used for each component. You should write 
a mark for each criterion and then total them in the boxes provided. The sheets for each 
student need to be displayed with the relevant work for moderation. 
Standardisation 
Where marking has been carried out by more than one teacher in a centre, there must be a 
process of internal standardisation carried out to ensure that there is a consistent application 
of the assessment criteria.
 During the internal standardisation process, teachers must:  
● mark their own group’s responses 
● mark sample pieces of work together to compare marking standards across all teaching 
groups 
● discuss any differences and ensure there is a common understanding of the criteria 
● amend marks so they are consistent 
● pay particular attention to marks awarded across both components and across all titles to 
ensure consistency of marking, using the generic assessment grid on pages 32 and 33 of 
the specification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
29 
Moderation 
Marks awarded by the centre will be subject to external moderation by a visiting moderator 
from Pearson. Moderation will ensure consistency with national standards. Pearson will notify 
centres of the students whose work has been selected for moderation. This sample will take 
cohort size into account. 
The moderator will contact the centre to arrange a visit at a mutually convenient time. On 
the day of the moderator’s visit, the centre must display all work from students identified in 
the sample so that it can be moderated during the visit. 
If the moderation indicates that centre assessment does not reflect national standards, an 
adjustment will be made to students’ final marks to compensate. 
For further information about standardisation and moderation please refer to the Joint 
Council for Qualifications (JCQ) Instructions for Conducting non-examination assessments 
(new GCE and GCSE specifications) on the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk. The assessment of 
this qualification must comply with these instructions. 
Presentation of work for the visiting moderator 
Work should be presented in the most appropriate format for the medium of the work, 
allowing visiting moderators to view the original work in all cases. 
Reproductions of the original artwork, including photographs of non-photographic work, 
on-screen display of artwork, online portfolios or video are acceptable means of presentation 
for assessment where the work is: 
● digital in nature 
● created specifically with the intention of implementing a digital medium or format as an 
integral part of the final piece. 
Student work must be clearly labelled and identifiable by name and component number. 
Each component submitted for assessment must be accompanied by a completed Teacher 
Mark Sheet (Appendix 1) and a signed copy of the Authentication Sheet (Appendix 2). 
Please refer to Pearson’s Centre Guidance for GCSE Art and Design for detailed information 
on the presentation and submission of work. This can be found on the Pearson website. 
Security and backups 
It is the centre’s responsibility to ensure that the Externally Set Assignment is kept secure 
until released to students. 
It is also the centre’s responsibility to keep the work that students have submitted for 
assessment secure. 
Secure storage is defined as a securely-locked cabinet or cupboard. Where students are 
producing artefacts, secure storage is defined as a classroom studio or workshop that is 
locked or supervised from the end of one session to the start of the next. 
The rules on storage also apply to electronic data. For example, centres should collect 
memory sticks for secure storage between sessions or restrict student access to specific 
areas of the centre’s IT network. 
For materials stored electronically, centres are strongly advised to utilise firewall protection 
and virus-checking software, and to employ an effective backup strategy, so that an  
up-to-date archive of students’ evidence is maintained. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
30 
It is the centre’s responsibility to keep the work that students have submitted for 
assessment secure. If the work submitted for assessment is lost or damaged whilst being 
kept secure by the centre, through reasons beyond their control e.g. fire, flood etc., the 
centre may apply to Pearson Edexcel for Special Consideration so that students may still be 
considered for assessment of the qualification. For further information please refer to the 
Centre Guidance document for GCSE Art and Design on the Pearson website. 
Centres must ensure that photographic or digital records are made and held within the 
centre as students progress through both components in order to support any Special 
Consideration application should this prove to be necessary at a later date. 
Further information 
For up-to-date advice on teacher involvement and administration of coursework, please refer 
to the Joint Council for Qualifications (JCQ) document Instructions for Conducting non-
examination assessments (new GCE and GCSE specifications) available on the JCQ website: 
www.jcq.org.uk. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
31 
Assessment Objectives 
 
Students must: % in GCSE 
AO1 Develop ideas through investigations, demonstrating critical 
understanding of sources 
25 
AO2 Refine work by exploring ideas, selecting and experimenting with 
appropriate media, materials, techniques and processes 
25 
AO3 Record ideas, observations and insights relevant to intentions as 
work progresses 
25 
AO4 Present a personal and meaningful response that realises 
intentions and demonstrates understanding of visual language 
25 
Total 100% 
 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
Component 
Assessment Objectives Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives AO1 % AO2 % AO3 % AO4 % 
Component 1:  
Personal Portfolio 
15 15 15 15 60% 
Component 2:  
Externally Set Assignment 
10 10 10 10 40% 
Total for GCSE 25% 25% 25% 25% 100% 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
32 
Applying the assessment grid 
Teachers should use this assessment grid to assess all student work for both components 
and all titles. 
● Refer to published visual exemplars to establish a secure understanding of how descriptors 
relate to practical evidence. 
● Working through each AO separately, use the bulleted descriptors in each box to 
determine which band the evidence meets best. 
● Use the descriptors holistically; there is not one mark available per descriptor. 
● Decide whether the evidence ‘just’ meets, ‘mostly’ meets or ‘fully’ meets the descriptors in 
the band to determine the appropriate mark within the band. 
● Where evidence for an AO meets descriptors from two or more different bands, a best-fit 
approach should be used to award the mark that corresponds most closely to the 
descriptors that have been met. 
● Determine a mark out of 18 for each AO and add them together for a total out of 72. 
The descriptors in the assessment grid should be understood as follows: 
● Limited – insufficient knowledge, understanding and skills. Minimal evidence of, and lack 
of structure in the development and recording of ideas. 
● Basic – some knowledge, understanding and skills demonstrated but they are simplistic 
and deliberate. Some structure and repetition in the development and recording of ideas. 
● Emerging Competent - knowledge, understanding and skills are generally adequate but 
safe 
● Competent and Consistent - knowledge, understanding and skills are secure and 
cohesive throughout 
● Confident and Assured - knowledge, understanding and skills are effective and focused 
throughout 
● Exceptional - knowledge, understanding and skills are in-depth, perceptive and 
accomplished throughout 
All the knowledge, understanding and skills on page 7 are assessed through the 
four Assessment Objectives. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
33 
Assessment grid 
Please see page 31 for an explanation of how to apply the assessment grid to students’ work. 
 
 
Band Limited  Basic Emerging Competent  Competent and Consistent  Confident and Assured  Exceptional  
Evidence meets 
requirements  Just   Mostly Fully  Just  Mostly Fully  Just  Mostly Fully  Just   Mostly Fully  Just   Mostly Fully  Just  Mostly Fully  
              Marks 
 
AOs 
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 
AO1 - Develop 
ideas through 
investigations, 
demonstrating 
critical 
understanding 
of sources 
No rewardable material 
• Development of ideas 
through investigations 
shows limited ability  
• The investigation process 
shows limited critical 
understanding of the 
context of own ideas and 
the sources that have 
informed them
   
• Development of ideas 
through investigations 
shows basic ability 
• The investigation process 
shows basic critical 
understanding of the 
context of own ideas and 
the sources that have 
informed them   
• Development of ideas 
through investigations 
shows emerging 
competence 
• The investigation process 
shows emerging 
competence in critical 
understanding of the 
context of own ideas and 
the sources that have 
informed them   
• Development of ideas 
through investigations 
shows competent and 
consistent ability 
• The investigation process 
shows competent and 
consistent critical 
understanding of the 
context of own ideas and 
the sources that have 
informed them   
• Development of ideas 
through investigations 
shows confident and 
assured ability 
• The investigation process 
shows confident and 
assured critical 
understanding of the 
context of own ideas and 
the sources that have 
informed them   
• Development of ideas 
through investigations 
shows exceptional ability  
• The investigation process 
shows exceptional critical 
understanding of the 
context of own ideas and 
the sources that have 
informed them   
AO2 - Refine 
work by 
exploring ideas, 
selecting and 
experimenting 
with appropriate 
media, 
materials, 
techniques and 
processes 
No rewardable material 
• Limited ability to refine 
work, driven by insights 
gained through 
exploration of ideas and 
reflection 
• Limited ability to explore 
ideas through a process of 
experimentation and 
review 
• Limited ability to select 
and experiment with 
media, materials, 
techniques and processes 
appropriate to personal 
intentions 
• Basic ability to refine 
work, driven by insights 
gained through 
exploration of ideas and 
reflection 
• Basic ability to explore 
ideas through a process of 
experimentation and 
review 
• Basic ability to select and 
experiment with media, 
materials, techniques and 
processes appropriate to 
personal intentions 
• Emerging competence in 
ability to refine work, driven 
by insights gained through 
exploration of ideas and 
reflection 
• Emerging competence in 
ability to explore ideas 
through a process of 
experimentation and review 
• Emerging competence in 
ability to select and 
experiment with media, 
materials, techniques and 
processes appropriate to 
personal intentions 
• Competent and consistent 
ability to refine work, driven 
by insights gained through 
exploration of ideas and 
reflection 
• Competent and consistent 
ability to explore ideas 
through a process of 
experimentation and review 
• Competent and consistent 
ability to select and 
experiment with media, 
materials, techniques and 
processes appropriate to 
personal intentions 
• Confident and assured 
ability to refine work, driven 
by insights gained through 
exploration of ideas and 
reflection 
• Confident and assured 
ability to explore ideas 
through a process of 
experimentation and review 
• Confident and assured 
ability to select and 
experiment with media, 
materials, techniques and 
processes appropriate to 
personal intentions 
• Exceptional ability to refine 
work, informed by insights 
gained through exploring 
and reflecting on ideas 
• Exceptional ability to 
explore ideas through a 
process of experimentation 
and review 
• Exceptional ability to select 
and experiment with media, 
materials, techniques and 
processes appropriate to 
personal intentions 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
34 
 
Assessment grid (continued) 
 
Band Limited  Basic Emerging Competent  Competent and Consistent  Confident and Assured  Exceptional  
Evidence meets 
requirements  Just   Mostly Fully  Just  Mostly Fully  Just  Mostly Fully  Just   Mostly Fully  Just   Mostly Fully  Just  Mostly Fully  
               
 Marks 
AOs 
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 
AO3 - Record 
ideas, 
observations 
and insights 
relevant to 
intentions as 
work progresses 
No rewardable material 
• Limited ability to record 
ideas, observations and 
insights related to 
personal work and the 
work of others through 
visual and other methods 
• Limited ability to record 
relevant to intentions 
• Basic ability to record 
ideas, observations and 
insights related to 
personal work and the 
work of others through 
visual and other methods 
• Basic ability to record 
relevant to intentions 
• Emerging competence in 
ability to record ideas, 
observations and insights 
related to personal work 
and the work of others 
through visual and other 
methods 
• Emerging competence in 
ability to record relevant to 
intentions 
• Competent and consistent 
ability to record ideas, 
observations and insights 
related to personal work 
and the work of others 
through visual and other 
methods 
• Competent and consistent 
ability to record relevant to 
intentions 
• Confident and assured 
ability to record ideas, 
observations and insights 
related to personal work 
and the work of others 
through visual and other 
methods 
• Confident and assured 
ability to record relevant to 
intentions 
• Exceptional ability to record 
ideas, observations and 
insights related to personal 
work and the work of others 
through visual and other 
methods 
• Exceptional ability to record 
relevant to intentions 
AO4 - Present a 
personal and 
meaningful 
response that 
realises 
intentions and 
demonstrates 
understanding 
of visual 
language 
No rewardable material 
• Limited ability to produce 
a personal and meaningful 
response  
• Limited ability to realise 
intentions  
• Realisations demonstrate 
limited understanding of 
visual language through 
application of formal 
elements  
• Basic ability to produce a 
personal and meaningful 
response  
• Basic ability to realise 
intentions  
• Realisations demonstrate 
basic understanding of 
visual language through 
application of formal 
elements  
• Emerging competence in 
ability to produce a personal 
and meaningful response  
• Emerging competence in 
ability to realise intentions  
• Realisations demonstrate 
emerging competence in 
understanding of visual 
language through 
application of formal 
elements  
• Competent and consistent 
ability to produce a personal 
and meaningful response  
• Competent and consistent 
ability to realise intentions  
• Realisations demonstrate 
competent and consistent 
understanding of visual 
language through 
application of formal 
elements  
• Confident and assured 
ability to produce a personal 
and meaningful response  
• Confident and assured 
ability to realise intentions  
• Realisations demonstrate 
confident and assured 
understanding of visual 
language through 
application of formal 
elements  
• Exceptional ability to 
produce a personal and 
meaningful response  
• Exceptional ability to realise 
intentions  
• Realisations demonstrate 
exceptional understanding 
of visual language through 
application of formal 
elements  
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
35 
3 Administration and general information 
Entries 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for this qualification can be found in 
our UK Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations officers and is 
available on our website: qualifications.pearson.com 
Forbidden combinations and discount codes 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more than one GCSE, or other Level 2 
qualifications with the same discount code, will have only the grade for their 'first entry' 
counted for the purpose of the School and College Performance Tables (please see 
Appendix 3: Codes). For further information about what constitutes 'first entry' and full 
details of how this policy is applied, please refer to the DfE website: www.education.gov.uk 
Students should be advised that, if they take two GCSEs with the same discount code, 
schools and colleges to which they wish to progress are very likely to take the view that they 
have achieved only one of the two GCSEs. The same view may be taken if students take two 
GCSE or other Level 2 qualifications that have different discount codes but which have 
significant overlap of content. Students or their advisers who have any doubts about their 
subject combinations should check with the institution to which they wish to progress before 
embarking on their programmes. 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, 
special consideration and malpractice 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality policy requires all students to 
have equal opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our qualifications 
to be awarded in a way that is fair to every student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the Equality Act 2010) are not, 
when they are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in comparison to 
students who do not share that characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification and that 
this achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their peers. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be available in English. All student work must be in 
English. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
36 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with special 
educational needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to: 
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the assessment. 
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an individual 
student with a disability, without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding bodies comply with the duty under the 
Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students will 
then know what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for assessment.  
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable adjustments 
where a person with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in undertaking an 
assessment. The awarding organisation is required to take reasonable steps to overcome 
that disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be unique to that individual and 
therefore might not be in the list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of factors, 
which will include: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding 
organisation, timeframes or affects the security or integrity of the assessment. This is 
because the adjustment is not ‘reasonable’. 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student's mark or grade to 
reflect temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the examination/ 
assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a material effect on a 
candidate’s ability to take an assessment or demonstrate their level of attainment in an 
assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to apply for access arrangements 
and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special 
consideration, please refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
37 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that compromises or seeks to 
compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in controlled assessments discovered before the candidate has signed 
the declaration of authentication form does not need to be reported to Pearson. 
Candidate malpractice found in controlled assessments after the declaration of authenticity 
has been signed, and in examinations must be reported to Pearson on a JCQ M1 Form 
(available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The completed form can be  
emailed to pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to Investigations Team, Pearson,  
190 High Holborn, London, WC1V 7BH. Please provide as much information and supporting 
documentation as possible. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies 
with Pearson. 
Failure to report candidate malpractice constitutes staff or centre malpractice.  
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and maladministration of 
our qualifications. As with candidate malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is any act that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of assessment or undermines the integrity 
of the qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported 
immediately, before any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson on a  
JCQ M2(a) Form (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form, 
supporting documentation and as much information as possible can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to Investigations Team, Pearson, 190 High Holborn, 
London, WC1V 7BH. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies with 
Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More-detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the document 
JCQ General and Vocational Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice. 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to comply with the requirements of 
Ofqual's General Conditions of Recognition. 
The raw marks for components 1 and 2 in this qualification will be scaled by Pearson to 
represent the relative weighting of 60% for Component 1 and 40% for Component 2. Any 
marks submitted by the centre should be in raw marks based on the assessment grids for 
components 1 and 2. 
Component Weighting  Raw marks Scaling factor Scaling mark 
1 60% 72 1.5 108 
2 40% 72 1.0 72 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
38 
This GCSE qualification will be graded and certificated on a nine-grade scale from 9 to 1 
using the total subject mark where 9 is the highest grade. Individual components are not 
graded.  
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum judged by Pearson to be of 
sufficient standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U result. 
The first certification opportunity for this qualification will be 2018. 
Student recruitment and progression 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this qualification. 
Progression 
This qualification is designed to allow progression to AS and A Level Art and Design, and 
other Level 3 qualifications. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
39 
 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Art and Design Teacher Mark Sheet 40 
Appendix 2: Art and Design Authentication Sheet 42 
Appendix 3: Codes 43 
Appendix 4: The context for the development of this qualification 44 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
40 
Appendix 1: Art and Design Teacher Mark Sheet 
 
Band Limited  Basic Emerging Competent  Competent and Consistent  Confident and Assured  Exceptional  
Mark 
awarded 
Evidence meets 
requirements  Just   Mostly Fully  Just  Mostly Fully  Just  Mostly Fully  Just   Mostly Fully  Just   Mostly Fully  Just  Mostly Fully  
                   
     Marks 
 
AOs 
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 
AO1 - Develop 
ideas through 
investigations, 
demonstrating 
critical 
understanding 
of sources 
No rewardable material 
• Development of ideas 
through investigations 
shows limited ability  
• The investigation process 
shows limited critical 
understanding of the 
context of own ideas and 
the sources that have 
informed them   
• Development of ideas 
through investigations 
shows basic ability 
• The investigation process 
shows basic critical 
understanding of the 
context of own ideas and 
the sources that have 
informed them   
• Development of ideas through 
investigations shows 
emerging competence 
• The investigation process 
shows emerging competence 
in critical understanding of 
the context of own ideas and 
the sources that have 
informed them   
• Development of ideas through 
investigations shows competent 
and consistent ability 
• The investigation process shows 
competent and consistent 
critical understanding of the 
context of own ideas and the 
sources that have informed 
them   
• Development of ideas through 
investigations shows 
confident and assured ability 
• The investigation process 
shows confident and assured 
critical understanding of the 
context of own ideas and the 
sources that have informed 
them   
• Development of ideas through 
investigations shows 
exceptional ability  
• The investigation process 
shows exceptional critical 
understanding of the context 
of own ideas and the sources 
that have informed them   
Total for AO1 
 
AO2 - Refine 
work by 
exploring ideas, 
selecting and 
experimenting 
with appropriate 
media, 
materials, 
techniques and 
processes 
No rewardable material 
• Limited ability to refine 
work, driven by insights 
gained through exploration 
of ideas and reflection 
• Limited ability to explore 
ideas through a process of 
experimentation and review 
• Limited ability to select and 
experiment with media, 
materials, techniques and 
processes appropriate to 
personal intentions 
• Basic ability to refine 
work, driven by insights 
gained through 
exploration of ideas and 
reflection 
• Basic ability to explore 
ideas through a process 
of experimentation and 
review 
• Basic ability to select and 
experiment with media, 
materials, techniques and 
processes appropriate to 
personal intentions 
• Emerging competence in 
ability to refine work, driven 
by insights gained through 
exploration of ideas and 
reflection 
• Emerging competence in 
ability to explore ideas 
through a process of 
experimentation and review 
• Emerging competence in 
ability to select and 
experiment with media, 
materials, techniques and 
processes appropriate to 
personal intentions 
• Competent and consistent 
ability to refine work, driven by 
insights gained through 
exploration of ideas and 
reflection 
• Competent and consistent 
ability to explore ideas through 
a process of experimentation 
and review 
• Competent and consistent 
ability to select and experiment 
with media, materials, 
techniques and processes 
appropriate to personal 
intentions 
• Confident and assured ability 
to refine work, driven by 
insights gained through 
exploration of ideas and 
reflection 
• Confident and assured ability 
to explore ideas through a 
process of experimentation 
and review 
• Confident and assured ability 
to select and experiment with 
media, materials, techniques 
and processes appropriate to 
personal intentions 
• Exceptional ability to refine 
work, informed by insights 
gained through exploring and 
reflecting on ideas 
• Exceptional ability to explore 
ideas through a process of 
experimentation and review 
• Exceptional ability to select 
and experiment with media, 
materials, techniques and 
processes appropriate to 
personal intentions 
Total for AO2 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
41 
Art and Design Teacher Mark Sheet (continued) 
 
Band Limited  Basic Emerging Competent  Competent and Consistent  Confident and Assured  Exceptional  
Mark 
awarded 
Evidence meets 
requirements  Just   Mostly Fully  Just  Mostly Fully  Just  Mostly Fully  Just   Mostly Fully  Just   Mostly Fully  Just  Mostly Fully  
                
Marks 
 
AOs 
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 
AO3 - Record 
ideas, 
observations 
and insights 
relevant to 
intentions as 
work progresses 
No rewardable material 
• Limited ability to record 
ideas, observations and 
insights related to personal 
work and the work of 
others through visual and 
other methods 
• Limited ability to record 
relevant to intentions 
• Basic ability to record 
ideas, observations and 
insights related to 
personal work and the 
work of others through 
visual and other methods 
• Basic ability to record 
relevant to intentions 
• Emerging competence in 
ability to record ideas, 
observations and insights 
related to personal work and 
the work of others through 
visual and other methods 
• Emerging competence in 
ability to record relevant to 
intentions 
• Competent and consistent 
ability to record ideas, 
observations and insights 
related to personal work and the 
work of others through visual 
and other methods 
• Competent and consistent 
ability to record relevant to 
intentions 
• Confident and assured ability 
to record ideas, observations 
and insights related to 
personal work and the work 
of others through visual and 
other methods 
• Confident and assured ability 
to record relevant to 
intentions 
• Exceptional ability to record 
ideas, observations and 
insights related to personal 
work and the work of others 
through visual and other 
methods 
• Exceptional ability to record 
relevant to intentions 
Total for AO3 
 
AO4 - Present a 
personal and 
meaningful 
response that 
realises 
intentions and 
demonstrates 
understanding 
of visual 
language. 
No rewardable material 
• Limited ability to produce a 
personal and meaningful 
response  
• Limited ability to realise 
intentions  
• Realisations demonstrate 
limited understanding of 
visual language through 
application of formal 
elements  
• Basic ability to produce a 
personal and meaningful 
response  
• Basic ability to realise 
intentions  
• Realisations demonstrate 
basic understanding of 
visual language through 
application of formal 
elements  
• Emerging competence in 
ability to produce a personal 
and meaningful response  
• Emerging competence in 
ability to realise intentions  
• Realisations demonstrate 
emerging competence in 
understanding of visual 
language through application 
of formal elements  
• Competent and consistent 
ability to produce a personal 
and meaningful response  
• Competent and consistent 
ability to realise intentions  
• Realisations demonstrate 
competent and consistent 
understanding of visual 
language through application of 
formal elements  
• Confident and assured ability 
to produce a personal and 
meaningful response  
• Confident and assured ability 
to realise intentions  
• Realisations demonstrate 
confident and assured 
understanding of visual 
language through application 
of formal elements  
• Exceptional ability to produce 
a personal and meaningful 
response  
• Exceptional ability to realise 
intentions  
• Realisations demonstrate 
exceptional understanding of 
visual language through 
application of formal 
elements  
Total for AO4 
 
 
       Final mark 
out of 72 
 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
42 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 2: Art and Design 
Authentication Sheet 
Both the student and the teacher must sign the Authentication Sheet, declaring that the 
work submitted for assessment has been carried out without assistance other than that 
which is acceptable according to the rules of the specification.  
Each component submitted for assessment must be accompanied by a completed Teacher 
Mark Sheet and a signed copy of the Authentication Sheet.  
Please download the authentication form from our website. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
43 
Appendix 3: Codes 
 
Type of 
code 
Use of code Code 
Discount codes Every qualification is assigned to a 
discount code indicating the subject 
area to which it belongs. This code may 
change. See our website 
(qualifications.pearson.com) for details 
of any changes. 
Photography: KJ1 
All other titles: JA2  
National 
Qualifications 
Framework 
(NQF) codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an 
Ofqual National Qualifications 
Framework (NQF) code. 
The NQF code is known as a 
Qualification Number (QN). This is the 
code that features in the DfE Section 96 
and on the LARA as being eligible for 
16–18 and 19+ funding, and is to be 
used for all qualification funding 
purposes. The QN will appear on 
students’ final certification 
documentation. 
The QN for this qualification is: 
601/8069/9 
 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to 
enter students for a qualification. 
Centres will need to use the entry codes 
only when claiming students’ 
qualifications. 
GCSE –  
1AD0/1FA0/1GC0/ 
1TE0/1TD0/1PY0/ 
Component 
codes 
These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be 
entered for individual components. 
Art, Craft and Design 
Component 1: 1AD0/01 
Component 2: 1AD0/02 
Fine Art 
Component 1: 1FA0/01 
Component 2: 1FA0/02 
Graphic Communication 
Component 1: 1GC0/01 
Component 2: 1GC0/02 
Textile Design 
Component 1: 1TE0/01 
Component 2: 1TE0/02 
Three-dimensional Design 
Component 1: 1TD0/01 
Component 2: 1TD0/02 
Photography 
Component 1: 1PY0/01 
Component 2: 1PY0/02 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
44 
Appendix 4: The context for the 
development of this qualification 
 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] and our 
ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
● reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with those 
taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
● consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including learned bodies, 
subject associations, higher-education academics, teachers and employers to ensure this 
qualification is suitable for a UK context 
● reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in their 
documents GCSE (9–1) Qualification Level Conditions and Requirements and GCSE Subject 
Level Conditions and Requirements for Art and Design, published in March 2015. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification Principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
● demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning and 
measuring higher-order skills 
● rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and valid 
assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in end users of the knowledge, skills 
and competencies of certified students 
● inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students develop at 
different rates and have different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
● empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills, see Appendix 5. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
45 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
 
  The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important change to the 
education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications will assist them in 
helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an ‘Expert 
Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or because of 
our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the world as diverse as 
Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification development 
process that has included: 
● Extensive international comparability of subject content against the highest-performing 
jurisdictions in the world 
● Benchmarking assessments against UK and overseas providers to ensure that they are at 
the right level of demand 
● Establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-specific 
expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
● Subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future oriented. The 
design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, meaning learner outcomes 
have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a learner’s 
success in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident that we have 
supported the development of qualifications that are outstanding for their coherence, 
thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as representing world-class best 
practice.     
  
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Sing Kong Lee 
Director, National Institute of Education, 
Singapore 
  
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
  
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
 
“ 
” 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Art and Design 
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2024 © Pearson Education Limited 2024 
46 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently flagged the 
need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable them to respond with 
confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines skills, or 
competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that can be learned and 
that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform an activity or task and can be 
built upon and extended through learning[1]. 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected and 
evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this process, we 
identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the most evidence-based and 
robust skills framework. We adapted the framework slightly to include the Program for 
International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT Literacy and Collaborative Problem Solving 
(CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves[2]: 
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve general 
cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and communicate[3]. 
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, oral communication, written communication, assertive 
communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, service 
orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared understanding, 
taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team organisation. 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work stress, 
adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, and physical 
adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual teams, 
work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and able to acquire 
new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher education, 
as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the teaching and learning of 
this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning materials, developed with 
stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
 
[1] OECD (2012), Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (2012): 
http://skills.oecd.org/documents/OECDSkillsStrategyFINALENG.pdf 
[2] Koenig, J. A. (2011) Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop, National Research Council 
[3] PISA (2011) The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy, PISA 
 
 
 
 
DB060624 9781446925874_GCSE2016_L12_ARTDGN_ISS2.DOC.1–52/0 
