This draft qualification has not yet been accredited by Ofqual. It is published to enable teachers to have early sight of our 
proposed approach to Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9 - 1) in Music (1MU0). Further chang
es may be required 
and no assurance can be given at this time that the proposed qualification will be made available in its current form, or 
that it will be accredited in time for first teaching in September 2016 and first award in 2018.
Specification
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9 - 1) in Italian (1IN0)
First teaching from September 2017
First certification from June 2019
GCSE (9-1)
Italian
Issue 5

 
 
Summary of Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2  
GCSE (9-1) in Italian Specification 
Issue 5 changes 
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this current 
issue  
Page 
number  
Removal of Subject Advisor name: 
‘Our subject advisor service and online community…’ 
3 
Update to Foundation tier paper timing: 
‘Foundation tier: 1 hour 15 minutes…’ 
6 and 39 
Clarification of question titles appearing in English added: 
‘The instructions to students are in Italian. The question titles appear in English.’ 
38 
Update to Foundation tier Assessment Information for Paper 4, bullet point 5: 
‘Question 2 has two options from which students have to select one. This 
question assesses students on their ability to note down key points and convey 
information. Students must use the formal register.’ 
39 
Reference to ‘GCE AS’ removed in the following sentence: 
This qualification offers a suitable progression route to GCE A level in Italian.  
67 
 
If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, contact us via our 
website at: qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/contact-us.html. 
 
 
Contents 
1 Introduction 2 
Why choose Edexcel GCSE Italian? 2 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this qualification 3 
Qualification at a glance 4 
2 Subject content 7 
Themes and topics 8 
Paper 1: Listening and understanding in Italian 10 
Paper 2: Speaking in Italian 12 
Paper 3: Reading and understanding in Italian 36 
Paper 4: Writing in Italian 38 
Assessment Objectives 63 
3 Administration and general information 64 
Entries 64 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special consideration and 
malpractice 64 
Student recruitment and progression 67 
Appendix 1: Candidate speaking examination record form (CS2) 71 
Appendix 2: Grammar list 72 
Appendix 3: Vocabulary list 75 
Appendix 4: The context for the development of this qualification 133 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 135 
Appendix 6: Codes 136 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
2 
1 Introduction 
Why choose Edexcel GCSE Italian? 
We believe languages should be accessible for all students. Our new Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian has been developed to help students of all abilities 
progress and develop a passion for languages, through culturally engaging content. 
We’ve listened to feedback from the languages community and have developed an engaging 
and inspirational course of study that will enable your students to manipulate and use the 
target language effectively, independently and creatively, so that they have a solid basis 
from which to progress to A Level or employment. 
Engaging and popular topics 
Our specification includes both familiar and new topics that you have told us you like and 
that motivate your students. 
Manageable content 
Our content has been structured across five themes. This flexible programme of study allows 
time for a focused revision period at the end of the course. 
Content and assessments that provide an engaging real-world focus 
The authentic situations and stimuli enable students to see language in context and learn 
about the culture of the target language country. Our assessments allow for spontaneity and 
test grammar as well as providing plenty of opportunities for students to apply their 
knowledge independently, creatively and in authentic situations. 
Straightforward assessments that are accessible to all students 
Special care has been taken to ensure that all our papers are designed to be clear and 
concise and, where appropriate, questions feature scaffolding to help all students’ progress 
through the assessments confidently. Reading and listening papers are structured so that 
questions set in the target language are in a separate section from those questions requiring 
responses in English. Both papers are also structured so that they are progressive in their 
level of demand with the most demanding question being the final question in the paper. 
Translation tasks are progressive in their level of difficulty and are of appropriate demand at 
each tier. 
Carefully selected texts 
We have worked closely with teachers and expert practitioners to ensure we include 
interesting and relevant texts at the right level for students at each tier and that will 
encourage the use of a wide range of texts in the classroom. 
Clear and precise assessment criteria 
Our mark schemes have been trialled with sample student answers to ensure they reward 
students appropriately and that it is clear what is expected of students at each band. 
Continuous progression 
Our content builds on the understanding developed at prior language learning experience at 
Key Stage 3 while also ensuring that students new to the subject are appropriately 
supported, and provides a firm foundation for students to make a smooth transition to A 
Level. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
3 
Supporting you in planning and implementing 
this qualification 
Planning 
● To support you in delivering this specification, our Getting Started Guide, available on 
our website, gives you an overview of the new GCSE qualification to help you to get to 
grips with the changes to content and assessment and to help you understand what these 
changes mean for you and your students. 
● We will give you an editable course planner and scheme of work that you can adapt to 
suit your department. 
● Our mapping documents highlight key differences between the new and 2009 
qualification. 
Teaching and learning 
There are lots of free teaching and learning support to help you deliver the new qualification, 
including: 
● a guide to questions in the target language 
● student guide 
● online and face-to-face training events. 
Preparing for exams 
We also provide a range of resources to help you prepare your students for the assessments, 
including: 
● marked exemplars of student work with examiner commentaries 
ResultsPlus 
ResultsPlus provides the most detailed analysis available of your students’ exam 
performance. It can help you identify the topics and skills where further learning would 
benefit your students. 
Get help and support 
Our subject advisor service and online community will ensure you receive help and guidance 
from us and that you can share ideas and information with other teachers. You can sign up 
to receive e-newsletters to keep up to date with qualification updates and product and 
service news. 
Learn more at qualifications.pearson.com 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
4 
Qualification at a glance 
Content and assessment overview 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian consists of four externally 
examined papers based on the following skills: listening, speaking, reading and writing. 
Students must complete their speaking assessment in April/May and all other assessments in 
May/June in any single year. 
Each paper is available at Foundation tier or Higher tier. Students must be entered for a 
single tier across all papers. 
The use of dictionaries is not permitted. For Paper 2 this includes during the 
preparation time. 
 
Paper 1: Listening and understanding in Italian (*Paper code: 1IN0/1F and 1H) 
Written examination 
Foundation tier: 35 minutes, including 5 minutes’ reading time; 50 marks 
Higher tier: 45 minutes, including 5 minutes’ reading time; 50 marks 
25% of the total qualification 
Content overview 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes and topics. 
Assessment overview 
Students are assessed on their understanding of standard spoken Italian by one or more 
speakers in a range of public and social settings. Students will respond to multiple-response 
and short-answer open-response questions based on a recording featuring male and female 
Italian speakers. 
Students must answer all questions in both sections. 
There is no requirement for students to produce written responses in Italian. 
Foundation tier 
● Section A is set in English. The instructions to students are in English. 
● Section B is set in Italian. The instructions to students are in Italian. 
Higher tier 
● Section A is set in Italian. The instructions to students are in Italian. 
● Section B is set in English. The instructions to students are in English. 
The listening audio files are available on our website. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
5 
 
 
Paper 2: Speaking in Italian (*Paper code: 1IN0/2F and 2H) 
Internally conducted and externally assessed 
Foundation tier: 7–9 minutes plus 12 minutes’ preparation time; 70 marks 
Higher tier: 10–12 minutes plus 12 minutes’ preparation time; 70 marks 
25% of the total qualification 
Content overview 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes and topics. 
Assessment overview 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate and interact effectively through 
speaking in Italian for different purposes and in different settings. 
There are three tasks which must be conducted in the following order: 
Task 1 – a role play based on one topic that is allocated by Pearson 
Task 2 – questions based on a picture stimulus based on one topic that is allocated by Pearson 
Task 3 – conversation based on two themes. The first theme is based on the topic chosen by 
the student in advance of the assessment. The second theme is allocated by Pearson. 
The assessments are conducted by teachers in one session within a prescribed assessment 
window, the recordings are then submitted to Pearson for external marking. 
 
Paper 3: Reading and understanding in Italian (*Paper code: 1IN0/3F and 3H) 
Written examination 
Foundation tier: 45 minutes; 50 marks 
Higher tier: 1 hour; 50 marks 
25% of the total qualification 
Content overview 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes and topics. 
Assessment overview 
Students are assessed on their understanding of written Italian across a range of different 
types of texts, including advertisements, emails, letters, articles and literary texts. Students 
are required to respond to multiple-response and short-answer questions based on these texts. 
Students must answer all questions in each of the three sections: 
Section A is set in English. The instructions to students are in English. 
Section B is set in Italian. The instructions to students are in Italian. 
Section C includes a translation passage from Italian into English with instructions in English. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
6 
 
 
Paper 4: Writing in Italian (*Paper code: 1IN0/4F and 4H) 
Written examination 
Foundation tier: 1 hour 15 minutes; 60 marks 
Higher tier: 1 hour 20 minutes; 60 marks 
25% of the total qualification 
Content overview 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes and topics. 
Assessment overview 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate ef fectively through writing in Italian for 
different purposes and audiences. Students are required to produce responses of varying 
lengths and types to express ideas and opinions in Italian. The instructions to students are in 
Italian. Word counts are specified for each question. Students must answer all questions. 
Foundation tier – three open-response questions and one translation into Italian. 
Higher tier – two open-response questions and one translation into Italian. 
 
*See Appendix 6: Codes for a description of this code and all codes related to this 
qualification 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
7 
2 Subject content 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian allows students to develop their 
ability to communicate with Italian native speakers in both speech and writing. Students will 
study across a variety of contexts relevant to their age and interests and will also develop a 
greater awareness of the culture of Italian-speaking communities and countries. These 
contexts are listed under Themes and topics. 
Students will need to develop and use their knowledge and understanding of Italian grammar 
progressively through their course of study. Grammar requirements are given in the 
grammar list (see Appendix 2: Grammar list). 
To help students build on their range of vocabulary, a list is provided of words that students 
are expected to use and understand (see Appendix 3: Vocabulary list). These lists are not 
exhaustive but are intended as a guide; students at both tiers will be required to understand 
and respond to familiar words (appropriate to the tier) that are not on the lists. 
Qualification aims and objectives 
The aims and objectives of this qualification are to enable students to: 
● develop their ability to communicate confidently and coherently with native speakers in 
speech and writing, conveying what they want to say with increasing accuracy 
● express and develop thoughts and ideas spontaneously and fluently 
● listen to and understand clearly articulated, standard speech at near normal speed 
● deepen their knowledge about how language works and enrich their vocabulary in order 
for them to increase their independent use and understanding of extended language in a 
wide range of contexts 
● acquire new knowledge, skills and ways of thinking through the ability to understand and 
respond to a rich range of authentic spoken and written material, adapted and abridged, 
as appropriate, including literary texts 
● develop awareness and understanding of the culture and identity of the countries and 
communities where the language is spoken 
● be encouraged to make appropriate links to other areas of the curriculum to enable 
bilingual and deeper learning, where the language may become a medium for constructing 
and applying knowledge 
● develop language-learning skills both for immediate use and to prepare them for further 
language study and use in school, higher education or employment 
● develop language strategies, including repair strategies. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
8 
 
Themes and topics 
Questions across all four language skills are set in common contexts, addressing a range of 
relevant contemporary and cultural themes. They are organised into five themes, each 
broken down into topics and sub-topics. 
The five themes are: 
1. Identity and culture 
2. Local area, holiday, travel 
3. School 
4. Future aspirations, study and work 
5. International and global dimension. 
All themes and topics must be studied in the context of both the students’ home 
country and that of countries and communities where Italian is spoken. 
For listening and reading assessments, the majority of contexts are based on the culture and 
countries where the assessed language is spoken. Students may also refer to the culture of 
the assessed language country/countries or communities in the speaking and writing papers. 
It is, therefore, important that students are exposed to materials relating to Italian-speaking 
countries throughout the course. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
9 
Each topic has been highlighted in bold. 
All topics must be studied in the context of both the students’ home country and 
that of countries and communities where Italian is spoken. 
 
Theme 1: Identity and culture 
● Who am I?: relationships; when I was younger; what my friends and family are like; 
what makes a good friend; interests; socialising with friends and family; role models 
● Daily life: customs and everyday life; food and drink; shopping; social media and 
technology (use of, advantages and disadvantages) 
● Cultural life: celebrations and festivals; reading; music; sport; film and television 
 
Theme 2: Local area, holiday and travel 
● Holidays: preferences; experiences; destinations 
● Travel and tourist transactions: travel and accommodation; asking for help and 
dealing with problems; directions; eating out; shopping 
● Town, region and country: weather; places to see; things to do 
 
Theme 3: School 
● What school is like: school types; school day; subjects; rules and pressures; celebrating 
success 
● School activities: school trips; events and exchanges 
 
Theme 4: Future aspirations, study and work 
● Using languages beyond the classroom: forming relationships; travel; employment 
● Ambitions: further study; volunteering; training 
● Work: jobs; careers and professions 
 
Theme 5: International and global dimension 
● Bringing the world together: sports events; music events; campaigns and 
good causes 
● Environmental issues: being ‘green’; access to natural resources 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
10 
 
Paper 1: Listening and understanding in Italian 
Content 
Students are assessed on their understanding of standard spoken Italian in a variety of 
scenarios. 
Students will need to:  
● identify the overall message, key points, details and opinions 
● deduce meaning from a variety of spoken texts 
● recognise the relationship between past, present and future events 
● recognise and respond to key information, important themes and ideas in spoken text, 
including authentic sources, adapted and abridged, as appropriate 
● be able to answer questions, extract information, evaluate and draw conclusions. 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes 
(see Themes and topics). 
Students are presented with recorded scenarios involving one or more speakers in public and 
social settings. Recordings include authentic sources and are based on the themes. Recorded 
material features both male and female voices and represents different age groups.  
Students should be given the opportunity to become accustomed to hearing the Italian 
language spoken in a range of styles and registers. 
Recordings for individual questions within the assessment vary in length, including both short 
and longer spoken passages, using both familiar language and, where appropriate, more 
complex language and abstract material, as appropriate to the tier. 
To prepare students adequately for this assessment, teachers should present and exploit a 
range of vocabulary relevant to each theme listed and build on the Key Stage 3 Programme 
of Study, where appropriate. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
11 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2019. 
● The assessment is out of 50 marks. 
● Students must be allocated five minutes in which to read through the paper before the 
first extract of the recording starts. This gives students an opportunity to familiarise 
themselves with the length and the layout of the paper and to read the questions before 
hearing the first extract. 
● Students will listen to the recording featuring Italian-language speakers who will speak at 
a rate appropriate to the expected level of student understanding. 
● Each passage is recorded twice, with pauses following the second hearing to allow each 
student sufficient time to write or note their response to each question (or part of a 
question) and to read the next question before the related extract is played. 
● Recordings will be issued as digital sound files accessed via a secure download. 
● Each question is set in a context drawn from the topics. The assessment tasks will feature 
general content that is familiar and accessible to all students. 
● Students must answer all questions in both sections.  
● Foundation tier 
o 35 minutes is given for the assessment, including 5 minutes’ reading time. 
o Section A contains 12 questions set in English. Question types comprise both multiple-
response and short-answer open-response questions. The instructions to students are 
in English. 
o Section B contains two questions set in Italian. The question type is multiple-response. 
The instructions to students are in Italian. 
● Higher tier 
o 45 minutes is given for the assessment, including 5 minutes’ reading time. 
o Section A contains two questions set in Italian. The question type is multiple-response. 
The instructions to students are in Italian. 
o Section B contains eight questions set in English. Question types comprise both 
multiple-response and short-answer open-response questions. The instructions to 
students are in English. 
● Four of the questions will be common to both tiers. 
● For both tiers, there is no requirement for students to produce written responses 
in Italian. 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and mark scheme for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
12 
Paper 2: Speaking in Italian 
Content 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate and interact effectively through 
speaking in Italian for different purposes. 
Students will need to: 
● convey information and narrate events coherently and confidently, using and adapting 
language for different purposes 
● speak spontaneously, responding to unpredictable questions, points of view or situations, 
sustaining communication by using rephrasing or repair strategies, as appropriate 
● use a range of vocabulary and grammatical structures accurately, including some more 
complex forms, with reference to past, present and future events 
● make creative and more complex use of the language, as appropriate, to express and 
justify their own thoughts and points of view 
● use accurate pronunciation and intonation in order to be understood by a native speaker, 
however they will be able to access the highest marks available for each task without a 
‘perfect’ command of Italian. 
These are assessed through a series of three consecutive tasks. 
Task 1 – Role play 
The role play is an interaction requiring the student to ask and answer questions, to 
exchange information and to use different registers (see definition of registers beneath the 
Role play mark grid within the marking guidance section of the specification). The role play 
relates to either formal or informal scenarios, in turn inviting the student to use either formal 
or informal language relevant to the scenario. The task is set in the register that the student 
is required to use, so students should use that register in their responses. All role plays are 
marked for communication only. 
The role plays are set and provided by Pearson at the time of assessment together with a 
sequencing grid and instructions. For an example, please see the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document – 
Paper 2: Speaking in Italian, General instructions to the teacher section. 
Scenarios require an exchange of information. Some scenarios are transactional in nature. 
The scenarios are based on any of the topics from themes 1 to 4 (listed on page 9), i.e. not 
on the theme International and global dimension as this theme lends itself better to the 
picture-based task and the conversation. 
Task 2 – Picture-based task 
The assessment scenario is based on any of the topics (listed on page 9). The topic is 
allocated by Pearson at the time of assessment together with a sequencing grid and 
instructions. For an example, please see the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in 
Italian Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document – Paper 2: Speaking in Italian, 
General instructions to the teacher section.  
This assessment allows students to: 
● describe and narrate events 
● give information 
● express, justify and exchange opinions. 
Students are required to refer to past, present and future events in this assessment at both 
Foundation and Higher tiers, using different timeframes. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
13 
 
Task 3 – Conversation 
The conversation allows students to cover all of the requirements outlined in the Content 
section on page 12, including conveying information, giving points of view, developing and 
initiating conversation and discussion and producing extended sequences of speech. 
The conversation is based on any two themes (see Themes and topics) and is in two parts. 
For the first part of the conversation, the student selects one topic from one theme in 
advance of the assessment. The choice of topic must be agreed between the student and the 
teacher and must be selected no later than two weeks before the assessment takes place. 
This part of the conversation task starts with this first topic and then may move on to other 
topics within the same theme. 
The second part of the conversation must be on a different theme. This will be prescribed by 
Pearson through instructions on a sequencing grid. For an example please see the Pearson 
Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) 
document – Paper 2: Speaking in Italian, General instructions to the teacher section. 
This part of the conversation may focus on one or more topics from within the selected 
theme (see page 9). 
Students are required to refer to past, present and future events in this assessment, using a 
range of tenses and timeframes. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
14 
 
Assessment information 
General information  
● First assessment: April/May 2019. 
● The entire assessment must be conducted in Italian. 
● Students complete three tasks. 
o Task 1 – a role play based on one topic. This is allocated by Pearson at the time of 
assessment. 
o Task 2 – a task containing a picture and questions drawn from one topic. This is 
allocated by Pearson at the time of assessment. 
o Task 3 – conversation based on two themes. The first theme is based on the topic 
chosen by the student in advance of the assessment. The second theme is selected by 
the teacher from a choice of two themes allocated by Pearson. 
● Task 1 is set in the register that the student is required to use. 
At the time of assessment, Pearson will issue a prescribed order per student for their role 
play, picture-based task and two themes for the second part of the conversation. The 
teacher does not choose the order of the cards. Pearson will provide instructions on 
sequencing and a sequencing grid. For an example please see the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document – 
Paper 2: Speaking in Italian, General instructions to the teacher, section. 
This grid has been designed to help ensure that each student covers a broad range of 
themes from this specification. 
● Assessments are conducted by centres within a five-week assessment period in April and 
May in any single year. Dates for the assessment period will be confirmed in the UK 
Information Manual at the start of each academic year. The assessment period will not 
always be continuous or be the same period each year, for example it will need to 
accommodate the Easter break which changes each year. 
● The assessment materials provided by Pearson for all tasks may be accessed by the 
teacher no more than three working days before the prescribed five week assessment 
period. This is to enable the teacher to prepare for the assessment. The assessment 
materials in this pack must not be removed from the centre premises.   
● Assessments are conducted by teachers in one session within a prescribed assessment 
window and then submitted to Pearson for external marking. 
● Students are presented with instructions in English but must communicate entirely in 
Italian for the duration of the assessment. 
● Complete, unedited recordings of all assessments must be submitted to Pearson via the 
online Learner Work Transfer (LWT) portal.
 
● Each question is set in a context drawn from the topics. The assessment tasks will feature 
general content that is familiar and accessible to all students. 
● Students must be permitted 12 minutes’ preparation time to consider the questions and 
stimulus cards for Tasks 1 and 2. 
● Students are assessed on the quality of responses rather than length of assessment, 
however the assessment times are different to reflect the demand of each tier. 
● All assessments are marked against assessment criteria, please see Marking Guidance for 
Paper 2. 
● Centres must have procedures in place to verify the identity of all students at the time of 
the assessment and confirm this on the Candidate speaking examination record form 
(CS2) (see Appendix 1). Centres are required to submit to Pearson one completed  
CS2 form for all students for each tier. 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted during the preparation time or during 
the assessment. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
15 
Foundation tier assessment time and marks 
● The total assessment for the three tasks is 7 to 9 minutes plus 12 minutes’ 
preparation time. 
● The assessment is worth 70 marks. 
● The assessment consists of the following three tasks, which must be conducted in the 
following order: 
o Task 1 – one role play recommended to last between one to one-and-a-half minutes for 
10 marks 
o Task 2 – one picture-based task recommended to last between two-and-a-half to three 
minutes for 24 marks 
o Task 3 – a conversation recommended to last between three-and-a-half to 
four-and-a-half minutes for 36 marks. 
 
Higher tier assessment time and marks 
● The total assessment for the three tasks is 10 to 12 minutes plus 12 minutes’ preparation 
time. 
● The assessment is worth 70 marks. 
● The assessment consists of the following three tasks, which must be conducted in the 
following order: 
o Task 1 – one role play recommended to last between two to two-and-a-half minutes for 
10 marks 
o Task 2 – one picture-based task recommended to last between three to three-and-a-
half minutes for 24 marks 
o Task 3 – a conversation recommended to last between five to six minutes for 36 marks. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
16 
Preparation time 
Students are allocated 12 minutes’ preparation time, under supervised conditions, 
immediately prior to the assessment for Tasks 1 and 2. The purpose is to consider the 
questions and stimulus for the role play and picture-based scenarios allocated. 
Students are permitted to make notes (up to a maximum of one side of A4 for both Tasks 1 
and 2) during this period and they can refer to them during the role play and picture-based 
assessment, but not during the conversation task. Students must return their notes to the 
teacher before commencing Task 3 (conversation). 
The notes should be for reference only and students must not read out whole, prepared 
sentences in answer to questions. 
Any notes made during the preparation time must be kept securely by the centre until the 
end of October in the year the assessment is completed, after which time they should be 
securely destroyed. 
Students cannot have access to a dictionary, or any other resource, during the 
preparation time. 
Task 1 – Role play 
Pearson will set and provide ten different sets of role plays for each tier. Each role play 
consists of two cards – one for the teacher and one for the student. 
Teacher cards 
The teacher cards contain instructions on how to conduct the role play and the exact 
questions to ask. 
Each role play opens with an introduction from the teacher who then asks the first question. 
Candidate cards 
The candidate cards include prompts as a guide and highlight where the candidate needs to 
ask a question (indicated by the symbol ‘?’), and where an unpredictable question is posed 
to them by the teacher (indicated by the symbol ‘!’). 
Students have access to this during their preparation time to help in preparing for 
the assessment. 
Each candidate card contains instructions in English and the task is in Italian. The context of 
the role play is provided in both sections. Candidates must read both sections fully to 
support understanding of each bullet point. 
At Foundation tier, the candidate cards contain five bullet points, eliciting five utterances. 
Students need to ask one question and respond to one unpredictable question. Students are 
required to speak only in the present tense for four of the prompts or they may use a 
familiar conditional tense where it is more natural to do so. 
At Higher tier, the candidate cards contain five bullet points, eliciting five utterances. 
Students need to ask two questions and respond to one unpredictable question. Students are 
required to speak in the present tense for four of the prompts or they may also use a 
conditional tense if it is more natural to do so and respond to one question set in a past 
tense. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
17 
 
Task 2 – Picture-based task 
Pearson will provide ten different sets of picture-based tasks for each tier. Each task consists 
of two cards – one for the teacher and one for the student. 
Teacher cards 
The teacher cards contain instructions on how to conduct this task and the five questions to 
ask the student. Teachers are allowed to repeat questions and use set prompts to enable 
students to give a developed response. They are not allowed to deviate from the set 
prompts. 
Each task opens with the teacher asking the first question, which is based on the picture. 
The first question is directly based on the picture; the remaining questions extend beyond 
the picture, but are based on the overall topic from which the picture is drawn, inviting an 
exchange of views or opinions. 
Candidate cards 
At Foundation tier, students are provided with a picture and five bullets in Italian to help in 
preparing for the five questions that will be asked during the assessment. Students are 
allowed to ask for questions to be repeated. 
Students have access to this during their preparation time. 
At Higher tier, students are provided with a picture and five bullets in Italian to help in 
preparing for the five questions that will be asked during the assessment. The final bullet is 
marked by the symbol ‘!’ to denote one unpredictable question. Students are allowed to ask 
for questions to be repeated. 
Students have access to this during their preparation time. 
Task 3 – Conversation 
The first part of the conversation opens with the topic chosen by the student. The student 
may choose to focus on any aspect(s) of the topic as each has a number of different 
features. For example, a student who has selected the topic What school is like may: 
● choose to focus on ‘school types’ and ‘rules and pressures’, or 
● choose to focus only on ‘rules and pressures’. 
To enable them to make a confident start, the teacher should allow the student to state their 
chosen aspect(s) from their nominated topic and to talk about this aspect/these aspects for 
up to one minute. 
The teacher continues the conversation on the chosen topic and then may move on to other 
topics within the same theme, if necessary, to ensure that students use the recommended 
time for this task most effectively. 
The second part of the conversation is based on a different theme allocated by Pearson and 
covers any of the topics across that single theme. 
Teachers must ensure that an equal amount of time is allocated to both parts of 
the conversation. 
Throughout the conversation, in order to facilitate a genuine and spontaneous interaction, 
the nature of questions from the teacher should enable students to: 
● answer questions freely, in turn allowing them to produce extended sequences of speech 
● develop conversations and discussions 
● give and justify own thoughts and opinions 
● refer to past, present and future events. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
18 
Administration and general information about the conduct of the 
speaking assessment 
Preparation time and notes for Tasks 1 and 2 only 
● The notes made during the preparation time should be a reference only, and students 
should not read out whole, prepared sentences. 
● The preparation time must be supervised. It can take place either in the examination 
room with the teacher or outside of the room with an invigilator. 
● Students are not permitted to write on the candidate cards. 
● Students must return their notes and candidate cards to the teacher at the end of the 
second task (picture-based task). 
● Any notes made during the preparation time must be kept securely by the centre until the 
end of October in the year the assessment is completed, after which time they should be 
securely destroyed. 
● Students cannot have access to a dictionary, or any other resource, during the preparation 
time. 
Sample assessment materials 
Sample candidate and teacher cards for the role-play and picture-based tasks and 
accompanying marking guidance and assessment criteria can be found in the Pearson 
Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) 
document. 
Marking guidance and assessment criteria are also provided in this document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
19 
Marking guidance for Paper 2: Speaking in Italian 
This marking guidance is for the use of Pearson-appointed external examiners. The guidance 
has been included for teacher reference to aid understanding of how the assessment criteria 
will be applied. 
General guidance on using levels-based mark schemes 
Step 1 Decide on a band 
● The examiner will first of all consider the answer as a whole and then decide which descriptors 
most closely match the answer and place it in that band. The descriptors for each band 
indicate the different features that will be seen in the student’s answer for that band. 
● When assigning a band they will look at the overall quality of the answer and not focus 
disproportionately on small and specific parts of the answer where the student has not 
performed quite as well as the rest. If the answer covers different aspects of different 
bands of the mark scheme they will use a ‘best fit’ approach for defining the band and 
then use the variability of the response to help decide the mark within the band, for 
example if the response is predominantly band 5–8 with a small amount of band 9–12 
material, it would be placed in band 5–8 but be awarded a mark near the top of the band 
because of the band 9–12 content. 
Step 2 Decide on a mark 
● Once they have decided on a band they will then need to decide on a mark within the 
band. 
● They will decide on the mark to award based on the quality of the answer; they will award 
a mark towards the top or bottom of that band depending on how the student has 
evidenced each of the descriptor bullet points. 
● They will modify the mark based on how securely the trait descriptors are met at that band. 
● They will need to go back through the answer as they apply the mark scheme to clarify 
points and assure themselves that the band and the mark are appropriate. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
20 
Assessment criteria for the Foundation tier – Part 1 
Role play – Foundation tier (10 marks) 
For this task, students’ work is marked by Pearson using the following assessment criteria. 
The mark grid is applied once to each individual response to the prompts. There is a 
maximum of 2 marks for each of the five prompts on the role-play cards. 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable communication; highly ambiguous OR pronunciation prevents 
communication 
1 Partially clear/ambiguous OR partially appropriate within the context of the 
role play; pronunciation may affect clarity of communication 
2 Clearly communicated; appropriate within the context of the role play; 
unambiguous; pronunciation supports clear communication 
 
Exemplification of how to apply the role-play mark grid can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Additional guidance 
Appropriate: relevant response related to the prompt, uses appropriate register for the 
scenario. 
Informal register includes language that students would use with friends and people of a 
similar age such as endearments and informal greetings and forms of address where 
appropriate. Informal register also requires the use of the informal structures when using, for 
example, verbs and possessive adjectives. 
Formal register includes language that students would use with adults in a formal context, 
for example teachers, employers, customers, officials. Formal register includes avoidance of 
slang, over-familiar language, exaggeration and endearments. It also includes formal 
greetings and forms of address where appropriate. Formal register requires formal structures 
when using, for example, verbs, personal pronouns and possessive adjectives 
Partially clear/pronunciation may affect clarity of communication: makes speech 
difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is eventually understood)/forces the 
listener to strain to understand what is meant. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
21 
Assessment criteria for the Foundation tier – Part 2 
Picture-based task – Foundation tier (24 marks) 
There are two mark grids to be applied to this task: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
Picture-based task: communication and content – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–4 ● Limited response to set questions, likely to consist of single-word answers 
● Minimal success in adapting language to describe, narrate, inform using 
individual words/phrases; sometimes unable to respond 
● A straightforward opinion may be expressed but without justification 
● Pronunciation and intonation are inconsistently intelligible with inaccuracies that 
lead to frequent impairment in communication 
5–8 ● Responds briefly to set questions, there is much hesitation and continuous 
prompting needed 
● Some limited success in adapting language, to describe, narrate and inform in 
response to the set questions; may occasionally be unable to respond 
● Straightforward, brief opinions are given but without justification 
● Pronunciation and intonation are mostly intelligible but inaccuracies lead to 
some impairment in communication 
9–12 ● Responds to set questions with some development, some hesitation and some 
prompting necessary 
● Some effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform in 
response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions with occasional, brief justification 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, occasionally inaccuracies affect 
clarity of communication 
13–16 ● Responds to set questions with frequently developed responses, occasional 
hesitation, occasional prompting necessary 
● Frequently effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform in 
response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions and gives justification with some development 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, inaccuracies are minimal and have 
no impact on clarity of communication 
 
Additional guidance 
Adaptation of/adapting language to describe, narrate and inform: adapts language to 
achieve different purposes in the language; students may adapt language more effectively 
for one purpose than another, for example they may use language effectively to inform but 
less effectively to narrate. 
Straightforward opinions and justification are those that form part of a 
minimum/standard/predictable response. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
22 
 
Picture-based task: linguistic knowledge and accuracy – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Limited accuracy when responding to set questions; minimal success when 
referring to past, present and future events 
● Individual words and phrases are coherent when responding to set 
questions; high frequency of errors prevent meaning throughout most of the 
conversation 
3–4 ● Occasionally accurate grammatical structures when responding to set 
questions; occasional success when referring to present events, limited 
success when referring to future or past events, much ambiguity 
● Some coherent phrases and sentences within responses to set questions; 
regular errors prevent coherent overall speech and frequently prevent 
meaning 
5–6 ● Some accurate grammatical structures, including some successful references 
to past, present and future events in response to the set questions, some 
ambiguity 
● Responses are partially coherent, errors occur that sometimes hinder clarity 
of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
7–8 ● Generally accurate grammatical structures, generally successful references to 
past, present and future events in response to the set questions, occasional 
ambiguity 
● Responses are generally coherent although errors occur that occasionally 
hinder clarity of communication 
 
Additional guidance 
Errors: the mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on 
clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the listener from the content of what is being said. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make speech difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force listeners to strain to understand what is meant, 
for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the possessive 
adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the listener from the content of what is 
being said. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, i.e. using the incorrect person of 
the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
23 
Assessment criteria for the Foundation tier – Part 3 
Conversation – Foundation tier (36 marks) 
There are three mark grids to be applied to this task: 
● communication and content 
● interaction and spontaneity 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
Conversation: communication and content – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Communicates limited information relevant to the topics and questions 
● Uses language to express limited, straightforward ideas and thoughts; 
occasional straightforward opinion expressed without justification 
● Uses limited, familiar vocabulary and expression with much repetition; 
communication is disjointed and frequently breaks down because of restricted 
range of vocabulary 
● Pronunciation and intonation are inconsistently intelligible with inaccuracies 
that lead to frequent impairment in communication 
4–6 ● Communicates brief information relevant to the topics and questions 
● Uses language to produce straightforward ideas and thoughts; expresses 
straightforward opinions with limited justification 
● Uses repetitive, familiar vocabulary and expression; communication is often 
constrained and occasionally breaks down because of restricted range of 
vocabulary 
● Pronunciation and intonation are mostly intelligible but inaccuracies lead to 
some impairment in communication 
7–9 ● Communicates information relevant to the topics and questions, with 
occasionally extended sequences of speech 
● Uses language to produce straightforward ideas, thoughts and opinions with 
occasional justification 
● Uses a limited variety of mainly straightforward vocabulary, communication for 
some purposes is constrained because of restricted range of vocabulary 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, occasionally inaccuracies affect 
clarity of communication  
10–12 ● Communicates information relevant to the topics and questions, with some 
extended sequences of speech 
● Occasionally uses language creatively to express some individual thoughts, 
ideas and opinions, some of which are justified 
● Occasional variety in use of vocabulary, including some examples of 
uncommon language with some variation of expression, fulfils 
most purposes 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, inaccuracies are minimal and 
have no impact on clarity of communication 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
24 
 
Additional guidance 
Uses language creatively – examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● manipulating language, including familiar, high-frequency and simple language, to 
respond to unfamiliar/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to 
maintain interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, to 
convince. 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view which go 
beyond the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
Straightforward ideas, thoughts and opinions are those that give the 
minimum/standard/predictable response. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
25 
Conversation: interaction and spontaneity – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Basic exchange where only some questions are responded to; answers rely 
on rehearsed language that is frequently irrelevant to the question 
● Short, undeveloped responses, many incomplete 
● Isolated examples of ability to sustain communication, pace is slow and 
hesitant throughout 
4–6 ● Responds with limited spontaneity; answers rely on rehearsed language that 
is occasionally irrelevant to the question 
● Short responses, any development depends on teacher prompting 
● Limited ability to sustain communication, pace is mostly slow and hesitant 
7–9 ● Occasionally able to respond spontaneously with some examples of natural 
interaction although often stilted 
● Occasionally able to initiate and develop responses independently but regular 
prompting needed 
● Occasionally able to sustain communication, using rephrasing/repair 
strategies if necessary to continue the flow; frequent hesitation 
10–12 ● Responds spontaneously to some questions, interacting naturally for parts of 
the conversation 
● Sometimes able to initiate and develop the conversation independently, 
some prompting needed 
● Sometimes able to sustain communication, using rephrasing/repair strategies 
if necessary to continue the flow; some hesitation 
 
Additional guidance 
Rephrasing/repair strategies: strategies that aid communication and allow the 
conversation to be sustained, for example rephrasing, circumlocution, adjusting the 
message, asking for clarification/repetition, repair strategies such as self-correction; these 
strategies enable students to deliver the message when exact vocabulary or expressions are 
not known. 
Responds/responding spontaneously: gives a relevant, impromptu response based on 
what they have heard. 
Rehearsed language: language learned by heart, which may not give a relevant, 
impromptu response based on what has been heard (not spontaneous). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
26 
Conversation: linguistic knowledge and accuracy – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Uses straightforward, individual words/phrases; limited evidence of language 
manipulation 
● Limited accuracy, minimal success when referring to past, present and future 
events 
● Individual words and phrases are coherent; high frequency of errors prevent 
meaning throughout much of the conversation 
4–6 ● Uses straightforward, repetitive, grammatical structures 
● Occasionally accurate grammatical structures, occasional success when 
referring to present events, limited success when referring to future or past 
events, much ambiguity 
● Some coherent phrases and sentences; regular errors prevent coherent 
overall speech and frequently prevent meaning 
7–9 ● Manipulates a limited variety of mainly straightforward grammatical 
structures, minimal use of complex structures 
● Some accurate grammatical structures, some successful references to past, 
present and future events, some ambiguity 
● Sequences of coherent speech although errors occur that often hinder clarity 
of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
10–12 ● Manipulates grammatical structures with occasional variation, complex 
structures used but repetitive 
● Generally accurate grammatical structures, generally successful references to 
past, present and future events 
● Generally coherent speech although errors occur that sometimes hinder 
clarity of communication 
 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be:  
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language. 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, 
high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: the mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on 
clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the listener from the content of what is being said. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
27 
 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make speech difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force listeners to strain to understand what is meant, 
for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the possessive 
adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the listener from the content of what 
is being said. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, i.e. using the incorrect person of 
the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
28 
Assessment criteria for the Higher tier – Part 1 
Role play – Higher tier (10 marks) 
For this task, students’ work is marked by Pearson using the following assessment criteria. 
The mark grid is applied once to each individual response to the prompts. There is a 
maximum of 2 marks for each of the five prompts on the role-play cards. 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable communication; highly ambiguous OR pronunciation prevents 
communication 
1 Partially clear/ambiguous OR partially appropriate within the context of the role 
play; pronunciation may affect clarity of communication 
2 Clearly communicated; appropriate within the context of the role play; 
unambiguous; pronunciation supports clear communication 
 
Exemplification of how to apply the role-play mark grid can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Additional guidance 
Appropriate: relevant response related to the prompt, uses appropriate register for 
the scenario. 
Informal register includes language that students would use with friends and people of a 
similar age such as endearments and informal greetings and forms of address where 
appropriate. Informal register also requires the use of the informal structures when using, for 
example, verbs and possessive adjectives.  
Formal register includes language that students would use with adults in a formal context, 
for example teachers, employers, customers, officials. Formal register includes avoidance of 
slang, over-familiar language, exaggeration and endearments. It also includes formal 
greetings and forms of address where appropriate. Formal register requires formal structures 
when using, for example, verbs, personal pronouns and possessive adjectives. 
Partially clear/pronunciation may affect clarity of communication: makes speech 
difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is eventually understood)/forces the 
listener to strain to understand what is meant. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
29 
Assessment criteria for the Higher tier – Part 2 
Picture-based task – Higher tier (24 marks) 
There are two mark grids to be applied to this task: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
Picture-based task: communication and content – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–4 ● Responds to set questions with some development, some hesitation and 
some prompting necessary 
● Some effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform in 
response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions with occasional, brief justification 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, occasionally inaccuracies affect 
clarity of communication 
5–8 ● Responds to set questions with frequently developed responses, occasional 
hesitation, occasional prompting necessary 
● Frequently effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform 
in response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions and gives justification with some development 
• Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, inaccuracies are minimal and 
have no impact on clarity of communication 
9–12 ● Responds to set questions with mostly developed and fluent responses, 
minimal hesitation and minimal prompting necessary 
● Predominantly effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and 
inform, in response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions effectively and gives justification which is mostly 
developed  
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible and predominantly accurate  
13–16 ● Responds to the set questions with consistently fluent and developed 
responses 
● Consistently effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and 
inform, in response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions with ease and gives fully-developed justification 
● Pronunciation and intonation are consistently accurate and intelligible 
Additional guidance 
Adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform: adapts language to achieve 
different purposes in the language; students may adapt language more effectively for one 
purpose than another, for example they may use language effectively to inform but less 
effectively to narrate. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
30 
Picture-based task: linguistic knowledge and accuracy – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Some accurate grammatical structures, including some successful 
references to past, present and future events in response to the set 
questions, some ambiguity 
● Responses are partially coherent, errors occur that sometimes hinder clarity 
of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Generally accurate grammatical structures, generally successful references 
to past, present and future events in response to the 
set questions, occasional ambiguity 
● Responses are generally coherent although errors occur that occasionally 
hinder clarity of communication 
5–6 ● Predominantly accurate grammatical structures, mostly successful 
references to past, present and future events in response to the set 
questions 
● Responses are predominantly coherent, errors occur but they rarely hinder 
clarity of communication 
7–8 ● Consistently accurate grammatical structures, successful references to 
past, present and future events in response to the set questions 
● Responses are coherent, any errors do not hinder the clarity of the 
communication 
 
Additional guidance 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free speech in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the listener from the content of what is being said. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make speech difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force listeners to strain to understand what is meant, 
for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the possessive 
adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they distract the listener from the content of what 
is being said. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message  
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, i.e. using the incorrect person of 
the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
31 
Assessment criteria for the Higher tier – Part 3 
Conversation – Higher tier (36 marks) 
There are three mark grids to be applied to this task: 
● communication and content 
● interaction and spontaneity 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
Conversation: communication and content – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Communicates information relevant to the topics and questions, with 
occasionally extended sequences of speech 
● Uses language to produce straightforward ideas, thoughts and opinions with 
occasional justification 
● Uses a limited variety of mainly straightforward vocabulary, communication 
for some purposes is constrained because of restricted range of vocabulary 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, occasionally inaccuracies affect 
clarity of communication
  
4–6 ● Communicates information relevant to the topics and questions, with some 
extended sequences of speech 
● Occasionally uses language creatively to express some individual thoughts, 
ideas and opinions, some of which are justified 
● Occasional variety in use of vocabulary, including some examples of 
uncommon language with some variation of expression, fulfils 
most purposes 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, inaccuracies are minimal and 
have no impact on clarity of communication 
7–9 ● Communicates detailed information relevant to the topics and questions, 
usually with extended sequences of speech 
● Frequently uses language creatively to express and justify a variety of 
individual thoughts, ideas and opinions 
● Uses a variety of vocabulary, including frequent use of uncommon language, 
to regularly vary expression for different purposes 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible and predominantly accurate  
10–12 ● Communicates detailed information relevant to the topics and questions, 
consistently extended sequences of speech 
● Consistently uses language creatively to express and justify a wide variety of 
individual thoughts, ideas and opinions 
● Consistently uses a wide variety of vocabulary, including uncommon 
language, to consistently vary expression for different purposes 
● Pronunciation and intonation are consistently accurate and intelligible 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
32 
Additional guidance 
Uses language creatively: examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● manipulating language, including familiar, high-frequency and simple language, to 
respond to unfamiliar/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to maintain 
interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, to 
convince. 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view that go beyond 
the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
Straightforward ideas, thoughts and opinions are those that give the 
minimum/standard/predictable response. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
33 
Conversation: interaction and spontaneity – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Occasionally able to respond spontaneously with some examples of natural 
interaction although often stilted 
● Occasionally able to initiate and develop responses independently but 
regular prompting needed 
● Occasionally able to sustain communication, using rephrasing/repair 
strategies if necessary to continue the flow; frequent hesitation 
4–6 ● Responds spontaneously to some questions, interacting naturally for parts 
of the conversation 
● Sometimes able to initiate and develop the conversation independently, 
some prompting needed 
● Sometimes able to sustain communication, using rephrasing/repair 
strategies if necessary to continue the flow; some hesitation 
7–9 ● Responds to most questions spontaneously, resulting in mostly natural 
interaction 
● Mostly able to initiate and develop the conversation independently 
● Able to sustain communication throughout most of the conversation, using 
rephrasing/repair strategies if necessary to continue the flow, occasional 
hesitation 
10–12 ● Responds spontaneously and with ease to questions, resulting in natural 
interaction 
● Consistently able to initiate and develop the conversation independently 
● Able to sustain communication throughout, using rephrasing/repair 
strategies if necessary to continue the flow 
Additional guidance 
Respond(s) spontaneously: gives a relevant, impromptu response based on what they 
have heard. 
Rephrasing/repair strategies are strategies that aid communication and allow the 
conversation to be sustained, for example rephrasing, circumlocution, adjusting the 
message, asking for clarification/repetition, repair strategies such as self-correction; these 
strategies enable students to deliver the message when exact vocabulary or expressions are 
not known. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
34 
Conversation: linguistic knowledge and accuracy – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Manipulates a limited variety of mainly straightforward grammatical 
structures, minimal use of complex structures 
● Some accurate grammatical structures, some successful references to past, 
present and future events, some ambiguity 
● Sequences of coherent speech although errors occur that often hinder clarity 
of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
4–6 ● Manipulates grammatical structures with occasional variation, complex 
structures used but repetitive 
● Generally accurate grammatical structures, generally successful references to 
past, present and future events 
● Generally coherent speech although errors occur that sometimes hinder 
clarity of communication 
7–9 ● Manipulates a variety of grammatical structures, some variety of complex 
structures 
● Predominantly accurate grammatical structures, mostly successful references 
to past, present and future events 
● Predominantly coherent speech; errors occur but they rarely hinder clarity of 
communication 
10–12 ● Manipulates a wide variety of grammatical structures, frequent use of 
complex structures 
● Consistently accurate grammatical structures, consistently successful 
references to past, present and future events 
● Fully coherent speech; any errors do not hinder the clarity of the 
communication 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● all grammar and structures included in the grammar list that are specific to Higher tier 
GCSE 
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, 
high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
35 
 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free speech in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the listener from the content of what is being said. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make speech difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force listeners to strain to understand what is meant, 
for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the possessive 
adjective. 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the listener from the content of what is 
being said. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message  
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, i.e. using the incorrect person or 
the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
36 
Paper 3: Reading and understanding in Italian 
Content 
Students are assessed on their understanding of written Italian across a range of different 
types of texts. 
Students need to: 
● identify the overall message, key points, details and opinions in texts 
● deduce meaning from a variety of written texts 
● recognise the relationship between past, present and future events 
● understand texts, organise and present relevant details, and, where appropriate, draw 
inferences in context and recognise implicit meaning 
● recognise and respond to key information, important themes and ideas in more extended 
written text, including authentic sources, adapted and abridged as appropriate, by being 
able to extract information and answer questions. 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes (see Themes and 
topics). 
Texts for individual questions within the assessment use high-frequency language and vary 
in length, including both short- and longer written passages. Texts include authentic sources 
that introduce more complex language and unfamiliar materials.  
The range of text types include: 
● advertisements, emails, letters, articles and literary texts 
● a short passage to be translated from Italian into English. 
Literary texts consist of short extracts from texts that may have been adapted and abridged 
from authentic sources to be appropriate to this level – from letters, short stories, novels or 
plays to contemporary and historical sources. Students are also expected to translate a short 
passage of written Italian into English to demonstrate an ability to transfer meaning 
accurately into English. 
Scenarios in the texts are set either at home or, more frequently, in an Italian-speaking 
country, allowing students to develop appropriate cultural awareness and understanding. 
To prepare students adequately for this assessment, teachers should present and exploit a 
range of vocabulary relevant to each theme listed, building on the Key Stage 3 Programme 
of Study, where appropriate. 
Students should be presented with Italian language in a range of styles or registers and in a 
variety of different contexts, as appropriate to their age and level of understanding. Students 
should also be presented with different fonts and formats, for example short, printed 
messages, articles and email messages. 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2019. 
● The assessment time is: 
o Foundation tier – 45 minutes in length 
o Higher tier – 1 hour in length. 
● The assessment is out of 50 marks. 
● The assessment consists of 10 questions. 
● Students must answer all questions from each of the three sections. 
● Students are required to respond to questions based on passages of text from a range of 
sources. Each question is set in a context drawn from the themes. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
37 
 
● Section A has six questions set in English. Question types comprise both multiple-response 
and short-answer open response questions. The instructions to students are 
in English. 
● Section B contains three questions set in Italian. The instructions to students are 
in Italian: 
o for the Foundation tier there are three multiple-response questions 
o for the Higher tier, there are two multiple-response questions and one short-answer 
open-response question. 
● Section C contains one translation passage from Italian into English. The instructions to 
students are in English. 
● Four of the questions are common to both tiers. 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and mark scheme for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 
1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
38 
Paper 4: Writing in Italian 
Content 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate effectively through writing in Italian. 
Students need to:  
● communicate effectively in writing for a variety of purposes across a range of specified 
contexts  
● write short texts, using simple sentences and familiar language accurately to convey 
meaning and exchange information 
● produce clear and coherent text of extended length to present facts and express ideas and 
opinions appropriately for different purposes and in different settings 
● make accurate use of a variety of vocabulary and grammatical structures, including some 
more complex forms, to describe and narrate with reference to past, present and future 
events 
● manipulate the language, using and adapting a variety of structures and vocabulary with 
increasing accuracy and fluency for new purposes, including using appropriate style and 
register 
● make independent, creative and more complex use of the language, as appropriate, to 
note down key points, express and justify individual thoughts and points of view, in order 
to interest, inform or convince 
● translate sentences and short texts from English into the assessed language to convey key 
messages accurately and to apply grammatical knowledge of language and structures in 
context. 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2019. 
● The assessment is out of 60 marks. 
● Each question is set in a context drawn from the themes and topics. The assessment tasks 
feature general content that is familiar and accessible to all students. 
● Students are required to produce responses of varying lengths and types to express facts, 
ideas and opinions in Italian. 
● The length of each response required and complexity of language increases across the 
paper. Recommended word counts are specified for each question. Students will not be 
penalised for writing more or fewer words than recommended in the word count or for 
going beyond the mandatory bullets. 
● One question is a translation of a short passage from English into Italian. 
● All assessments are marked against assessment criteria, please see Marking guidance for 
Paper 4: Writing in Italian. 
● The instructions to students are in Italian. The question titles appear in English. 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
39 
● Foundation tier 
o The assessment time is 1 hour and 15 minutes in length. 
o The paper consists of three open questions and one translation from English into 
Italian. 
o Students must answer all questions. 
o Question 1 assesses students on their ability to write to describe and to express 
opinions. 
o Question 2 has two options from which students have to select one. This question 
assesses students on their ability to note down key points and convey information. 
Students must use the formal register, please see the definition in Marking guidance for 
Paper 4: Writing in Italian. 
o Question 3 has two options from which students have to select one. This question 
assesses students on their ability to convey information, narrate, express opinions, 
interest, and convince the reader about a certain point. Students must use the informal 
register, please see the definition in Marking guidance for Paper 4: Writing in Italian. 
This question is common to the Higher tier. 
o Question 4 is the translation question. Students are required to translate five sentences 
from English to Italian. The sentences are ordered by increasing level of difficulty. 
● Higher tier 
o The assessment time is 1 hour and 20 minutes in length. 
o The paper consists of two questions and one translation from English into Italian. 
o Students must answer all questions. 
o Question 1 has two options from which students have to select one. This question 
assesses students on their ability to convey information, narrate, express opinions, 
interest, and convince the reader about a certain point. Students must use the informal 
register, please see the definition in Marking guidance for Paper 4: Writing in Italian. 
This question is common to the Foundation tier. 
o Question 2 has two options from which students have to select one. This question 
assesses students on their ability to convey information, narrate, express and justify 
ideas and opinions, and interest or convince the reader. Students must use the formal 
register, please see the definition in Marking guidance for Paper 4: Writing in Italian.  
o Question 3 is the translation question. Students are required to translate a short 
paragraph from English into Italian. The individual sentences are ordered by increasing 
level of difficulty. 
 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample question paper and accompanying marking guidance and assessment criteria can 
be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian Sample Assessment 
Materials (SAMs) document. 
Marking guidance and assessment criteria are also provided in this document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
40 
Marking guidance for Paper 4: Writing in Italian 
This marking guidance is for the use of Pearson-appointed external examiners. The guidance 
has been included for teacher reference to aid understanding of how the assessment criteria 
will be applied. 
General guidance on using levels-based mark schemes 
Step 1 Decide on a band 
● The examiner will first of all consider the answer as a whole and then decide which descriptors 
most closely match the answer and place it in that band. The descriptors for each band 
indicate the different features that will be seen in the student’s answer for that band. 
● When assigning a band they will look at the overall quality of the answer and not focus 
disproportionately on small and specific parts of the answer where the student has not 
performed quite as well as the rest. If the answer covers different aspects of different 
bands of the mark scheme they will use a ‘best fit’ approach for defining the band and 
then use the variability of the response to help decide the mark within the band, for 
example if the response is predominantly band 5–8 with a small amount of band 9–12 
material, it would be placed in band 5–8 but be awarded a mark near the top of the band 
because of the band 9–12 content. 
Step 2 Decide on a mark 
● Once they have decided on a band they will then need to decide on a mark within 
the band. 
● They will decide on the mark to award based on the quality of the answer; they will award 
a mark towards the top or bottom of that band depending on how the student has 
evidenced each of the descriptor bullet points. 
● They will modify the mark based on how securely the trait descriptors are met at that band. 
● They will need to go back through the answer as they apply the mark scheme to clarify 
points and assure themselves that the band and the mark are appropriate. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
41 
Assessment criteria for the Foundation tier 
Question 1 – Foundation tier (12 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria given in two 
mark grids: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
The student is expected to produce 20–30 words for this task. The number of words is 
approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer words than 
recommended in the word count. All work produced by the student must be marked. 
Question 1: communication and content mark grid – Foundation tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Some relevant, basic information without development 
● Uses language to inform, give short descriptions and express opinions with 
limited success 
● Uses limited selection of common, familiar vocabulary and expression with frequent 
repetition 
3–4 ● Mostly relevant information, minimal extra detail 
● Uses language to give short descriptions, simple information and opinions with 
variable success 
● Uses small selection of common, familiar vocabulary and expression with some 
repetition 
5–6 ● Relevant information with occasional extra detail 
● Uses language to give short descriptions, simple information and opinions with 
some success 
● Uses small selection of common, familiar vocabulary and expression with little 
repetition 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
42 
Question 1: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Foundation tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Produces simple, short sentences in isolation 
● Limited accurate application of a small selection of straightforward grammatical 
structures, limited success in referring to present events; frequently errors 
prevent meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Produces simple, short sentences with little linking 
● Inconsistently accurate application of a small selection of straightforward 
grammatical structures, inconsistently successful reference to present events; 
often errors occur that hinder clarity of communication and occasionally 
prevent meaning 
5–6 ● Produces simple sentences with some linking 
● Accurate application of a small selection of straightforward grammatical 
structures, refers successfully to present events as appropriate to the task; 
occasionally errors occur that hinder clarity of communication 
Additional guidance 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: the mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on 
coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the 
possessive adjective. 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of 
the writing. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
43 
Question 2 – Foundation tier (16 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria given in two 
mark grids: 
● communication and content  
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
This question requires students to write in a formal style/register (see Additional guidance). 
The student is expected to produce 40–50 words for this task. The number of words is 
approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer words than 
recommended in the word count. All work produced by the student must be marked. 
 
Question 2: communication and content mark grid – Foundation tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Limited information given likely to consist of single words and phrases 
● Limited ability to use language to present simple facts, inform and note down key 
points; expression is frequently constrained and communication often 
breaks down 
● Repetitive use of a limited selection of common words and phrases; heavy 
reliance on language of the stimulus material to express thoughts 
● Knowledge of register and style is rarely evident because of restricted use of 
vocabulary and expression 
3–4 ● Some brief information given, basic points made without development 
● Occasional success in using language to present simple facts, information and to 
note down key points but expression is sometimes constrained and 
communication occasionally breaks down 
● Limited use of common, familiar vocabulary and expression with 
frequent repetition; some reliance on language of the stimulus material to express 
thoughts 
● Occasional appropriate use of register and style 
5–6 ● Some relevant information given appropriate to the task, basic points made with 
little development 
● Uses language with some success, to present simple facts, information and to 
note down key points, expression is occasionally constrained 
● Uses a small range of, common, familiar vocabulary and expression, mostly 
independently selected, with some repetition; mostly goes beyond the language of 
the stimulus material 
● Mostly appropriate use of register and style, mostly sustained 
7–8 ● Relevant information given appropriate to the task, basic points made with 
some development 
● Uses language mostly with success, to present simple facts, information and to 
note down key points using simple ideas 
● Uses independently selected, common, familiar vocabulary and expression with 
little repetition; goes beyond the language of the stimulus material 
● Appropriate use of register and style sustained 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
44 
 
Additional guidance 
Independently selected vocabulary and expression: students may use key words from 
the stimulus material but to demonstrate their knowledge of vocabulary and ability to 
express themselves independently they must be able to use vocabulary and expression that 
is not in the stimulus material. 
Register and style definition: formal register and style includes, for example, avoidance 
of slang, over-familiar language, exaggeration, ‘text-speak’, inappropriate colloquialisms or 
writing in a conversational style. Formal register and style require the use of the formal 
structure when using, for example, verbs, personal pronouns and possessive adjectives. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
45 
Question 2: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Foundation tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Repetitive use of minimal selection of straightforward grammatical structures 
● Produces individual words/set phrases 
● Limited accuracy in grammatical structures used, limited success in referring to 
present and future events; regular errors prevent meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Use of a restricted range of straightforward grammatical structures, 
frequent repetition 
● Produces simple, short sentences, which are not linked 
● Occasional accuracy in grammatical structures used, occasional success in 
referring to present and future events; sometimes errors prevent meaning being 
conveyed 
5–6 ● Uses straightforward grammatical structures, some repetition 
● Produces simple, short sentences; minimal linking 
● Some accurate use of straightforward grammatical structures, some success in 
referring to present and future events to meet the requirements of the task; 
occasionally errors prevent meaning being conveyed 
7–8 ● Uses straightforward grammatical structures, occasional repetition 
● Produces predominantly simple sentences occasionally linked together 
● Mostly accurate use of straightforward grammatical structures, mostly successful 
references to present and future events to meet the requirements of the task; 
occasionally errors hinder clarity of communication 
Additional guidance 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: the mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on 
coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements. 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the 
possessive adjective. 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
46 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
47 
Question 3 – Foundation tier (20 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria given in two 
mark grids: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
This question contains four bullet points that form part of the task. Failure to cover all four 
bullet points will impact on the marks that can be awarded against the requirements of the 
two mark grids for this question. There is no requirement for even coverage of the bullet 
points in any band. However, in order to access marks in the top band, students must refer 
to all bullet points and meet the other assessment criteria in the top band. 
This question requires students to write in an informal style (see Additional guidance). 
The student is expected to produce 80–90 words for this task. The number of words is 
approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer words than 
recommended in the word count. All work produced by the student must be marked. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
48 
Question 3: communication and content mark grid – Foundation tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Communicates brief information relevant to the task with little development 
● Limited adaptation of language to narrate, inform and interest; straightforward 
personal opinions are given with limited justification 
● Expresses straightforward thoughts and ideas; uses common, familiar language 
with repetition 
● Variable use of appropriate register and style 
4–6 ● Communicates information relevant to the task, with development of the 
occasional key point and idea 
● Some effective adaptation of language to narrate and inform; attempts are 
made to interest and give convincing personal opinions which are occasionally 
successful 
● Expresses mainly straightforward thoughts and ideas with the occasional 
individual thought/idea; some different examples of common, 
familiar language 
● Appropriate use of register and style is evident but with inconsistencies 
7–9 ● Communicates information relevant to the task, with development of some key 
points and ideas 
● Mostly effective adaptation of language to narrate and inform, some effective 
language to interest and give convincing personal opinions 
● Some examples of creative language use to express individual thoughts and 
ideas; a variety of mainly common, familiar language with the occasional 
example of uncommon language 
● Appropriate use of register and style is evident but with occasional 
inconsistency 
10–12 ● Communicates information relevant to the task with expansion of key points 
and ideas 
● Effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest and give convincing 
personal opinions 
● Frequent examples of creative language use to express individual thoughts and 
ideas; a variety of vocabulary and expression, some examples of uncommon 
language 
● Appropriate use of register and style throughout with minimal inconsistency 
 
Additional guidance 
Creative language use – examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● using language, including familiar, high-frequency and simple language, to respond to 
unfamiliar/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to maintain 
interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, to 
convince. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
49 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view which go 
beyond the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
Register and style definition: informal register and style – examples of informal style 
include colloquial, conversational language that students would use with friends. It also 
requires use of the informal structure when using, for example, verbs, personal pronouns 
and possessive adjectives. 
Adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest and give convincing opinions: 
adapts language to achieve different purposes in the language; students may adapt language 
more effectively for one purpose than another, for example they may use language 
effectively to narrate but less effectively to interest or give a convincing opinion. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
50 
Question 3: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Foundation tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Uses straightforward grammatical structures, some repetition 
● Produces brief, simple sentences, limited linking of sentences 
● Variable accuracy with language and structures, variable success when referring 
to past, present and future events, regular ambiguity; often errors prevent 
meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Uses mostly straightforward grammatical structures, occasional repetition 
● Produces occasionally extended sentences linked with familiar, straightforward 
conjunctions 
● Some accurate language and structures, including some successful references to 
past, present and future events, some ambiguity; often errors occur that hinder 
clarity of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
5–6 ● Different examples of straightforward grammatical structures are evident 
● Produces some extended sentences that are linked with familiar, straightforward 
conjunctions 
● Frequently accurate language and structures, including mostly successful 
references to past, present and future events, occasional ambiguity; sometimes 
errors occur that hinder clarity of communication 
7–8 ● Some variation of grammatical structures, occasional complex structure 
● Produces frequently extended sentences, well linked together 
● Generally accurate language and structures, including successful references to 
past, present and future events; occasionally errors occur that hinder clarity of 
communication 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language. 
Straightforward grammatical structures is considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
51 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the 
possessive adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of 
the writing. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
52 
Question 4 – Foundation tier (12 marks) 
Translation mark grids and example responses 
Mark grid for sentences (a), (b) and (c), which are worth 2 marks each. The 
mark grid will be applied to each individual sentence. 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1 ● Meaning partially communicated with errors that hinder clarity or prevent meaning 
being conveyed 
2 ● Meaning fully communicated with occasional errors that do not hinder clarity 
 
Mark grid for sentences (d) and (e), which are worth 3 marks each. The mark 
grid will be applied to each individual sentence. 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1 ● Some words are communicated but the overall meaning of the sentence is not 
communicated 
2 ● The meaning of the sentence is partially communicated 
● Linguistic structures and vocabulary are mostly accurate with some errors that 
hinder clarity or prevent meaning being conveyed 
3 ● The meaning of the sentence is fully communicated 
● Linguistic structures and vocabulary are accurate with only occasional errors that 
do not hinder clarity 
Additional guidance 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the 
possessive adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of 
the writing. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
53 
Assessment criteria for the Higher tier 
Question 1 – Higher tier (20 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria given in two 
mark grids: 
• communication and content 
• linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
This question contains four bullet points that form part of the task. Failure to cover all four 
bullet points will impact on the marks that can be awarded against the requirements of the 
two mark grids for this question. There is no requirement for even coverage of the bullet 
points in any band. However, in order to access marks in the top band, students must refer 
to all bullet points and meet the other assessment criteria in the top band. 
This question requires students to write in an informal style (see Additional guidance). 
The student is expected to produce 80–90 words for this task. The number of words is 
approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer words than 
recommended in the word count. All work produced by the student must be marked. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
54 
Question 1: communication and content mark grid – Higher tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Communicates brief information relevant to the task with little development 
● Limited adaptation of language to narrate, inform and interest; straightforward 
personal opinions are given with limited justification 
● Expresses straightforward thoughts and ideas; uses common, familiar language 
with repetition 
● Variable use of appropriate register and style 
4–6 ● Communicates information relevant to the task, with development of the 
occasional key point and idea 
● Some effective adaptation of language to narrate and inform; attempts are made 
to interest and give convincing personal opinions which are 
occasionally successful 
● Expresses mainly straightforward thoughts and ideas with the occasional 
individual thought/idea; some different examples of common, familiar language 
● Appropriate use of register and style is evident but with inconsistencies 
7–9 ● Communicates information relevant to the task, with development of some key 
points and ideas 
● Mostly effective adaptation of language to narrate and inform, some effective 
language to interest and give convincing personal opinions 
● Some examples of creative language use to express individual thoughts and 
ideas; a variety of mainly common, familiar language with the occasional 
example of uncommon language 
● Appropriate use of register and style is evident but with occasional inconsistency 
10–12 ● Communicates information relevant to the task with expansion of key points and 
ideas 
● Effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest and give convincing 
personal opinions 
● Frequent examples of creative language use to express individual thoughts and 
ideas; a variety of vocabulary and expression, some examples of uncommon 
language 
● Appropriate use of register and style throughout, with minimal inconsistency 
Additional guidance 
Creative language use: examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● using language, including familiar, high frequency and simple language, to respond to 
unfamiliar/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to maintain 
interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, to 
convince. 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view that go beyond 
the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
55 
Register and style definition: informal register and style – examples of informal style 
include colloquial, conversational language that students would use with friends. It also 
requires use of the informal structure when using, for example, verbs, personal pronouns 
and possessive adjectives. 
Adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest and give convincing opinions: 
adapts language to achieve different purposes in the language; students may adapt language 
more effectively for one purpose than another, for example they may use language 
effectively to narrate but less effectively to interest or give a convincing opinion. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
56 
Question 1: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Higher tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Uses straightforward grammatical structures, some repetition 
● Produces brief, simple sentences, limited linking of sentences 
● Variable accuracy with language and structures, variable success when referring 
to past, present and future events, regular ambiguity; often errors prevent 
meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Uses mostly straightforward grammatical structures, occasional repetition 
● Produces occasionally extended sentences linked with familiar, straightforward 
conjunctions 
● Some accurate language and structures, including some successful references to 
past, present and future events, some ambiguity; often errors occur that hinder 
clarity of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
5–6 ● Different examples of straightforward grammatical structures are evident 
● Produces some extended sentences that are linked with familiar, straightforward 
conjunctions 
● Frequently accurate language and structures, including mostly successful 
references to past, present and future events, occasional ambiguity; sometimes 
errors occur that hinder clarity of communication 
7–8 ● Some variation of grammatical structures, occasional complex structure 
● Produces frequently extended sentences, well linked together 
● Generally accurate language and structures, including successful references to 
past, present and future events; occasionally errors occur that hinder clarity of 
communication 
 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● all grammar and structures included in the grammar list that are specific to 
Higher tier GCSE 
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language. 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, 
high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
57 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the 
possessive adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of 
the writing. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
58 
Question 2 – Higher tier (28 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria contained in 
two mark grids: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
This question contains four bullet points that form part of the task. Failure to cover all four 
bullet points will impact on the marks that can be awarded against the requirements of the 
two mark grids for this question (see below). There is no requirement for even coverage of 
the bullet points in any band. However, in order to access marks in the top band, students 
must refer to all bullet points and meet the other assessment criteria in the top band. 
This question requires students to write in a formal register/style (see Additional guidance). 
The student is expected to produce 130–150 words for this task. The number of words is 
approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer words than 
recommended in the word count. All work produced by the student must be marked. 
Question 2: communication and content mark grid – Higher tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–4 ● Communicates occasionally detailed information relevant to the task with 
occasionally effective development of key points and ideas 
● Some effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest/convince 
● Occasional examples of creative use of language to express individual thoughts, 
ideas and points of view, occasional justification; variety of mainly common, 
familiar language, occasional examples of uncommon language 
● Appropriate use of register and style with the occasional inconsistency 
5–8 ● Communicates some detailed information relevant to the task, frequently 
effective development of key points and ideas 
● Frequently effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest/convince 
● Examples of creative use of language to express some individual thoughts, ideas 
and points of view, some justified; some variation of vocabulary and expression 
with some examples of uncommon language 
● Appropriate use of register and style with few inconsistencies 
9–12 ● Communicates detailed information relevant to the task, with mostly effective 
development of key points and ideas 
● Mostly effective adaptation of language, to narrate, inform, interest/convince 
● Creative use of language to express a range of individual thoughts, ideas and 
points of view, most of which are justified; variety of vocabulary and expression, 
frequent examples of uncommon language 
● Predominantly appropriate use of register and style 
13–16 ● Communicates detailed information relevant to the task, with consistently 
effective development of key points and ideas 
● Consistently effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, 
interest/convince 
● Creative use of language to express and fully justify a wide range of individual 
thoughts, ideas and points of view; wide variety of vocabulary and expression, 
many examples of uncommon language 
● Consistent use of appropriate register and style throughout 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
59 
 
Additional guidance 
Creative use of language: examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● using language, including familiar, high frequency and simple language, to respond to 
unfamiliar/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to maintain 
interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, to 
convince. 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view that go beyond 
the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
Adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest/convince: adapts language to 
achieve different purposes in the language; students may adapt language more effectively 
for one purpose than another, for example they may use language effectively to narrate but 
less effectively to interest/convince. 
Register and style definition: formal register and style includes, for example, avoidance 
of slang, over-familiar language, exaggeration, ‘text-speak’, inappropriate colloquialisms or 
writing in a conversational style. Formal register and style require the use of the formal 
structure when using, for example, verbs, personal pronouns and possessive adjectives. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
60 
Question 2: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Higher tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Uses a variety of mainly straightforward grammatical structures, occasional 
examples of repetitive complex language 
● Occasional sequences of fluent writing, occasionally extended, well-linked 
sentences 
● Straightforward grammatical structures are largely accurate with occasional 
accurate use of complex language, some successful references to past, present 
and future events but some ambiguity; errors occur that sometimes hinder clarity 
of communication 
4–6 ● Some variation of grammatical structures, including some repetitive instances of 
complex language 
● Prolonged sequences of fluent writing, some extended, well-linked sentences 
● Generally accurate language and structures, frequently successful references to 
past, present and future events, occasional ambiguity; errors occur that 
occasionally hinder clarity of communication 
7–9 ● Uses a variety of grammatical structures including some different examples of 
complex language 
● Predominantly fluent response; frequent extended sentences, mostly well linked 
● Mostly accurate language and structures, mostly successful references to past, 
present and future events; errors occur but they rarely hinder clarity of 
communication 
10–12 ● Uses a wide variety of grammatical structures, including complex language 
● Fluent response throughout with extended, well-linked sentences 
● Consistently accurate language and structures, consistently successful references 
to past, present and future events; any errors do not hinder the clarity of the 
communication 
 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● all grammar and structures included in the grammar list that are specific to 
Higher tier GCSE 
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language. 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
• repetitive, simple word order 
• short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, 
high-frequency structures 
• simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
61 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the 
possessive adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of 
the writing. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
62 
Question 3 – Higher tier (12 marks) 
Translation mark grid and example response 
Translation mark grid assesses both communication and content and linguistic knowledge 
and accuracy. When awarding marks, the student’s response across the whole paragraph 
should be considered. 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Meaning of some individual words or phrases is conveyed; frequent 
omissions/incorrectly communicated words and phrases/mother-tongue 
interference 
● Some straightforward structures are accurate but regular errors prevent meaning 
of individual phrases/sentences being conveyed 
4–6 ● The meaning of the passage is partially communicated, some words and phrases 
are omitted/incorrectly communicated 
● Language and structures are accurate in some phrases and sentences but some 
errors prevent meaning being conveyed 
7–9 ● The meaning of the passage is mostly communicated, occasional words are 
omitted/incorrectly communicated 
● Mostly accurate language and structures; errors occur that occasionally hinder 
clarity and in rare instances prevent meaning being conveyed 
10–12 ● The meaning of the passage is fully communicated 
● Consistently accurate language and structures, any errors do not hinder clarity 
Additional guidance 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inappropriate tense formation, mismatch of subject and the 
possessive adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of 
the writing. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is carrying out the action, for example using the incorrect 
person of the verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
63 
Assessment Objectives 
 
Students must: % in GCSE 
AO1 Listening – understand and respond to different types of spoken 
language 
25 
AO2 Speaking – communicate and interact effectively in speech 25 
AO3 Reading – understand and respond to different types of written 
language 
25 
AO4 Writing – communicate in writing 25 
Total 100% 
 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
 
Paper 
Assessment Objectives Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives AO1 % AO2 % AO3 % AO4 % 
Paper 1: Listening and 
understanding in Italian 
25 0 0 0 25% 
Paper 2: Speaking in Italian 0 25 0 0 25% 
Paper 3: Reading and 
understanding in Italian 
0 0 25 0 25% 
Paper 4: Writing in Italian 0 0 0 25 25% 
Total for GCSE 25% 25% 25% 25% 100% 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
64 
3 Administration and general information 
Entries 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for this qualification can be found in 
our UK Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations officers and is 
available on our website: qualifications.pearson.com 
Discount code and performance tables 
Students taking the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian must take all 
assessments in either the Foundation tier or the Higher tier only. 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more than one GCSE, or other Level 2 
qualifications with the same discount code, will have only the grade for their 'first entry' 
counted for the purpose of the school and college performance tables (please see 
Appendix 6: Codes). For further information about what constitutes 'first entry' and full 
details of how this policy is applied, please refer to the DfE website: 
www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-education 
Students should be advised that if they take two GCSEs with the same discount code, 
schools and colleges they wish to progress to are likely to take the view that this 
achievement is equivalent to only one GCSE. The same view may be taken if students take 
two GCSEs or other Level 2 qualifications that have different discount codes but have 
significant overlap of content. Students or their advisers who have any doubts about their 
subject combinations should check with the institution they wish to progress to before 
embarking on their programmes. 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, 
special consideration and malpractice 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality policy requires all students to 
have equal opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our qualifications 
to be awarded in a way that is fair to every student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the Equality Act 2010) are not, 
when they are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in comparison to 
students who do not share that characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification and that 
this achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their peers. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be available in English, with the exception of specific 
questions in the listening, reading and writing assessments. 
For speaking and writing assessments, all student work must be in Italian. For listening and 
reading, all student work must follow the instruction provided for the individual question. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
65 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with special 
educational needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to: 
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the assessment. 
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an individual 
student with a disability, without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding bodies comply with the duty under the 
Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students will 
then know what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for assessment. 
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable adjustments 
where a person with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in undertaking an 
assessment. The awarding organisation is required to take reasonable steps to overcome 
that disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be unique to that individual and 
therefore might not be in the list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of factors, 
including: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding 
organisation, or affects timeframes or the security or integrity of the assessment. This is 
because the adjustment is not ‘reasonable’. 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student's mark or grade to 
reflect temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the 
examination/assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a material 
effect on a candidate’s ability to take an assessment or demonstrate their level of attainment 
in an assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to apply for access arrangements 
and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special 
consideration, please refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
66 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that compromises or seeks to 
compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in examinations must be reported to Pearson using a JCQ Form M1 
(available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to Investigations Team, Pearson, 190 High Holborn, 
London, WC1V 7BH. Please provide as much information and supporting documentation as 
possible. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice constitutes staff or centre malpractice. 
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and maladministration of 
our qualifications. As with candidate malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is any act that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the 
integrity of the qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported 
immediately, before any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson on a 
JCQ Form M2(a) (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form, 
supporting documentation and as much information as possible can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to Investigations Team, Pearson, 
190 High Holborn, London, WC1V 7BH. Note that the final decision regarding 
appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the document 
General and Vocational Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments Policies and Procedures, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice. 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to comply with the requirements of 
Ofqual's General Conditions of Recognition. 
The raw marks for papers 1, 3 and 4 in this qualification will be scaled by Pearson to 
represent the relative weighting of 25% for each paper. 
Foundation and Higher tier 
Paper  Weighting  Raw marks Scaling factor Scaling mark 
1 25% 50 1.400 70 
2 25% 70 1.000 70 
3 25% 50 1.400 70 
4 25% 60 1.167 70 
 
This GCSE qualification will be graded and certificated on a nine-grade scale from 9 to 1 
using the total subject mark where 9 is the highest grade. Individual papers are not graded. 
For Foundation tier, grades 1–5 are available and for Higher tier, grades 4–9 are available, 
however if the mark achieved is a smaller number of marks below the 4/3 grade boundary, 
then a grade 3 may be awarded. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
67 
The first certification opportunity for this qualification will be 2019. 
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum judged by Pearson to be of 
sufficient standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U result. 
Student recruitment and progression 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this qualification. 
Progression 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian builds on the programme of study 
at Key Stages 2 and 3, focusing on the development of all four language skills, listening, 
speaking, reading and writing. Grammar and the mastering of linguistic features are key 
elements of this specification as is the inclusion of authentic written and spoken sources. 
Students will be expected to be able to talk about themselves as well as matters that go 
beyond their immediate experience. They should be able to express and justify their own 
opinions in speech and writing, building on the fluency and spontaneity developed at 
Key Stage 3. 
The skill of translation will be developed from those skills initiated from Key Stage 3. The 
broader range of topics promotes a clear progression in grammar and vocabulary from Key 
Stage 3 and will increase linguistic and cognitive demand. The grammar and vocabulary lists 
illustrate the level required for this qualification. 
This qualification offers a suitable progression route to GCE A Level in Italian. In addition, the 
study of one language at GCSE can facilitate and help promote the learning of other 
languages. The qualification may also add to an individual’s employability profile. 
Students will be able to apply their knowledge, skills and understanding to authentic, real-life 
contexts. They will develop transferable skills that support higher education study and the 
transition to employment, together with an understanding and appreciation of Italian-
speaking countries and their cultures. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
68 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
69 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Candidate speaking examination record form (CS2) 71 
Appendix 2: Grammar list 72 
Appendix 3: Vocabulary list 75 
Appendix 4: The context for the development of this qualification 133 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 135 
Appendix 6: Codes 136 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
70 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
71 
Appendix 1: Candidate speaking examination record form (CS2) 
 
A separate form must be submitted for Foundation tier and Higher tier candidates. Please indicate the tier below. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian 1IN0:       2F/2H*                     (*Please delete as appropriate) 
Centre name:  Centre number:  
 
Candidate name and number Declaration and permissions signature 
and date* 
Role play Picture-
based 
discussion 
Conversation 
(1)                  (2) 
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
Teacher name Declaration and permissions signature 
and date* 
        
            
 
*I declare that the above examinations have been carried out in line with Pearson and JCQ documentation for the conduct of the examinations and agree to 
this work being used to support teachers and examiners. 
Please photocopy and continue on a separate sheet as necessary. Please do not write in shaded boxes – these areas are for Pearson Examiner use 
only. A ‘Word’ version of this form is available on our website to facilitate administration in centres. 

 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
72 
Appendix 2: Grammar list 
GCSE students will be expected to have acquired knowledge and understanding of Italian 
grammar during their course. In the examination they will be required to apply their 
knowledge and understanding, drawing from the following lists. The examples in brackets are 
indicative, not exclusive. For structures marked (R) only receptive knowledge is required. 
Italian (Foundation tier) 
Nouns: 
● gender 
● singular and plural forms, including common irregulars e.g. la mano, il cinema, il/la 
ciclista, la foto, gli uomini 
Articles: 
● definite and indefinite 
● partitive 
Adjectives: 
● agreement 
● position 
● comparative and superlative: regular (più di, meno di, il più, il meno, tanto … quanto, cosí 
… come) 
● demonstrative (questo, quello) 
● indefinite: singular/plural usage ( tutto, ogni, altro, qualche, alcuni) 
● possessive, short and long forms 
● interrogative (qual, quale, quali) 
● use of di and che after comparatives 
● ecco 
Adverbs: 
● formation 
● comparative and superlative 
● interrogative (come, quando) 
● adverbs of time and place (oggi, domani, qui, qua) 
● common adverbial phrases 
● common expressions of quantity (abbastanza, mezzo, molto, poco, un po’, tanto , 
troppo,quanto, quarto) 
Pronouns: 
● subject, including si 
● object: direct and indirect 
● direct and indirect object after an infinitive or gerund (R) 
● position and order of object pronouns (R) 
● reflexive 
● relative (che, cui) (quello che,il cui – (R)) 
● disjunctive/emphatic 
● demonstrative (questo etc) 
● indefinite (nessuno, niente, ogni, qualcuno, qualcosa, qualche, uno, ognuno) 
● possessive (il mio etc – (R)) 
● interrogative (chi, che, cosa, che cosa, quanto/a, quanti/e) 
● after ecco 
● use of ci, vi (R) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
73 
Verbs: 
● regular and irregular verbs, including reflexive verbs 
● all persons of the verb, singular and plural 
● negative forms 
● interrogative forms  
● modes of address (tu, voi, Lei) 
● impersonal verbs (fa, bisogna) 
● verbs followed by an infinitive, with or without a preposition 
● tenses:  
o present 
o stare + gerund (R) 
o imperfect (avere, essere, stare, fare) (other common verbs (R)) 
o immediate future (vengo subito, vado a fare la spesa) 
o future  
o perfect with avere, essere + agreement 
o conditional (vorrei + mi piacerebbe only) 
o pluperfect (R) 
● imperative: common forms, including negative 
● passive voice: present tense (R) 
● gerund 
Negatives: 
non, non … alcuno/a, non ancora, non … che, non … mai, non … né … né, non … niente, non 
… nessuno, non … nulla, non … più, non solo …ma anche , neanche, nemmeno, niente, 
nessuno, mai 
Prepositions: 
● common prepositions eg a, da, di, in, su, con, entro, fra, per, senza, tra 
● common compound prepositions eg vicino a, senza di, lontano da 
● contracted forms of prepositions + definite article (a, da, di, in, su) 
● use of da with present tense 
Conjunctions: 
● common coordinating conjunctions eg e/ed, ma, o (… o), oppure 
● common subordinating conjunctions eg quando, perché, anche se, poiché, se 
Number, quantity, dates and time: 
● ordinal and cardinal numbers 
● common quantities 
● time and dates 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
74 
Italian (Higher tier) 
All grammar and structures listed for Foundation tier, as well as: 
Students entering for Higher Tier assessments will be required to apply all grammar and 
structures listed for Foundation Tier, in addition to the new grammar and structures listed for 
Higher Tier. 
Nouns: 
● less common irregulars e.g. il dito, la dita 
Adjectives: 
● common irregular comparative and superlative, including il migliore, il peggiore 
● use of quello and bello before a noun 
Adverbs: 
● common irregular comparative and superlative, including meglio, peggio 
Pronouns: 
● use of ci, ne 
● combinations of direct and indirect pronouns and their modifications 
● position and order of object pronouns 
● impersonal use of si (si fanno i compiti) 
● use of plural adjectives after si 
● direct and indirect object after an infinitive or gerund 
● relative: il quale, il cui, quello che 
● possessive (il mio etc)  
● less common indefinite e.g. ciascuno, parecchi, qualsiasi, qualunque 
Verbs: 
● dependent infinitives (far vedere) 
● perfect infinitive e.g. after dopo 
● impersonal constructions (si dice, si crede) 
● tenses:  
o stare + gerund 
o imperfect 
o future 
o conditional 
o pluperfect 
o future perfect (R) 
o conditional perfect (R) 
● passive voice 
● subjunctive mood: present, in commonly used expressions; past (R) 
Prepositions: 
● use of da with imperfect tense 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
75 
Appendix 3: Vocabulary list 
The following vocabulary list is intended to assist teachers in planning their work. It provides 
the core generic vocabulary that all students will need to acquire. It is an essential 
vocabulary list that students should refer to and build on when preparing for the duration of 
their study for the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian. 
However, students entered for the Foundation tier are required to understand and respond to 
common or familiar words and/or forms of words that are not on the vocabulary list. 
Similarly, students entered for the Higher tier are required to understand and respond to 
common or familiar words and/or forms of words that are not on the vocabulary list and 
which are less common or familiar than those used in relation to Foundation tier 
assessments. 
Word lists 
Section 1: High-frequency language 
Common verbs 
Common adjectives 
Common adverbs 
Prepositions 
Colours 
Numbers 
Ordinal numbers 
Quantities and measures 
Some useful connecting words 
Time expressions 
Times of day 
Days of the week 
Months and seasons of the year 
Question words 
Other useful expressions 
Other high-frequency words 
Countries 
Continents 
Nationalities 
Areas/mountains/seas 
Useful acronyms 
Social conventions 
Language used in dialogue and messages 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
76 
Section 2: Topic-specific language 
Although words are listed under specific topic headings, the words are not exclusive to those 
particular headings. Many words also relate to other themes but may be listed in only one 
theme. Many common verbs are given in the verb list, with a few others included under a 
specific topic. 
Each topic has been highlighted in bold. 
All topics must be studied in the context of both the student’s home country and 
that of countries and communities where Italian is spoken. 
 
Theme 1: Identity and culture 
Who am I?: relationships; when I was younger; what my friends and family are like; what 
makes a good friend; interests; socialising with friends and family; role models 
Daily life: customs and everyday life; food and drink; shopping; social media and 
technology (use of, advantages and disadvantages) 
Cultural life: celebrations and festivals; reading; music; sport; film and television 
 
Theme 2: Local area, holiday and travel 
Holidays: preferences, experiences and destinations 
Travel and tourist transactions: travel and accommodation; asking for help and dealing 
with problems; directions; eating out; shopping 
Town, region and country: weather; places to see; things to do 
 
Theme 3: School 
What school is like: school types; school day; subjects; rules and pressures; celebrating 
success 
School activities: school trips; events and exchanges 
 
Theme 4: Future aspirations, study and work 
Using languages beyond the classroom: forming relationships; travel; employment 
Ambitions: further study; volunteering; training 
Work: jobs; careers and professions 
 
Theme 5: International and global dimension 
Bringing the world together: sports events; music events; campaigns and good causes 
Environmental issues: being ‘green’; access to natural resources 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
77 
 
Section 1: High-frequency language 
Common verbs  
to accept accettare 
to accompany accompagnare 
to add aggiungere 
to advise consigliare 
to allow permettere 
to answer/to reply rispondere 
to apply rivolgersi, fare domanda 
to argue litigare 
to arrive arrivare 
to ask chiedere/domandare 
to ask a question fare una domanda 
to avoid evitare 
to bath, to bathe fare il bagno 
to be essere 
to be able to potere, essere capace di 
to be about to (do) stare per (fare) 
to be born nascere 
to be called chiamarsi 
to be careful stare attento/fare attenzione 
to be hot/cold avere caldo/freddo 
to be hungry avere fame 
to be in a hurry avere fretta 
to be interested in interessarsi a/essere interessato a 
to be keen to avere voglia di, non vedere l'ora di 
to be located trovarsi/essere situato 
to be lucky essere fortunato/avere fortuna 
to be sleepy avere sonno 
to be successful avere successo, riuscire 
to be thirsty avere sete 
to borrow prendere in prestito/prestare 
to break rompere 
to bring portare 
to brush (teeth, hair) spazzolarsi (i denti, i capelli) 
to buy comprare 
to call  chiamare 
to cancel cancellare 
to carry portare 
to change cambiare 
to chat chiacchierare 
to check controllare 
to choose scegliere 
to clean pulire 
to click  cliccare/fare clic 
to climb/go up salire, arrampicarsi 
to close chiudere 
to collide/to crash scontrarsi 
to come venire 
to complain reclamare, lamentarsi 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
78 
 
Common verbs (cont)  
to contact contattare 
to continue/carry on continuare 
to convince convincere 
to copy copiare 
to cost costare 
to count contare 
to cross, go across attraversare  
to cry piangere 
to dance ballare 
to decide decidere 
to describe descrivere 
to deserve meritare 
to die morire 
to discuss discutere 
to dismiss licenziare 
to do the vacuum cleaning passare l'aspirapolvere 
to do the washing up lavare i piatti 
to do, to make fare 
to download (music) scaricare 
to draw disegnare 
to dress vestirsi 
to drink bere 
to drive guidare 
to earn guadagnare 
to eat mangiare 
to enjoy oneself divertirsi 
to enter/go in entrare 
to escape scappare/fuggire 
to explain spiegare 
to express esprimere 
to fail (an exam) essere bocciato (in un esame) 
to fall cadere 
to fall asleep Addormentarsi  
to feed, nourish dar da mangiare, nutrire 
to feel sentire/sentirsi 
to fill riempire 
to fill out (a form) riempire (un modulo) 
to find trovare 
to finish, end finire, terminare 
to fly volare 
to follow seguire 
to forget dimenticare/dimenticarsi 
to forgive perdonare 
to get a good/bad mark prendere un bel/brutto voto 
to get angry arrabbiarsi 
to get dressed vestirsi 
to get dressed vestirsi 
to get on well with andare d'accordo con 
to get undressed svestirsi, spogliarsi 
to get up alzarsi 
to give dare 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
79 
 
Common verbs (cont) 
 
to give a gift fare un regalo 
to give back restituire 
to go andare  
to go down, get out of (bus, car, train) scendere (da)  
to go for a walk fare una passeggiata 
to go out uscire 
to go shopping andare a fare shopping/fare compere 
to go to bed andare a letto 
to go up, get onto (bus, car, train) salire (su) 
to harm/damage fare male a/danneggiare 
to hate odiare, detestare 
to have avere 
to have breakfast fare colazione 
to have dinner cenare 
to have lunch pranzare 
to have to/must dovere 
to hear sentire 
to help aiutare 
to hold tenere 
to hope sperare 
to hurry sbrigarsi 
to hurt (oneself) farsi male 
to imagine immaginare 
to improve migliorare 
to include includere 
to inform informare 
to introduce, to present (a person) presentare  
to interest interessare 
to invite invitare 
to iron stirare 
to jump saltare 
to justify giustificare 
to knock, hit bussare (alla porta), colpire 
to know (a fact) sapere 
to know (person, place) conoscere  
to land atterrare 
to last durare 
to laugh ridere 
to lay/to clear the table apparecchiare/sparecchiare (la tavola) 
to learn imparare, apprendere 
to leave (an object) lasciare 
to leave, to depart partire 
to lend prestare/dare in prestito 
to light, turn on accendere 
to like, to please piacere 
to listen ascoltare 
to live vivere 
to live (inhabit) abitare 
to look after/mind (child, dog) prendersi cura di, occuparsi 
to look for cercare 
to look like, to resemble assomigliare 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
80 
 
Common verbs (cont)  
to lose perdere 
to love amare 
to make a mistake fare un errore, sbagliare 
to manage (business) dirigere, gestire 
to mean/to signify significare/voler dire 
to meet incontrare 
to miss (train, bus etc) perdere  
to miss, to be lacking mancare 
to need aver bisogno di 
to note notare, rendersi conto 
to offer offrire 
to open aprire 
to order ordinare 
to organise organizzare 
to park parcheggiare 
to pass (an exam) passare/superare un esame 
to persuade persuadere 
to phone telefonare 
to play (game, sport) giocare 
to play (musical instrument) suonare  
to prefer preferire 
to prevent impedire 
to produce produrre 
to pull tirare 
to push spingere 
to put mettere 
to put on make up truccarsi 
to rain piovere 
to read leggere 
to realise rendersi conto, accorgersi 
to receive ricevere 
to recommend raccomandare, consigliare 
to refund rimborsare 
to regret, be sorry dispiacersi 
to remember ricordare/ricordarsi 
to rent/to hire affittare/noleggiare 
to repair riparare 
to repeat ripetere 
to replace sostituire 
to reserve/to book prenotare 
to rest riposarsi 
to return, to go back tornare/ritornare 
to revise ripassare 
to ride a bicycle/a horse andare in bicicletta/a cavallo 
to ring  chiamare (al telefono), suonare 
to run correre 
to save salvare, conservare 
to save (money) risparmiare 
to say, to tell dire 
to see vedere 
to seem sembrare 
to sell vendere 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
81 
 
Common verbs (cont)  
to send mandare, inviare 
to serve servire 
to show mostrare, far vedere 
to sign firmare 
to sing cantare 
to sit down sedersi 
to skate pattinare 
to sleep dormire 
to smile sorridere 
to smoke fumare 
to snow nevicare 
to speak parlare 
to spend (money) spendere 
to spend (time) passare 
to start/to begin cominciare/iniziare 
to stay/to remain stare, restare, rimanere 
to steal rubare 
to stop fermare 
to stop, to quit smettere 
to study studiare 
to succeed riuscire, avere successo 
to sunbathe prendere il sole 
to surf the internet navigare su internet 
to swim nuotare 
to switch off spegnere 
to take prendere 
to take off (plane) decollare  
to take photographs fare fotografie 
to tell/recount raccontare 
to thank ringraziare 
to think, believe pensare, credere 
to throw tirare 
to touch toccare 
to travel viaggiare 
to try cercare, provare 
to try on provare 
to turn girare 
to understand capire 
to use usare 
to visit (a person) andare a trovare 
to visit (a place) visitare 
to wait for aspettare 
to wake up svegliarsi 
to walk camminare 
to want volere 
to wash, to wash (oneself) lavare, lavarsi 
to wear indossare 
to weigh pesare 
to win vincere 
to wish desiderare 
to work lavorare 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
82 
 
Common verbs (cont)  
to work (function) funzionare 
to worry preoccuparsi 
to write scrivere 
Common adjectives  
active attivo/a 
alike, similar simile 
all tutto/a 
angry arrabbiato/a 
awful orribile 
beautiful bello/a 
big grande 
boring noioso/a 
brave coraggioso/a 
broken rotto/a 
clean pulito/a 
close (nearby) vicino/a 
closed chiuso/a 
comfortable comodo/a 
delicious delizioso/a 
difficult difficile 
dirty sporco/a 
disgusting disgustoso/a, schifoso/a 
easy facile 
expensive caro/a, costoso/a 
exciting eccitante 
fabulous favoloso/a 
fair giusto/a 
false  falso/a  
famous famoso/a 
fantastic fantastico/a 
fashionable alla moda/di moda 
fast veloce, rapido/a 
fat grasso/a 
favourite preferito/a 
flexible flessibile 
free (at no cost) gratuito/a, gratis 
free (unoccupied, available) libero/a, disponibile 
friendly amichevole 
frightening spaventoso/a 
full pieno/a 
funny/entertaining/amusing divertente 
funny (comical) buffo/a, comico/a 
generous generoso/a 
good buono/a 
good (well-behaved, good at something) bravo/a 
grateful grato/a 
great  grande 
great (marvellous) stupendo/a, fantastico/a 
happy, cheerful felice, allegro/a 
hard duro/a 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
83 
 
Common adjectives (cont)  
hardworking diligente 
healthy sano/a  
heavy pesante 
high, tall  alto/a  
honest onesto/a 
hot caldo/a 
ideal ideale 
in a good mood di buon umore 
in a hurry di fretta 
independent indipendente 
intelligent, clever intelligente 
kind gentile 
large grande 
last/latest ultimo/a 
lazy pigro/a 
light leggero/a 
long lungo/a 
lost perduto/a, smarrito/a 
magnificent magnifico/a 
marvellous meraviglioso/a 
mature maturo/a 
modern moderno/a 
narrow stretto/a 
naughty cattivo/a 
necessary necessario/a 
negative negativo/a 
new nuovo/a 
next prossimo/a 
nice, likeable (person) simpatico/a 
noisy rumoroso/a 
normal normale 
numerous numeroso/a 
old vecchio/a, (grande)  
old (former) ex 
old fashioned antiquato/a, fuori moda 
open aperto/a 
optimistic ottimista 
other altro/a 
own proprio/a 
(im)patient (im)paziente 
peaceful calmo/a, tranquillo/a 
perfect perfetto/a 
pessimistic pessimista 
pleased contento/a 
pleasant piacevole 
(im)polite (mal)educato/a 
popular popolare 
positive positivo/a 
practical pratico/a 
pretty carino/a 
quiet tranquillo/a, silenzioso/a 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
84 
 
Common adjectives (cont)  
ready pronto/a 
real reale 
recent recente 
responsible responsabile 
rich ricco/a 
ridiculous ridicolo/a 
ripe maturo/a 
rotten marcio/a 
sad triste 
safe sicuro/a 
same stesso/a 
satisfied soddisfatto/a 
selfish egoista 
sensational sensazionale 
serious serio/a 
short corto/a, basso/a (persona) 
shy timido/a 
silent silenzioso/a 
silly, stupid stupido/a, sciocco/a 
slim snello/a 
small piccolo/a 
strict severo/a 
strong forte 
superb superbo/a 
surprised sorpreso/a 
talkative chiacchierone/a 
thin (person) magro/a 
tidy ordinato/a 
tired stanco/a 
tiring faticoso/a, stancante 
traditional tradizionale 
true  vero/a  
typical tipico/a 
ugly brutto/a 
unbelievable incredibile 
unfair ingiusto/a 
unhappy triste, infelice 
unhealthy non sano/a, dannoso/a 
unpleasant (person) antipatico/a 
useful utile 
useless inutile 
valid valido/a 
valuable prezioso/a, di valore 
weak debole 
worried preoccupato/a 
young giovane 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
85 
 
Common adverbs 
 
(for) a long time per molto tempo, a lungo 
fortunately fortunatamente, per fortuna 
again ancora, di nuovo 
almost quasi 
already già 
also/too anche 
always sempre 
badly male 
below (under) sotto 
especially specialmente, particolarmente 
everywhere dappertutto, ovunque 
fairly, quite abbastanza 
generally in generale/generalmente 
here qui/qua 
immediately immediatamente 
never (non) mai 
nowhere da nessuna parte 
often spesso 
over there laggiù 
perhaps forse 
quickly rapidamente 
rarely raramente 
rather piuttosto 
really davvero, veramente 
recently recentemente 
sometimes qualche volta, a volte 
soon presto 
still ancora 
straight away immediatamente, subito 
there là, lì 
together insieme 
too (adjective) troppo 
unfortunately purtroppo, sfortunatamente 
up there lassù 
up to now finora 
usually di solito 
very molto 
well bene 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
86 
 
Prepositions 
 
about, approximately su/di/riguardo a, circa 
according to secondo 
above sopra 
after dopo 
against contro 
among tra/fra 
around intorno (a) 
at (someone’s house) a (casa di qn) 
at the end of alla fine di 
at, to a, in 
before prima 
behind dietro (a) 
between tra/fra 
during durante 
except tranne, eccetto 
far (from) lontano (da) 
for, in order to per 
from da (di) 
in  in, a 
in front of davanti a 
in the middle (of) nel mezzo (di) 
inside dentro, all'interno di 
near  vicino (a)  
next to accanto (a), di fianco (a) 
on  su (sopra a) 
on the corner of all'angolo di 
opposite di fronte a 
outside/out of fuori (da) 
through attraverso, per 
towards verso 
under sotto  
until fino a 
Colours 
 
black nero/a 
blue azzurro/a 
brown marrone 
colour colore 
chestnut brown castano/a 
dark (hair, skin, colour) scuro/a 
green verde 
grey grigio/a 
light chiaro/a 
navy-blue blu 
pink rosa 
orange arancione 
red rosso/a 
violet viola 
white bianco/a 
yellow giallo/a 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
87 
 
Numbers 
 
1 uno 
2 due 
3 tre 
4 quattro 
5 cinque 
6 sei 
7 sette 
8 otto 
9 nove 
10 dieci 
11 undici 
12 dodici 
13 tredici 
14 quattordici 
15 quindici 
16 sedici 
17 diciassette 
18 diciotto 
19 diciannove 
20 venti 
21 ventuno 
22 ventidue 
23 ventitre 
24 ventiquattro 
25 venticinque 
26 ventisei 
27 ventisette 
28 ventotto 
29 ventinove 
30 trenta 
31 trentuno 
32 etc. trentadue etc. 
40 quaranta 
50 cinquanta 
60 sessanta 
70 settanta 
80 ottanta 
90 novanta 
100 cento 
101 centouno 
120 centoventi 
200 duecento 
1000 mille 
1100 millecento 
2000 duemila 
100 centomila 
1.000.000 un milione 
2.000.000 due milioni 
1.000.000.000 un miliardo 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
88 
 
Ordinal numbers 
 
first primo/a 
second secondo/a 
third terzo/a 
fourth quarto/a 
fifth quinto/a 
sixth sesto/a 
seventh settimo/a 
eighth ottavo/a 
ninth nono/a 
tenth decimo/a 
eleventh undicesimo 
twelfth (etc.) dodicesimo/a (etc.) 
twenty first ventunesimo/a 
Quantities and measures 
 
a bottle (of) una bottiglia (di) 
a box (of) una scatola (di) 
a dozen una dozzina 
a jar (of) un vasetto/barattolo (di) 
a kilo (of) un chilo (di) 
a litre (of) un litro (di) 
a little (of) un po' (di) 
a packet (of) un pacchetto (di) 
a part (of) una parte (di) 
a piece (of) un pezzo (di) 
a quarter (of) un quarto (di) 
a slice (of) una fetta (di) 
a third (of) un terzo (di) 
centilitre centilitro (m) 
centimetre centimetro (m) 
enough abbastanza 
exactly esattamente 
gramme grammo (m) 
half metà 
kilogram chilo (m), chilogrammo (m) 
kilometre chilometro (m) 
less meno 
litre litro (m) 
maximum massimo 
metre metro (m) 
minimum minimo 
more più 
much/many, a lot of molto/molta, molti/molte 
nothing niente, nulla 
only solo/solamente 
quantity quantità 
several parecchi/parecchie, vari/varie 
some alcuni/alcune, qualche  
tin, box (of) scatola (di) 
too much, too many troppo/troppa, troppi/troppe 
weight peso (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
89 
 
Some useful connecting words 
 
according to secondo 
also anche 
and e 
because perché 
because of a causa di 
before prima  
but ma 
even if, though anche se 
finally alla fine, infine, finalmente 
first of all prima di tutto 
however comunque, però 
if se 
in order to per 
nevertheless tuttavia 
Or oppure/o 
perhaps forse 
since poiché, siccome, visto che 
so così 
then dopo, allora 
therefore perciò, quindi 
after dopo 
afternoon, in the afternoon pomeriggio (m), nel pomeriggio 
ago fa 
already già 
always sempre 
as soon as (non) appena 
at the same time nello stesso momento, contemporaneamente 
at the start all’inizio 
before prima 
day giorno (m), giornata 
Time expressions  
during/for durante/per 
early presto 
evening sera (f), serata (f) 
every day ogni giorno, tutti i giorni 
fortnight due settimane, quindici giorni 
from da 
from time to time ogni tanto 
last (i.e. last year) scorso, passato (i.e. l'anno scorso) 
last night (during the night) ieri notte 
last night (yesterday evening) ieri sera  
later tardi 
later dopo, più tardi, in seguito 
midday mezzogiorno (m) 
midnight  mezzanotte  
minute minuto (m) 
morning, in the morning mattina/mattino (m), la mattina 
next prossimo 
night, at night notte (f), la notte/di notte 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
90 
 
Time expressions (cont)  
now ora, adesso 
on time puntuale, in orario 
once una volta 
since da 
soon presto 
straightaway, immediately subito, immediatamente 
the day after tomorrow dopodomani 
the day before yesterday l’altro ieri 
the next day il giorno dopo 
the night before, eve la notte prima, la vigilia 
time tempo, ora 
today oggi 
tomorrow domani 
twice due volte 
week settimana 
Weekend fine settimana, weekend 
year anno (m) 
yesterday ieri 
Times of day 
 
a quarter past e un quarto 
a quarter to meno un quarto 
at one o'clock all'una  
at two o'clock, etc. alle due etc. 
five past, etc. e cique, etc. 
five to, etc.  meno cinque, etc. 
half past  e mezzo/e mezza 
hour ora 
in the afternoon (pm) del pomeriggio 
in the evening (pm) di sera 
in the morning (am) del mattino 
it's one o'clock è l'una 
it's two o'clock, etc. sono le due, etc. 
midday, noon mezzogiorno 
midnight mezzanotte 
minute minuto (m) 
second secondo (m) 
Days of the week 
 
Monday lunedì 
Tuesday martedì 
Wednesday mercoledì 
Thursday giovedì 
Friday venerdì 
Saturday sabato 
Sunday domenica 
(on) Monday morning lunedì mattina 
(on) Monday afternoon lunedì pomeriggio 
(on) Monday evening lunedì sera 
on Mondays al/il lunedì 
every Monday ogni lunedì, tutti i lunedì 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
91 
 
Months and seasons of the year 
 
month mese (m) 
January gennaio 
February febbraio 
March marzo 
April aprile 
May maggio 
June giugno 
July luglio 
August agosto 
September settembre 
October ottobre 
November novembre 
December dicembre 
season stagione 
(in) autumn (in) autunno (m) 
(in) spring (in) primavera 
(in) summer (in/d') estate 
(in) winter (in/d') inverno (m) 
Question words 
 
at what time? a che ora? 
how much, how many? quanto?/quanta?, quanti/quante? 
how? come? 
what colour? che colore? 
what/which? che/quale? 
what? che cosa? 
when? quando? 
where? dove? 
which one (s)? quale (quali)? 
who? chi? 
why? perché? 
Other useful expressions  
all the better tanto meglio 
good luck buona fortuna 
here you are/here it is ecco 
how do you spell that? come si scrive? 
I don’t know non (lo) so 
I don’t mind non importa 
I don’t understand non capisco 
I like it mi piace, mi piacciono 
I’m fine sto bene 
in my opinion secondo me 
it annoys me mi dà fastidio, mi irrita 
it depends dipende 
it doesn’t matter non importa 
it’s all the same to me per me è lo stesso 
it’s not worth it non ne vale la pena 
of course naturalmente 
ok (I agree) ok, d'accordo 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
92 
 
Other useful expressions (cont)  
once again ancora una volta 
personally personalmente 
so, so così così 
thank you grazie 
that’s enough basta/basta così 
there is/are c’è, ci sono 
what a shame (che) peccato 
what does that mean? che cosa significa?, che cosa vuol dire? 
with pleasure con piacere, volentieri 
Other high-frequency words 
 
as, like come 
everybody, all ognuno, tutti 
except tranne, eccetto 
figure (number) cifra (f) 
for example per/ad esempio 
Miss Signorina (Sig.na) (f) 
Mr (also Sir) Signor (Sig.) (m) 
Mrs (also Madam) Signora (Sig.ra) (f) 
no no 
not non 
number numero (m) 
phone number numero di telefono (m) 
reader lettore (m) lettrice (f) 
shape forma (f) 
someone qualcuno 
something qualcosa 
that/those quello/quella/quelli/quelle 
thing cosa (f) 
this/these questo/questa/questi/queste 
time (i.e. once) volta (f) 
type/kind/sort tipo (m), specie (f) 
way (manner) modo (m), maniera (f) 
with con 
without senza 
yes sì 
Countries 
 
Austria  Austria (f) 
Belgium Belgio (m) 
Canada Canada(m) 
China Cina (f) 
Denmark  Danimarca (f) 
England  Inghilterra (f) 
France  Francia (f) 
Germany  Germania (f) 
Great Britain  Gran Bretagna (f) 
Greece  Grecia (f) 
Holland  Olanda (f)  
India India (f) 
Ireland  Irlanda (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
93 
 
Countries (cont)  
Italy  Italia (f) 
Netherlands  Paesi Bassi (mpl) 
Russia  Russia (f) 
Scotland  Scozia (f) 
Spain  Spagna (f) 
Switzerland Svizzera (f) 
Turkey Turchia (f) 
United Kingdom  Regno Unito (m) 
United States  Stati Uniti (mpl) 
Wales Galles (m) 
Continents 
 
Africa Africa (f) 
Asia Asia (f) 
Australia Australia (f) 
Europe Europa (f) 
North America America del Nord (f) 
South America America del Sud (f) 
Nationalities 
 
American americano/a 
Austrian austriaco/a 
Belgian belga 
British britannico/a 
Canadian canadese 
Chinese cinese 
Danish danese 
Dutch olandese 
English inglese 
European europeo/a 
French francese 
German tedesco/a 
Greek greco/a 
Indian indiano/a 
Irish irlandese 
Italian italiano/a 
Russian russo/a 
Scottish scozzese 
Spanish spagnolo/a 
Swiss svizzero/a 
Turkish turco/a 
Welsh gallese 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
94 
 
Areas/mountains/seas  
Adriatic Sea Mar Adriatico (m) 
Ionian Sea Mar Ionio (m) 
Mediterranean Sea Mar Mediterraneo (m) 
province provincia (f) 
region regione (f) 
Sardinia Sardegna (f) 
Sicily Sicilia (f) 
the Alps Alpi (fpl) 
the Apennines (mountains) Appennini (mpl) 
the English Channel il canale della Manica (m) 
Tyrrhenian Sea Mar Tirreno (m) 
Useful acronyms 
 
European Union UE (Unione Europea) 
high speed train TAV (Treno ad alta velocità) 
Italian national railway company FS (Ferrovie dello Stato) 
Italian national statistics institute ISTAT (Istituto nazionale di statistica) 
Italian public TV and radio channels RAI (Radiotelevisione italiana) 
postcode CAP (Codice di avviamento postale) 
United Nations Organization ONU (Organizzazione delle Nazioni Unite) 
Social conventions  
best wishes tanti auguri 
don’t mention it prego 
enjoy yourself/yourselves! buon divertimento! 
good evening buonasera 
goodbye arrivederci, arrivederla 
goodnight buonanotte 
have a good journey buon viaggio 
have a good day/evening buona giornata/serata 
hello (on the telephone) pronto  
hello, good morning ciao, buongiorno 
help! aiuto! 
hi ciao 
I beg your pardon? Pardon? scusa?/scusi?, come? 
It’s a pleasure è un piacere 
no thank you no, grazie 
of course certo, naturalmente 
please  per favore, per piacere 
see you later ci vediamo più tardi 
see you soon a presto! 
see you tomorrow a domani, ci vediamo domani 
sorry (apology) scusa/scusi 
(I’m) sorry  mi dispiace 
thank you (very much) (molte) grazie 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
95 
 
Language used in dialogues and messages 
address indirizzo (m) 
area code prefisso (telefonico) (m) 
call me (informal/formal) chiamami/mi chiami 
dear Sir/Madam Egregio Signore / Gentile Signora 
dial the number fare il numero 
email email (f), posta elettronica (f) 
for the attention of alla cortese attenzione di 
further to/following a seguito di/con riferimento a 
following seguente 
I will put you through te lo/la passo, glielo/gliela passo 
I’ll be right back torno subito 
I’m listening sto ascoltando 
message messaggio (m) 
mobile phone cellulare (m), telefonino (m) 
moment momento (m), attimo (m) 
on the line/speaking in linea 
please repeat that puoi/può ripetere? 
point punto 
postcode codice postale (CAP) (m) 
receiver (telephone) ricevitore (m) 
sent by inviato da 
stay on the line resta/resti in linea 
telephone telefono (m) 
text message SMS, messaggio (m) 
tone tono (m) 
voice mail segreteria telefonica (f) 
wait attenda 
wrong number numero sbagliato (m) 
yours sincerely cordiali saluti (m pl) 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
96 
 
Section 2 – Topic-specific vocabulary 
Identity and culture:daily life, food and drink, including eating out 
Foundation tier 
 
appetite appetito (m)  
apple mela (f) 
apricot albicocca (f) 
banana banana (f) 
bean fagiolo (m) 
beef manzo (m) 
beer birra (f) 
bill conto (m) 
biscuit biscotto (m) 
bottle bottiglia (f) 
bread pane (m) 
breakfast colazione (f) 
brussels sprouts cavolini di Bruxelles (mpl) 
butter burro (m) 
cabbage cavolo (m) 
café bar (m) 
cake torta (f) 
carrot carota (f) 
cauliflower cavolfiore (m) 
cereals cereali (mpl) 
champagne champagne (m) 
cheese formaggio (m) 
cherry ciliegia (f) 
chicken pollo (m) 
chips patatine (fpl) 
chocolate cioccolato (m) 
choice scelta (f) 
chop (e.g. pork/lamb) braciola (es. maiale), costoletta (es.agnello) 
cider sidro (m) 
closed (on Mondays) chiuso/a (il lunedì) 
cocoa cacao (m) 
coffee caffè (m) 
cold sliced meat (e.g. salami) salumi (mpl) 
cooked, boiled cotto/a, bollito/a 
cream panna (f) 
crisps patatine fritte (fpl) 
cucumber cetriolo (m) 
cup tazza (f) 
customer cliente (m/f) 
delicious delizioso/a 
dessert dessert (m), dolce (m) 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
97 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
dining room sala da pranzo (f) 
dish of the day piatto del giorno (m) 
drink bibita (f), bevanda (f) 
egg uovo (m) pl le uova (fpl) 
enjoy your meal! buon appetito! 
euro euro (m) 
evening meal, dinner cena (f) 
first course primo (m) 
fish pesce (m) 
fixed price menu menù a prezzo fisso (m) 
food cibo (m), alimento (m) 
food and drink cibo (m) e bevande (fpl), generi alimentari (mpl) 
food shopping spesa (f) 
fork forchetta (f) 
fruit frutto (m) 
fruit juice succo di frutta (m) 
fruit pie torta alla frutta (f) 
glass bicchiere (m) 
grapefruit pompelmo (m) 
grapes uva (f) 
gravy, sauce sugo (m), salsa (f) 
green beans fagiolini (mpl) 
ham prosciutto (m) 
hamburger hamburger (m) 
hot chocolate cioccolata calda (f) 
ice cream gelato (m) 
ice cream parlour gelateria (f) 
inn (traditional) trattoria (f) 
jam marmellata (f) 
jar vasetto (m), barattolo (m) 
juice succo (m) 
kebab spiedino (m) 
knife coltello (m) 
lamb agnello (m) 
lemon limone (m) 
lemonade limonata (f) 
lettuce, salad lattuga (f), insalata (f) 
lunch pranzo (m) 
main course piatto principale (m) 
margarine margarina (f) 
meal pasto (m) 
meat carne (f) 
meatball polpetta (di carne) (f) 
melon melone (m) 
menu menù (m) 
menu of the day menù del giorno (m) 
milk latte (m) 
mince carne trita (f) 
mineral water acqua minerale (f) 
mixed misto/a 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
98 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
Money soldi (mpl), denaro (m) 
mushroom fungo (m) 
mustard senape (f) 
napkin tovagliolo (m) 
oil olio (m) 
omelette omelette (f), frittata (f) 
onion cipolla (f) 
orange arancia (f) 
packet pacchetto (m) 
pasta pasta (f) 
pastries paste (fpl), pasticcini (mpl) 
peach pesca (f) 
pear pera (f) 
peas piselli (mpl) 
pepper pepe (m) 
pepper (vegetable) peperone (m) 
pineapple ananas (m) 
pizza pizza (f) 
pizzeria, pizza restaurant pizzeria (f) 
place setting, cover charge coperto (m) 
plate piatto (m) 
plum prugna (f), susina (f) 
pork maiale (m) 
portion porzione (f) 
pot of coffee, tea caffettiera (f), teiera (f) 
potato patata (f) 
prepared food/ready meal piatto pronto (m), cibo pronto (m) 
raspberry lampone (m) 
restaurant ristorante (m) 
rice riso (m) 
roast arrosto (m) 
roll (bread) panino (m) 
salad dressing condimento per insalata (m) 
salt sale (m) 
salty/savoury salato/a 
sandwich tramezzino (m), sandwich (m) 
sausage salsiccia (f) 
self-service self-service (m) 
service servizio (m) 
slice fetta (f) 
snack spuntino (m) 
snack bar tavola calda (f), snack-bar (m) 
soup minestra (f), zuppa (f) 
speciality specialità (f) 
spoon cucchiaio (m) 
starter antipasto (m) 
steak bistecca (f) 
strawberry fragola (f) 
sugar zucchero (m) 
sweet caramella (f), dolce (m) 
sweet (tasting) dolce  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
99 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
Table tavolo (m), tavola(f) 
table cloth tovaglia (f) 
tart torta (f), crostata (f) 
tasty buono/a, saporito/a 
tea tè (m) 
tea room sala da tè (f) 
tea spoon cucchiaino (m) 
tea time snack merenda (f) 
tip (money) mancia (f) 
to ask chiedere, domandare 
to drink bere 
to eat  mangiare 
to order ordinare 
to pay pagare 
to serve servire 
to taste assaggiare 
to wait at table, to serve servire (ai tavoli) 
tomato pomodoro (m) 
tuna tonno (m) 
vanilla vaniglia (f) 
vegetable verdura (f) 
vegetarian vegetariano/a 
vinegar aceto (m) 
waiter/waitress cameriere (m), cameriera (f) 
water acqua (f) 
wine vino (m) 
yoghurt yogurt (m) 
Higher tier 
 
artichoke carciofo (m) 
appetizing appetitoso/a 
beer (from the pump) birra (alla spina) (f) 
bitter amaro/a 
boiled egg, hard-boiled egg uovo alla coque (m), uovo sodo (m) 
cucumber cetriolo (m) 
drink before meal aperitivo (m) 
duck anitra (f) 
fried egg uovo fritto (m) 
frui/herbal tea tisana (f) 
full fat milk latte intero (m) 
garlic aglio (m) 
goat’s cheese formaggio di capra (m) 
goose oca (f) 
homemade fatto/a in casa, artigianale 
honey miele (m) 
leeks porri (mpl) 
lettuce lattuga (f) 
loaf pagnotta (f), pancarrè (m) 
medium (steak) cottura media (bistecca) (f) 
organic food cibo biologico (m) 
pistachio pistacchio (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
100 
 
Higher tier (cont)  
rare (steak) al sangue (bistecca) 
raw crudo/a 
salmon salmone (m) 
saucer piattino (m) 
scrambled egg uovo strapazzato (m) 
sea food frutti di mare (mpl) 
(semi-)skimmed milk latte (parzialmente) scremato (m) 
smoked affumicato/a 
spicy piccante 
spinach spinaci (mpl) 
steamed (boiled) al vapore (bollito/a) 
tasty gustoso/a, saporito/a 
tray vassoio (m) 
trout trota (f) 
turkey tacchino (m) 
veal vitello (m) 
well-cooked ben cotto/a 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
101 
 
Identity and culture - what my friends and family are like 
Words relating to dress and style 
Foundation tier  
belt cintura (f) 
big grande 
boots stivali (mpl) 
boxer shorts boxer (mpl) 
bra reggiseno (m) 
bracelet braccialetto (m) 
cap berretto (m) 
changing room, fitting room camerino (m) 
clothes vestiti/abiti (mpl), abbigliamento (m) 
clothes shop negozio di abbigliamento (m) 
coat/overcoat cappotto (m) 
cotton (made of cotton) (di/in) cotone (m) 
dress vestito (m), abito (m) 
earring orecchino (m) 
fashion moda (f) 
fashionable alla moda, di moda 
glove guanto (m) 
handbag borsa (f) 
hat cappello (m) 
it fits/suits you ti sta bene 
jacket giacca (f) 
jeans jeans (mpl) 
jeweller’s (shop), jewellery (craft) gioielleria (f) 
jewels gioielli (mpl) 
leather/made of leather (di/in) pelle (f) 
leggings leggings (mpl), fuseaux (mpl) 
linen (made of linen) (di/in) lino (m) 
lipstick rossetto (m) 
loose (i.e. too big) largo/a  
make, brand marca (f) 
makeup trucco (m) 
medium (size) medio/a (misura) 
necklace collana (f) 
nightdress camicia da notte (f) 
old fashioned antiquato/a, fuori moda 
old fashioned (vintage, retro style) vecchio stile (vintage, rétro) 
pants, briefs mutande (fpl) 
perfume profumo (m) 
poloshirt polo (f) 
pyjamas pigiama (m) 
ring anello (m) 
scarf sciarpa (f) 
shirt camicia (f) 
shoe scarpa (f) 
shoe shop negozio di scarpe (m), negozio di calzature (m) 
shorts shorts (mpl), pantaloncini (mpl), pantaloni corti 
(mpl) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
102 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
size (general), shoe size misura/taglia (f), numero (di scarpe) (m) 
skirt gonna (f) 
slipper pantofola (f), ciabatta (f) 
small piccolo/a 
smart elegante 
sock calza (f) 
sports kit kit sportivo (m) 
sports shirt maglia (f) 
spotted a pois 
striped a righe 
style stile (m) 
suit abito (m), completo (m), tailleur (m) 
sweater, jumper maglione (m), golf (m) 
sweatshirt felpa (f) 
swimming costume/trunks costume da bagno (m) 
tattoo tatuaggio (m) 
tee shirt maglietta (f), T-shirt (f) 
tie cravatta (f) 
tights collant (mpl) 
tracksuit tuta da ginnastica (f) 
trainers scarpe da ginnastica (fpl) 
trousers pantaloni (mpl) 
umbrella ombrello (m) 
watch orologio (m) 
wool (woollen) (di) lana (f) 
  
Words relating to dress and style 
 
Higher tier 
 
cardigan cardigan (m) 
dressing gown vestaglia (f) 
dyed tinto/a 
model modello (m) 
silk (made of silk) (di/in) seta (f) 
straw hat cappello di paglia (m) 
tight stretto/a 
to have one’s hair cut tagliarsi i capelli 
to have one’s hair done andare dal parrucchiere 
to put on makeup truccarsi 
velvet (made of velvet) (di/in) velluto (m) 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
103 
 
Identity and culture - what my friends and family are like 
Words on relations, relationships, personal and physical 
characteristics 
Foundation tier 
 
Adolescent adolescente (m/f) 
adult, grown-up adulto (m) 
adventurous avventuroso/a 
age età (f) 
alone (da) solo/a 
armchair poltrona (f) 
at home, at my/our house a casa, a casa mia/nostra 
aunt zia (f) 
baby neonato/a (m/f), bebè (m), bambino/ 
a piccolo/a (m/f) 
bald calvo, pelato 
bathroom bagno (m) 
beard, bearded (con la) barba (f) 
beautiful bello/a 
bedroom camera da letto (f) 
(date of) birth (data di) nascita (f) 
birthday compleanno (m) 
birthplace luogo di nascita (m) 
block (of flats) palazzo (m), edificio (m) 
born nato/a 
bossy prepotente 
body piercing body piercing (m) 
boy ragazzo (m) 
boyfriend ragazzo (m), fidanzato (m) 
brother fratello (m) 
brother-in-law, sister-in-law cognato (m), cognata (f) 
brothers and sisters, siblings fratelli e sorelle, fratelli (mpl) 
cat gatto (m) 
celebrity persona famosa (f), celebrità (f) 
chair sedia (f) 
character, personality carattere (m), personalità (f) 
charming affascinante 
chatty chiacchierone/a 
child bambino/a (m/f) 
clothes vestiti (mpl), abiti (mpl) 
comfortable (house, furniture) confortevole, comodo/a 
cousin cugino (m), cugina (f) 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
104 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
curly riccio/a 
dad papà (m), babbo (m) 
daily/everyday life vita quotidiana (f) 
daughter figlia (f) 
dead morto/a 
dining room sala da pranzo (f) 
divorced divorziato/a 
dog cane (m) 
engaged fidanzato/a 
eyes occhi (mpl) 
face faccia (f), viso (m) 
family famiglia (f) 
famous famoso/a 
father padre (m) 
feeling sensazione (f), sentimento (m) 
first name nome (di battesimo) (m) 
flat, apartment appartamento (m) 
foolish, silly stupido/a 
friend amico (m), amica (f) 
friendly amichevole 
friendship amicizia (f) 
furniture mobili (mpl) 
garden giardino (m) 
garage garage (m) 
girl ragazza (f) 
girlfriend ragazza (f), fidanzata (f) 
glasses occhiali (mpl) 
goldfish pesce rosso (m) 
grandad, grandfather nonno (m) 
grandchild nipote (m/f) 
grandma, granny, grandmother nonna (f) 
grandparents nonni (mpl) 
guinea pig cavia (f), porcellino d’India (m) 
guy, dude, bloke ragazzo (m), tipo (m), tizio (m) 
hair capelli (mpl) 
half-brother/step-brother, half-sister/step-
sister fratellastro (m), sorellastra (f) 
hamster criceto (m) 
home casa (f) 
honest onesto/a 
house casa (f) 
husband marito (m) 
ideal ideale 
identity identità (f) 
in love innamorato/a 
intelligent intelligente 
invitation invito (m) 
kind gentile 
kitchen cucina (f) 
kiss bacio (m) 
lazy pigro/a 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
105 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
life vita (f) 
lively vivace 
living room, front room, lounge soggiorno (m), salotto (m), sala (f) 
loft soffitta (f), solaio (m) 
man uomo (m) 
married sposato/a 
mean, nasty cattivo/a, odioso/a 
member of the family membro della famiglia (m), familiare (m) 
mood umore (m) 
mother madre (f) 
moustache baffi (mpl.) 
mouth bocca (f) 
multicultural multiculturale 
mum mamma (f) 
naughty cattivo/a 
neighbour vicino/a (di casa) (m/f) 
nephew nipote (m) 
nice, likeable simpatico/a 
nickname soprannome (m) 
niece nipote (f) 
normal normale 
old vecchio/a, anziano/a 
old fashioned antiquato/a 
older più vecchio/a, più grande 
oldest (brother/sister) il/la maggiore (fratello/sorella) 
only child figlio unico (m), figlia unica (f) 
opinion opinione (f) 
optimistic ottimista 
parents genitori (mpl) 
party festa 
penfriend amico/a di penna (m/f), corrispondente (m/f) 
people gente (f sing.) 
person persona (f) 
pessimistic pessimista 
pet animale domestico (m) 
picture quadro (m) 
place of residence luogo di residenza (m) 
Postcode codice postale (m) 
present, gift regalo (m) 
Pretty carino/a 
Rabbit coniglio (m) 
Reasonable ragionevole 
Relationship rapporto (m), relazione (f) 
Religion religione (f) 
Selfish egoista 
semi-detached house casa/villetta bifamiliare (f) 
sense of humour senso dell’umorismo (m) 
separated separato/a 
serious serio/a 
short (height) basso/a 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
106 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
shy timido/a 
single single, nubile (donna non sposata), celibe 
(uomo non sposato) 
sister sorella (f) 
sofa, settee divano (m), sofà (m) 
son figlio (m) 
son-in-law, daughter-in-law genero (m), nuora (f) 
stepfather, stepmother patrigno (m), matrigna (f) 
straight (hair) lisci  
study (room) studio (m) 
surname cognome (m) 
survey sondaggio (m), inchiesta (f) 
tall alto/a 
telephone number numero di telefono (m) 
terraced house casa/villetta a schiera (f) 
thin, slim magro/a, snello/a 
tidy, neat ordinato/a 
to annoy infastidire, disturbare 
to argue, to quarrel litigare 
to babysit fare da babysitter 
to be called chiamarsi 
to be in a good / bad mood essere di buon umore / di cattivo umore 
to care for, to look after curare, occuparsi di 
to celebrate festeggiare 
to chat, chatter chiacchierare 
to chat (online) chattare 
to get divorced divorziare 
to get on (well) with andare d'accordo con 
to look (e.g. angry/happy etc)  sembrare (arrabbiato/felice etc.)  
to respect rispettare 
to separate, to split up separarsi, dividersi 
tortoise tartaruga (f) 
tropical fish pesce tropicale (m) 
twins gemelli/gemelle (m/fpl) 
ugly brutto/a 
uncle zio (m) 
unemployed disoccupato/a 
unbearable insopportabile 
untidy disordinato/a 
visit visita (f) 
well behaved educato/a 
wife, woman moglie (f) 
woman donna (f) 
young/younger giovane/più giovane 
youth (i.e the time of life) giovinezza (f) 
  
Higher tier   
acquaintance conoscente (m/f) 
adopted adottato/a 
adventurous avventuroso/a 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
107 
 
Higher tier (cont)  
Annoying fastidioso/a, irritante 
argument litigio (m) 
Career carriera (f) 
character trait tratto caratteriale (m), caratteristica (f) 
cheeky sfacciato/a 
comfortable (at ease) a proprio agio 
conceited presuntuoso/a, pieno/a di sé 
depressed depresso/a 
discrimination discriminazione (f) 
faith (religious) fede (f) 
fiancé(e) fidanzato (m), fidanzata (f) 
furnished ammobiliato/a, arredato/a 
gang banda (f), gruppo (di amici) (m) 
gender, sex sesso (m) 
generous generoso/a 
hall (in house), lobby entrata (f), ingresso (m) 
identical twins gemelli identici (mpl) 
independent indipendente 
jealous geloso/a 
loyal, faithful leale, fedele 
mad, crazy matto/a, pazzo/a 
meeting riunione (f), incontro (m) 
old age/third age vecchiaia/terza età (f) 
old people’s home casa di riposo (f) 
pensioner, senior citizen pensionato/a 
pretentious pretenzioso/a 
priest prete (m), sacerdote (m) 
racist razzista 
relationship rapporto (m), relazione (f) 
relative, relation parente (m/f) 
reliable affidabile 
self-confident sicuro/a di sé 
sensitive sensibile 
sexist sessista 
similar simile 
single parent genitore single (m) 
spoilt viziato/a 
spot, pimple foruncolo (m), brufolo (m) 
stubborn testardo/a 
to be disadvantaged essere svantaggiato/emarginato 
to experience sperimentare, provare 
to look after badare a, curarsi di, prendersi cura di qc 
to pick on, to harass, to bully prendere di mira, molestare, intimidire  
to resemble/look like somigliare/assomigliare 
to suffer soffrire 
to support sostenere 
to thank ringraziare 
underage minorenne (m/f) 
understanding comprensione (f) 
well-balanced equilibrato/a 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
108 
 
Identity and culture: cultural life  
Foundation tier  
activity attività (f) 
advantage vantaggio (m) 
adventure film film d’avventura (m) 
article articolo (m) 
athletics atletica (f) 
badminton badminton (m), volano (m) 
ball palla (f) 
band/group band (f), gruppo (m) 
basketball pallacanestro (f), basket (m) 
body building body building (m) 
book libro (m) 
bowl bocce (fpl) 
boxing pugilato (m), boxe (f) 
bridegroom sposa (f) 
bridegroom sposo (m) 
camera macchina fotografica (f) 
canoeing canoa (f) 
cartoon cartoni animati (mpl) 
CD (compact disc) CD (compact disc) (m) 
celebration, party celebrazione (f)/festeggiamento (m), festa (f) 
changing rooms spogliatoi (mpl) 
chess scacchi (mpl) 
Christmas Natale (m) 
Christmas Eve vigilia di Natale (f) 
clarinet clarinetto (m) 
classical, classic classico/a 
climbing/rock climbing scalata/arrampicata (f) 
club circolo (m), club (m) 
collection collezione (f) 
comic (magazine) fumetto (m) 
competition gara (f), concorso (m) 
computer game videogioco (m) 
concert concerto (m) 
cultural life vita culturale (f) 
culture cultura (f) 
custom/tradition usanza (f)/tradizione (f) 
cycling ciclismo (m) 
dance/dancing ballo (m), danza (f) 
detective/police (book/film) (libro/film) poliziesco/giallo 
disadvantage svantaggio (m) 
disco, nightclub discoteca (f) 
documentary documentario (m) 
drums batteria (f sing) 
Easter Pasqua (f) 
Easter Monday Lunedì dell’Angelo (m), Pasquetta (f) 
engagement fidanzamento (m), impegno (m) 
entertainment divertimento (m) 
equipment attrezzatura (f) 
extreme sports sport estremi (mpl) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
109 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
fanatical about appassionato/a di qs 
fantasy film film fantasy (m) 
festival festival (m), sagra(f)/festa (f) 
flute flauto (m) 
film film (m) 
folk music musica folk (f), musica popolare (f) 
football calcio (m) 
free time tempo libero (m) 
game gioco (m), partita (f) 
games console console (per videogiochi) (f) 
Good Friday Venerdì Santo (m) 
guitar chitarra (f) 
gym palestra (f) 
gymnastics ginnastica (f) 
handball pallamano (f) 
Happy birthday!  Buon compleanno!  
Happy New Year! Buon anno!, Felice Anno Nuovo! 
hobby, leisure activity hobby (m), attività del tempo libero 
hockey hockey (m) 
horror film film di orrore (m) 
horse riding equitazione (f) 
ice skating pattinaggio su ghiaccio (m) 
interest/hobby interesse (m)/passatempo (m)/hobby (m) 
judo judo (m) 
karate karate (m) 
keyboard tastiera (f) 
leisure tempo libero (m) 
Lent (period leading up to Easter) Quaresima (f) 
life vita (f) 
magazine rivista (f)/ giornalino (m) 
marriage matrimonio (m) 
martial arts arti marziali (fpl) 
mobile phone cellulare (m) 
Mothers’ day festa della mamma (f) 
mountain bike mountain bike (f) 
mountaineering alpinismo (m) 
MP3 player lettore MP3 (m) 
music musica (f) 
netball netball (m) 
New Year anno nuovo (m), Capodanno (m) 
news notizie (fpl), telegiornale (m) 
orchestra orchestra (f) 
parachuting paracadutismo (m) 
paragliding parapendio (m) 
piano pianoforte (m), piano (m) 
play (theatre) spettacolo (teatrale) (m) 
player giocatore (m) 
pleasure/amusement piacere (m), divertimento (m) 
pocket money paghetta (settimanale) (f) 
pop music musica pop (f) 
quiz show quiz (televisivo) (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
110 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
race/racing corsa (f), gara (f), competizione (f) 
rap rap (m) 
reading lettura (f) 
recorder (instrument) flauto dolce (m) 
referee arbitro (m) 
rock music musica rock (f) 
roller blading pattinaggio a rotelle (m) 
role model esempio (m), modello (m) 
romantic romantico/a 
romantic film/love film film romantico/film d’amore (m) 
rugby rugby (m) 
sailing vela (f) 
saxophone sassofono (m) 
science fiction film film di fantascienza (m) 
series serie (f) 
shopping  compere (fpl)/acquisti (mpl), shopping (m) 
show (theatre etc), TV show spettacolo (teatrale etc.) (m), spettacolo 
televisivo (m) 
singer cantante (m/f) 
skate boarding fare/andare in skate-board 
skiing sci (m) 
soap (opera) telenovela (f), soap (f) 
socialising socializzazione (f), socializzare 
social media social media (mpl), media sociali (mpl) 
song canzone (f) 
sport sport (m) 
sports ground campo sportivo (m) 
sporty sportivo/a 
spy story storia di spionaggio (f) 
squash squash (m) 
stage palcoscenico (m) 
stereo system/music centre (impianto) stereo (m) 
surfing surf (m) 
swimming nuoto (m) 
table tennis ping pong (m), tennis da tavolo (m) 
team squadra (f) 
technology tecnologia (f) 
television televisione (f) 
tennis tennis (m) 
thriller thriller (m), giallo (m) 
toy giocattolo (m), gioco (m) 
trumpet tromba (f) 
TV channel canale TV/canale televisivo (m) 
TV programme programma televisivo (m) 
Twelfth Night/Epiphany/6th January Epifania (f), Befana (f) 
use of technology uso (m) della tecnologia 
violin violino (m) 
volleyball pallavolo (f), volley-ball (m) 
water skiing sci d'acqua (m), sci nautico (m) 
western (film etc) western (film etc.) 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
111 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
Windsurfing windsurf (m) 
X box X-box (f) 
youth club circolo giovanile (m) 
Higher tier 
 
archery tiro con l'arco (m) 
board game, electronic game gioco da tavolo (m), gioco elettronico (m) 
cable TV TV via cavo (f) 
camcorder/video camera videocamera (f), camcorder (f) 
championship campionato (m) 
do it yourself, DIY fai-da-te (m), bricolage (m) 
drama (TV etc) dramma (TV etc.) (m) 
dubbed (film) (film) doppiato  
earphones auricolari (mpl), cuffie (fpl) 
fencing scherma (f) 
fishing rod canna da pesca (f) 
goal goal (m), rete (f) 
half-time intervallo (della partita) (m) 
knowledge conoscenza (f) 
league, division (sports) serie (f), divisione (sportiva) (f) 
marriage ceremony, wedding cerimonia di nozze (f), matrimonio (m) 
melody/tune melodia/canzone (f) 
musical comedy (a musical) musical (m), commedia musicale (f) 
original version versione originale (f) 
remote control telecomando (m) 
rowing canottaggio (m) 
sailing boat barca a vela (f) 
satellite TV TV satellitare (f) 
scuba diving nuoto subacqueo (m) 
sitcom sitcom (f) 
sports equipment attrezzatura sportiva (f) 
subtitles sottotitoli (mpl) 
tournament torneo (m) 
viewer/audience spettatore (m), pubblico (m) 
Verbs associated with cultural life  
to be a member of essere iscritto a, essere membro di 
to collect collezionare 
to congratulate congratularsi 
to cycle, go cycling andare in bicicletta, fare ciclismo 
to dance ballare 
to do gymnastics fare ginnastica 
to do sport fare sport 
to exercise fare esercizio, fare moto 
to fish/go fishing pescare/andare a pesca 
to get married sposarsi 
to go bowling (tenpin) giocare a bowling  
to go for a walk/stroll andare a fare una passeggiata/passeggiare 
to go horse riding andare a cavallo, fare equitazione 
to hike, ramble fare un’escursione, fare una camminata 
to play (a game/sport) giocare (a qc) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
112 
 
Verbs associated with cultural life (cont) 
to play (an instrument) suonare (uno strumento) 
to roller-skate andare sui pattini a rotelle, pattinare (con i 
pattini a rotelle) 
to sail fare vela, andare in barca a vela 
to score a goal segnare un goal 
to shoot sparare, andare a caccia 
to skateboard fare skate-board 
to ski, to snowboard sciare, fare snowboard 
to swim nuotare 
to take out for a walk (the dog) portare fuori (il cane), uscire con (il cane) 
to take part (in) partecipare, prendere parte (a) 
to train allenarsi 
to walk camminare 
  
Identity and culture: using social media 
Foundation tier 
blog blog (m), diario in rete (m) 
chatroom chat room (f) 
computer computer (m) 
connection connessione (f), collegamento (m) 
cyber bullying 
cyberbullismo/ciberbullismo (m), bullismo 
online (m) 
digital digitale 
disk disco (m) 
email email (f), posta elettronica (f) 
homepage homepage (f), pagina iniziale (f) 
internet internet (m) 
internet page pagina di internet (f) 
key (of keyboard) tasto (m) 
keyboard tastiera (f) 
social media i media sociali (m pl) 
mouse mouse (m) 
new technology nuova tecnologia (f) 
password password (f), parola d'ordine (f) 
printer stampante (f) 
programmer programmatore (m) 
risk rischio (m) 
screen schermo (m) 
security sicurezza (f) 
social network social network (m), rete sociale (f) 
software software (m) 
to burn masterizzare 
to chat on line chattare (online) 
to download scaricare 
to erase, delete cancellare, eliminare 
to load caricare 
to publish pubblicare 
to print stampare 
to save, to store salvare, archiviare 
to surf (the net) navigare (in rete) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
113 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
to type scrivere al computer, digitare 
to upload caricare  
virus virus (m) 
web rete (f), web (m) 
web page pagina web (f) 
webcam videocamera digitale (f), webcam (f) 
website sito web (m), website (m) 
  
Local area, holiday and travel 
 
Foundation tier 
 
abroad all’estero 
accommodation alloggio (m), sistemazione (f) 
adult adulto (m) 
advertisement, advert annuncio (m) 
air conditioning/air-con aria condizionata (f) 
airport aeroporto (m) 
appointment appuntamento (m) 
area (in town) quartiere (m), zona (f) 
arrival arrivo (m) 
art gallery galleria d'arte (f) 
asking for help chiedere aiuto 
bakery panetteria (f) 
balcony balcone (m) 
bank banca (f) 
bar bar (m) 
basement seminterrato (m) 
bath bagno (m) 
bath tub vasca da bagno (f) 
bathroom bagno (m) 
beach spiaggia (f) 
bed letto (m) 
bed and breakfast accommodation bed and breakfast (m), pensione (f) 
bed linen lenzuola (fpl) 
bicycle/bike bicicletta/bici (f) 
bike/car hire noleggio biciclette/auto (m) 
boat barca (f) 
bowling alley bowling (m) 
brand/make marca (f) 
bridge ponte (m) 
brochure/leaflet opuscolo (m), depliant (m) 
building edificio (m) 
bus (by bus) autobus (in autobus) (m) 
bus stop fermata dell’autobus (f) 
bus/coach station 
stazione degli autobus, delle corriere/dei 
pullman (f) 
business/trade commercio (m) 
butcher’s shop macelleria (f) 
café bar (m), caffè (m) 
calm/peaceful calmo/a, tranquillo/a 
campsite campeggio (m), camping (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
114 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
capital city capitale (f) 
car macchina (f), automobile (f) 
car park parcheggio (m) 
caravan roulotte (f) 
carriage (train) carrozza (f), vagone (m) 
castle castello (m) 
cathedral duomo (m), cattedrale (f) 
chemist's farmacia (f) 
church chiesa (f) 
cinema cinema (m) 
city/town città (f) 
closed chiuso/a 
coach corriera (f), pullman (m) 
coast costa (f) 
comfortable comodo/a 
commercial commerciale 
compartment scompartimento (m) 
concert concerto (m) 
connection coincidenza (f) 
corner angolo (m) 
country campagna (f) 
country (i.e. nation) Paese (m), nazione (f) 
countryside, scenery paesaggio (m) 
crossroads incrocio (m) 
cycle path pista ciclabile (f) 
dealing with problems affrontare problemi 
degree (temperature) grado (m) 
delay ritardo (m) 
department store grande magazzino (m) 
departure partenza (f) 
destination destinazione (f) 
diesel (fuel) diesel (gasolio) (m) 
direct diretto/a 
direction direzione (f) 
directions indicazioni (stradali) (fpl) 
disco discoteca (f) 
diversion, detour deviazione (f) 
double room camera doppia/matrimoniale (f) 
driver autista (m/f) 
driving licence patente di guida (f) 
eating out mangiare fuori 
electrical goods (retailer) negozio di elettrodomestici (m) 
emergency emergenza (f) 
enjoy your stay! buon soggiorno! 
entertainment, things to do divertimenti (mpl), cose da fare (fpl) 
entrance entrata (f) 
exhibition mostra (f) 
exit uscita (f) 
experience esperianza (f) 
factory fabbrica (f) 
farm fattoria (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
115 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
Ferry traghetto (m) 
field campo (m) 
fishmonger's pescheria (f) 
flat, apartment appartamento (m) 
flight volo (m) 
floor (on the floor) pavimento (m) (per terra) 
floor, storey (1st, 2nd) piano (m) (primo, secondo) 
(it is) forbidden to… (è) vietato... 
foreigner straniero (m) 
form modulo (m) 
free (available, vacant) libero/a (disponibile) 
full (hotel etc) pieno/a, esaurito/a 
full board (all meals included) pensione completa (f) 
games room sala giochi (f) 
garage, service station, petrol station 
garage (m), stazione di servizio (f), 
distributore di benzina (m) 
greengrocer's fruttivendolo (m) 
grocery, grocer’s shop negozio di alimentari (m) 
ground floor piano terra (m), pianterreno (m) 
guest (in a hotel), customer ospite (di albergo) (m), cliente (m/f) 
guided tour visita guidata (f), tour guidato (m) 
half board (B and B and evening meal) mezza pensione (f) 
heating riscaldamento (m) 
hill collina (f) 
hire of/hiring/renting (e.g. bike, house) noleggio (m) (for es. bicicletta), affitto (m) 
(casa) 
historic storico/a 
holiday, fair/festival vacanza (f), festa (f), festival (m) 
holidays vacanze (fpl) 
hospital ospedale (m) 
hotel albergo (m), hotel (m) 
household goods shop (cleaning materials etc) negozio di casalinghi (m) 
hypermarket ipermercato (m) 
ice rink pista di pattinaggio su ghiaccio (f) 
identification, ID documento d'identità (m), carta d'identità (f) 
in advance in anticipo 
included incluso/a, compreso/a 
indoor swimming pool piscina coperta (f) 
industrial industriale 
industry industria (f) 
information office ufficio informazioni (m) 
inhabitant abitante (m) 
inside dentro, all'interno 
island isola (f) 
journey viaggio (m) 
key chiave (f) 
lake lago (m) 
left luggage office/locker deposito bagagli (m) 
leisure centre centro ricreativo (m) 
library biblioteca (f) 
lift ascensore (m) 
line/route linea(f), percorso (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
116 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
litter/rubbish bin cestino dei rifiuti (m) 
lively vivace 
local area zona locale (f) 
lorry camion (m) 
lost property office ufficio oggetti smarriti (m) 
luggage bagaglio (m) 
luxurious lussuoso/a, di lusso 
map (of a country, road map) cartina (f) 
map (of the town) piantina (della città) (f) 
market mercato (m) 
means of transport mezzi di trasporto (mpl) 
Media media (mpl), mezzi di comunicazione di massa 
(mpl) 
metro/underground metropolitana/metro (f) 
Monument monumento (m) 
Moped motorino (m) 
motorbike/bike motocicletta/moto (f) 
Motorway autostrada (f) 
Mountain montagna (f) 
Museum museo (m) 
Nature natura (f) 
newspaper  giornale (m) 
newspaper stall edicola (f), giornalaio (m) 
night club discoteca (f) 
occupied/taken occupato/a 
office ufficio (m) 
on foot a piedi 
on the left a sinistra 
on the right a destra 
one way street strada a senso unico (f) 
open aperto/a 
opening hours/times orario di apertura (m) 
organiser organizzatore 
outing, trip gita (f), escursione (f) 
outside fuori 
outside/in the open air fuori/all’aperto 
outskirts, suburb (of town) periferia (della città) 
owner proprietario/a (m/f) 
palace palazzo (m) 
park parco (m) 
passenger passeggero/a (m/f) 
passport passaporto (m) 
passport control controllo passaporti(m) 
pavemnet marciapiede (m) 
pedestrian pedonale 
pedestrian area zona pedonale (f) 
pedestrian crossing attraversamento pedonale (m), passaggio 
pedonale (m) 
petrol benzina (f) 
petrol station  distributore di benzina (m) 
picturesque pittoresco/a 
pillow cuscino (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
117 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
pitch (for tent) piazzola (per tenda) (f) 
place posto (m), luogo (m) 
places to see posti da vedere (mpl) 
plane aereo (m) 
platform binario (m) 
playground parco giochi (m) 
police station stazione di polizia (f), questura (f) 
policeman/woman poliziotto (m), poliziotta (f) 
port porto (m) 
post office ufficio postale (m), posta (f) 
postcard cartolina (f) 
poster, notice poster (m), avviso (m), cartello (m) 
preference preferenza (f) 
price list listino prezzi (m) 
problem problema (m) 
province provincia (f) 
public holiday festa (nazionale) (f) 
public transport trasporti pubblici (mpl) 
public/municipal pubblico/a, comunale 
railway ferrovia (f) 
reception reception (f) 
receptionist receptionist (m/f) 
reduction riduzione (f) 
region, area regione (f), zona (f) 
rent, rental affitto(m), noleggio (m) 
reservation prenotazione (f) 
return ticket biglietto di andata e ritorno (m) 
river fiume (m) 
road map cartina stradale (f) 
road/street via(f), strada (f) 
(bed) room (in a hotel) camera (di albergo) (f) 
sea  mare (m) 
(at the) seaside al mare 
season stagione (f) 
seat (train, plane) posto (m) 
service station stazione di servizio (f) 
sheet lenzuolo (m) 
ship nave (f) 
shop negozio (m) 
(shop) window vetrina (di negozio) (f) 
shopping centre shopping centre (m), centro commerciale (m) 
show mostra (f), spettacolo (m) 
shower doccia (f) 
sight, place of interest luogo di interesse (m) 
sign (road sign) cartello stradale (m) 
single room camera singola (f) 
single ticket biglietto di andata (m) 
ski resort località sciistica (f) 
sleeping bag sacco a pelo (m) 
sleeping car (in a train) vagone letto (m) 
snack bar tavola calda (f), snack-bar (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
118 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
snack bar, buffet (on a train) buffet (m), vagone ristorante (m) 
soap sapone (m) 
souvenir souvenir (m), ricordo (m) 
spacious spazioso/a 
sports centre centro sportivo (m) 
square (in town) piazza (f) 
stadium stadio (m) 
stairs, staircase scala (f), scale (fpl) 
star stella (f) 
station (railway) stazione (ferroviaria) (f) 
stop (bus, tram etc) fermata (autobus, tram etc.) (f) 
suburb, outskirts of town periferia (della città) (f) 
suitable for drinking potabile 
suitcase valigia (f) 
summer camp campo estivo (m) 
supermarket supermercato (m) 
supplement supplemento (m) 
swimming pool piscina (f) 
taxi taxi (m) 
television set televisore (m) 
tennis court campo da tennis (m) 
tent tenda (f) 
theatre teatro (m) 
things to do cose da fare (fpl) 
ticket inspector controllore (m) 
ticket office biglietteria (f) 
ticket, tram, bus or metro ticket biglietto (del tram, dell'autobus o della 
metropolitana) (m) 
till, cash desk cassa (f) 
Timetable orario (m) 
to be situated essere situato/a, trovarsi 
to camp (in a tent) fare campeggio 
to cross attraversare 
to continue, carry on continuare 
to follow seguire 
to function, to work funzionare 
to hire, to rent noleggiare, affittare 
to miss (train, bus etc.) perdere 
to pack/unpack (cases) fare/disfare le valigie 
to park parcheggiare 
to turn/switch off spegnere 
to turn/switch on accendere 
tobacconist’s shop tabaccheria (f) 
toilet paper carta igienica (f) 
toilets bagni (mpl), toilette (f) 
toothbrush spazzolino da denti (m) 
toothpaste dentifricio (m) 
tour giro (m), tour (m) 
tourist turista (m/f) 
tourist attraction attrazione turistica (f) 
tourist information office ufficio turistico (m), ufficio di turismo (m) 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
119 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
(tourist) transactions transazioni (turistiche) (fpl) 
tower torre (f) 
town città (f) 
town centre centro città (m), centro della città (m) 
town hall municipio (m) 
track, platform (railway) binario (m) 
traffic traffico (m) 
traffic jam ingorgo (stradale) (m) 
traffic lights semaforo (m) 
train treno (m) 
tram tram (m) 
travel agency agenzia di viaggi (f) 
travel viaggio (m) 
traveller viaggiatore (m) 
twin room camera doppia/a due letti (f) 
underground station stazione della metropolitana (f) 
unleaded petrol benzina senza piombo (f) 
view (over, of) vista (su, di) (f) 
village paese (m), villaggio (m) 
visit visita (f) 
waiting room sala d’attesa (f) 
wardrobe armadio (m) 
wash basin lavabo (m), lavandino (m) 
way out/exit uscita (f) 
weather tempo (meteorologico) (m) 
welcome benvenuto/a 
window finestra (f) 
wood, forest bosco (m), foresta (f) 
youth hostel ostello della gioventù (m) 
Higher tier 
 
ATM/ cash point sportello bancomat (m), bancomat (m) 
brakes freni (mpl) 
canal canale (m) 
customs (i.e. at border crossing) dogana (f) 
door (of train etc) porta (di treno etc.) (f) 
dry cleaner’s, dry cleaning lavasecco (m), tintoria (f) 
emergency exit uscita d’emergenza (f) 
event evento (m), avvenimento (m) 
experience esperienza (f) 
fast train treno rapido (m) 
fireworks fuochi d'artificio (mpl), fuochi artificiali (mpl) 
fountain fontana (f) 
helicopter elicottero (m) 
hospitality ospitalità (f) 
ironmonger’s/hardware shop ferramenta (m) 
level crossing passaggio a livello (m) 
motorway junction raccordo autostradale (m) 
no entry (when driving) divieto di accesso (m) 
no parking divieto di parcheggio (m) 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
120 
 
Higher tier (cont)  
Noise rumore (m) 
package holiday 
pacchetto vacanze (m), viaggio organizzato 
(m) 
procession processione (f) 
registration/check in registrazione (f), check in (m) 
roundabout (in road) rotatoria (f), rotonda (f) 
rush hour ora di punta (f) 
savings bank cassa di risparmio (f) 
seaside resort località balneare (f) 
seat belt cintura di sicurezza (f) 
speed (limit) (limite di) velocità  
surrounding area, vicinity area circostante (f), vicinanze (fpl) 
to board, embark (plane, boat) imbarcarsi (aereo, nave) 
to brake frenare 
to confirm confermare 
to overtake superare, sorpassare 
to put someone up, accommodate sistemare qn, alloggiare 
to run over (traffic accident) investire  
to stay (for a holiday) stare, soggiornare 
to take place, occur aver luogo, avvenire 
to validate a ticket (e.g. train, tram) convalidare/timbrare il biglietto (treno, tram) 
toll pedaggio (m), casello (m) 
unleaded (petrol) (benzina) senza piombo 
vehicle veicolo (m) 
winter/skiing holidays 
vacanze invernali/sciistiche (fpl), settimana 
bianca (f) 
zoo zoo (m), parco zoologico (m) 
Phrases associated with weather 
 
Foundation tier 
 
bad (weather) brutto 
Bright soleggiato, (fa) bel tempo 
climate clima (m) 
Cloud nuvola (f) 
(it is) cloudy (è) nuvoloso 
(it is) cold (fa) freddo  
degree (temperature) grado (m) 
Dry secco/a 
Fog nebbia (f) 
(it is) foggy nebbioso, c'è nebbia  
heat calore (m) 
highest temperature temperatura più alta (f) 
(it is) hot (fa) caldo 
(in the) east, eastern (a) est/(a) oriente, orientale 
(in the) north, northern (a/nel) nord/(nel) settentrione, settentrionale 
(in the) south, southern  (a/nel) sud/(nel) meridione, meridionale 
(in the) west, western (a) ovest/(a) oriente, orientale 
it is freezing fa freddissimo, è gelido 
it is lightning lampeggia 
it is raining piove 
it is snowing nevica 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
121 
 
Foundation tier  
it is thundering tuona 
lightining lampo (m) 
lowest temperature temperatura più bassa (f) 
mist foschia (f) 
nice (weather) bello (bel tempo) 
overcast coperto, nuvoloso 
rain pioggia (f) 
season stagione (f) 
sky cielo (m) 
snow neve (f) 
storm, thunderstorm tempesta (f), temporale (m) 
sun sole (m) 
sunny, the sun is shining soleggiato, c’è il sole 
thunder tuono (m) 
to change cambiare 
to freeze gelare 
to rain piovere 
to shine brillare 
to snow nevicare 
weather tempo (meteorologico) 
weather forecast, weather report previsioni del tempo (fpl), previsioni meteo 
(fpl) 
wind vento (m) 
(it is) windy ventoso (c’è vento) 
Higher tier 
 
average temperature temperatura media (f) 
bright spell schiarita (f) 
changeable variabile 
hail grandine (f) 
misty nebbioso/a 
rainy piovoso/a 
shower (rain) acquazzone (m) 
stormy temporalesco/a 
to brighten up rischiararsi 
to hail grandinare 
Asking for directions 
 
are you going on foot/in a car? vai/va a piedi/in macchina? 
as far as fino a 
continue  continua/continui 
cross (over) attraversa/attraversi 
go straight on  va/vada sempre dritto 
high street/main street strada principale 
how do I get to? per andare a…? 
it is 100 metres away è a 100 metri (di distanza) 
it is very close è molto vicino 
take the first road on the left prendi/prenda la prima a sinistra 
turn left gira/giri a sinistra 
turn right gira/giri a destra 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
122 
 
Dealing with problems 
 
Foundation tier 
 
Address indirizzo (m) 
Bill conto (m) 
bill (invoice) fattura (f) 
Breakdown guasto 
Broken rotto/a 
Colour colore (m) 
complaint reclamo (m) 
correct number numero corretto/giusto (m) 
customer cliente (m/f) 
customer service servizio clienti (m) 
damage danno (m) 
delivery consegna (f) 
email address indirizzo email (m) 
form modulo (m) 
guarantee garanzia (f) 
mistake errore (m) 
payment method metodo di pagamento (m) 
purse portamonete (m), borsellino (m) 
quantity quantità (f) 
receipt ricevuta (f), scontrino (m) 
reduction riduzione (f) 
repair riparazione (f) 
replacement (part) (pezzo di) ricambio (m) 
service servizio (m) 
size misura (f), taglia (f) 
telephone number numero di telefono (m) 
theft, robbery furto (m), rapina (f) 
to complain reclamare, protestare 
to deliver consegnare 
to exchange Cambiare 
to guarantee garantire 
to pay pagare 
to repair riparare 
to replace sostituire 
to work, function funzionare 
waiting time tempo d'attesa (m) 
wallet portafoglio (m) 
wrong number numero sbagliato (m) 
Higher tier 
 
instructions for use istruzioni per l’uso (fpl) 
insurance assicurazione (f) 
progress, improvement progresso (m), miglioramento (m) 
to bring back, take back portare indietro 
to return/give back restituire/rendere 
to insure assicurare 
  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
123 
 
School 
 
Foundation tier 
 
absent assente 
A levels (equivalent) esame di maturità/di livello avanzato (GB) (m) 
achievement, performance risultati (mpl), profitto (m) 
answer risposta (f) 
art arte (f) 
biology biologia 
board (blackboard, whiteboard etc) lavagna (tradizionale, lavagna bianca etc) (f) 
book libro (m) 
break pausa (f), intervallo (m) 
calculator calcolatrice (f), calcolatore (m) 
canteen mensa (f) 
careers adviser consulente di formazione (m/f) 
caretaker custode (m/f) 
celebrating success celebrare/festeggiare unsuccesso/un buon 
risultato 
changing room spogliatoio (m) 
chemistry chimica (f) 
choir coro (m) 
class test, assessment verifica (f), compito in classe (m) 
classroom aula (f), classe (f) 
clever intelligente 
copy, script (exam paper) copia (f), testo (d’esame) (m) 
corridor corridoio (m) 
desk banco (m) 
detention punizione (alunno trattenuto oltre la fine delle 
lezioni) 
dictionary dizionario (m) 
drama teatro (m), dramma (m) 
drama group, acting group gruppo teatrale (m), gruppo di attori (m) 
DT (design technology) grafica computerizzata (f) 
education istruzione (f) 
English inglese (m) 
examination esame (m) 
exchange scambio (m) 
exercise book quaderno (m) 
exercise, practice esercizio (m), pratica (f) 
experiment esperimento (m) 
fair giusto/a, equo/a 
felt tip pennarello (m) 
first day back at school primo giorno di scuola (m) 
food technology tecnologia alimentare (f) 
foreign languages lingue straniere (fpl) 
fountain pen penna stilografica (f) 
French francese (m) 
future plans progetti per il futuro (mpl) 
GCSE equivalent esame di licenza media (m) 
geography geografia (f) 
German tedesco (m) 
glue colla (f) 
gym palestra (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
124 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
gymnastics ginnastica (f) 
half-term vacanza di metà trimestre (f) 
hardworking diligente 
headteacher direttore (m), direttrice (f), preside (m/f) 
history storia (f) 
humanities materie umanistiche (fpl) 
(school) holidays vacanze (scolastiche) (fpl) 
homework compito (m)/compiti (mpl) 
ICT informatica (f) 
Italian italiano (m) 
kindergarten, nursery school scuola materna (f), asilo (m) 
laboratory laboratorio (m) 
(modern) languages lingue (moderne) (fpl) 
language lab laboratorio linguistico (m) 
latin latino (m) 
lesson, hour lezione (f), ora (f) 
library biblioteca (f) 
lunch break pausa pranzo (f) 
mark, grade voto (m) 
maths matematica (f) 
media studies scienze della comunicazione (fpl) 
mixed misto/a 
music musica (f) 
oral orale 
pad of paper blocco (m)/bloc-notes (m) 
page pagina (f) 
PE educazione fisica (f) 
pen penna (f) 
pencil matita (f) 
pencil case astuccio (m) 
physics fisica (f) 
plan, project piano (m), progetto (m) 
playground parco giochi (m) 
present (in school) presente (a scuola) 
pressure  pressione (f) 
primary school scuola primaria/scuola elementare (f) 
private school scuola privata (f) 
progress progresso (m) 
projector proiettore (m) 
personal and social education (PSE) educazione civica (f) 
pupil alunno/a (m/f), allievo/a (m/f) 
qualification qualifica (f) 
question domanda (f) 
religion, Religious Studies religione (f) 
report pagella (f), giudizio (m) 
result risultato (m) 
rubber gomma (f) 
rule regola (f) 
ruler righello (m) 
secondary school scuola secondaria (f), scuola media (f) 
school scuola (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
125 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
school activities attività scolastiche (fpl) 
school bag cartella (f) 
school book libro scolastico (m) 
school bus scuolabus (m) 
school day giorno di scuola (m) 
school exchange scambio (scolastico) (m) 
school event evento scolastico 
school group/party gruppo scolastico (m) 
school hall salone della scuola (m), sala delle assemblee (f) 
school keeper, caretaker custode (m/f), bidello/a (m/f) 
school leaving certificate diploma di maturità (m) 
school report, certificate pagella (f), diploma (m) 
school trip gita scolastica (f) 
school year anno scolastico (m) 
sciences scienze (fpl) 
scissors forbici (fpl) 
serious (hardworking) serio/a, diligente 
semester semestre (m) 
sharpener temperamatite (m) 
sixth form scuola superiore (ultimi due anni in Gran 
Bretagna) (f) 
sociology sociologia (f) 
Spanish spagnolo (m) 
sports field campo sportivo (m) 
sports hall, gym palestra (f) 
staff room sala professori (f) 
state stato (m) 
state school scuola statale (f) 
strict severo/a 
strong, good at (subject) bravo/a (in) 
student studente (m), studentessa (f) 
subject materia (f) 
success successo (m) 
successful di successo 
summer holidays vacanze estive (fpl) 
supply teacher, cover teacher supplente (m/f) 
team squadra (f), gruppo (m) 
technology tecnologia (f) 
term trimestre (m) 
test prova (f), verifica (f) 
tie cravatta (f) 
timetable orario (m) 
to answer rispondere 
to attend (school) frequentare 
to calculate calcolare 
to carry on continuare 
to copy  copiare 
to correct correggere 
to discuss discutere 
to draw disegnare 
to fail (an exam) essere bocciato (a un esame)/non passare (un 
esame) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
126 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
to fill out riempire, compilare 
to pass (exam) passare/superare (esame) 
to pay attention, to be careful fare attenzione, stare attento 
to practise fare pratica, esercitarsi 
to read leggere 
to repeat ripetere 
to repeat a year ripetere un anno 
to revise ripassare 
to sing cantare 
to sit an exam sostenere un esame 
to study studiare 
to teach insegnare 
to understand capire 
to work hard lavorare sodo, impegnarsi 
training, education formazione, istruzione 
type of school tipo (m) di scuola 
unfair ingiusto 
uniform divisa (f), uniforme (f) 
vocational school, technical college scuola professionale (f), istituto tecnico (m) 
weak, bad at (subject) non bravo/a, scarso/a in (materia) 
what school is like com'è la scuola 
worksheet foglio (di lavoro) (m) 
yr 7 prima media (anno 7) 
yr 8 seconda media (anno 8) 
yr 9 terza media (anno 9) 
yr 10 primo anno della scuola superiore (anno 10) 
yr 11 secondo anno della scuola superiore (anno 11) 
yr 12 terzo anno della scuola superiore (anno12) 
yr 13 quarto anno della scuola superiore (anno13) 
Higher tier 
 
ballpoint pen penna a sfera (f) 
biology biologia (f) 
boarding school collegio (m) 
business studies studi aziendali (mpl) 
class register registro di classe (m) 
core/compulsory subject materia obbligatoria (f) 
degree (university) laurea (universitaria) (f) 
distance (i.e. distance learning) a distanza 
earphones auricolari (mpl), cuffie (fpl) 
economics economia (f) 
essay tema (m) 
final exam esame finale (m) 
foreign language assistant assistente di lingua straniera (m/f) 
gifted dotato/a 
headphones cuffia (f) 
ink cartridge cartuccia d’inchiostro (f) 
meeting, discussion incontro (m), riunione (f), discussione (f) 
necessary necessario/a 
optional (subject) facoltativo/a  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
127 
 
Higher tier  
Permission permesso (m) 
physics and chemistry fisica (f) e chimica (f) 
pressure pressione (f) 
pronunciation pronuncia (f) 
sociology sociologia (f) 
studies studi (mpl) 
supervisor supervisore (m) 
text book libro di testo (m) 
to agree (with) something essere d'accordo su qs 
to ask a question fare una domanda 
to be cancelled (lessons) essere cancellato 
to copy copiare 
to drop a subject lasciare una materia 
to explain spiegare 
to follow seguire 
to have a detention avere una punizione 
to improve (one’s knowledge/skills in) migliorare (la propria conoscenza/le proprie 
competenze in) 
to move up (to the next form/year) passare (alla classe/all'/anno successivo) 
to pronounce pronunciare 
to skive/to skip/bunk lessons saltare le lezioni 
to spell scrivere 
to teach insegnare 
to translate tradurre 
training centre centro di formazione (m) 
translation traduzione (f) 
university università (f) 
waste of time perdita di tempo (f) 
(to do a) written punishment, lines (fare un) compito (scritto) di punizione (m) 
Future aspirations, study and work 
Foundation tier 
 
actor, actress attore (m), attrice (f) 
advertisement annuncio (m), inserzione (f), pubblicità (f) 
air hostess/air steward assistente di volo (m/f), hostess (f), steward 
(m) 
ambition ambizione (f) 
answerphone segreteria telefonica (f) 
apprenticeship apprendistato (m) 
architect architetto (m) 
artist artista (m/f) 
aspiration aspirazione (f)  
badly paid mal pagato/a 
baker fornaio/a (m), panettiere/a (m) 
beyond the classroom  al di fuori della classe 
builder costruttore (m), imprenditore edile (m) 
building relationships instaurare relazioni 
business/shop impresa (f), negozio (m) 
busy impegnato/a, occupato/a 
butcher macellaio/a (m/f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
128 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
Career carriera (f) 
cashier cassiere/a (m/f) 
charity associazione di beneficenza (f), ente di 
beneficenza (m)  
civil servant funzionario/a statale, (m/f), impiegato/a 
statale (m/f) 
coffee (tea/lunch) break pausa caffè (tè/pranzo) 
colleague collega (m/f) 
computer science informatica di beneficenza  
computer scientist informatico (tecnico) (m) 
conference conferenza di beneficenza  
cook cuoco/a (m/f) 
degree (university) laurea (universitaria) (f) 
dentist dentista (m/f) 
designer progettista (m/f) 
doctor dottore (m), dottoressa (f) 
drama teatro (m), dramma (m), opera drammatica 
(f) 
dream sogno (m) 
driver conducente (m/f), autista (m/f), macchinista 
(m/f) 
educational didattico/a, formativo/a 
electrician elettricista (m/f) 
(bank) employee impiegato/a di banca (m/f), bancario/a (m/f) 
employer datore di lavoro (m) 
employment impiego (m), lavoro (m), occupazione (f) 
engineer ingegnere (m), tecnico (m) 
experienced esperto/a 
farmer agricoltore (m) 
farm worker bracciante agricolo (m) 
fashion moda (f) 
file dossier (m), pratica (f), file (m) 
fireman vigile del fuoco (m), pompiere (m) 
folder cartella (f) 
form modulo (m) 
further study studi ulteriori (mpl) 
future futuro (m) 
interview (job) colloquio (di lavoro) (m) 
interview (TV or magazine) intervista (TV o rivista) (f) 
job lavoro (m), occupazione (f) 
journalist giornalista (m/f) 
language lingua (f) 
manager manager (m), responsabile (m/f), dirigente 
(m/f) 
marketing marketing (m), commercializzazione (f) 
mechanic meccanico (m) 
meeting riunione (f), incontro (m) 
message messaggio (m) 
musician musicista (m/f) 
nurse infermiere/a (m/f) 
part time part-time, a tempo parziale 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
129 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
per hour orario (m), per ora 
pharmacist farmacista (m/f) 
plan, project piano (m), progetto (m) 
planned programmato/a, pianificato/a 
plumber idraulico (m) 
poet poeta (m/f) 
police officer poliziotto (m), poliziotta (f) 
profession professione (f) 
programmer programmatore (m), programmatrice (f) 
sales representative, rep rappresentante (m/f), venditore (m), 
venditrice (f) 
salary salario (m) 
sewing, tailoring cucito (m), sartoria (f) 
situation wanted domande di impiego (f) 
skills abilità (fpl), competenze (fpl) 
society/company società (f), azienda (f), ditta (f) 
student studente (m), studentessa (f) 
study studio (m) 
teacher insegnante (m/f), professore (m), 
professoressa (f), docente (m/f) 
teacher (primary) maestro/a (m/f) 
technician tecnico (m) 
telephone call telefonata (f) 
terms of employment condizioni d’impiego (fpl) 
to apply for a job fare domanda (di lavoro), candidarsi per un 
lavoro 
to cut, cut off (phone) tagliare, cadere (la linea) 
to dial the number fare il numero 
to do a course fare un corso 
to fill in a form compilare un modulo 
to file archiviare 
to hang up attaccare 
to organise organizzare 
to print stampare 
to represent rappresentare 
to study studiare 
training formazione (f) 
travel agency agenzia di viaggi (f) 
unemployment disoccupazione (f) 
university università (f) 
voluntarily/without pay/as a volunteer su base volontaria/come volontario 
volunteering volontariato (m) 
waiter/waitress cameriere (m), cameriera (f) 
well paid ben pagato/a 
work lavoro (m), occupazione (f) 
work experience esperienza di lavoro (f)   
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
130 
 
Higher tier 
 
(data) file file (dati) (m) 
aim, goal scopo (m), obiettivo (m) 
to apply at/go to/ask at reception informarsi presso/rivolgersi a/domandare alla 
reception) 
apply, enrol fare domanda, iscriversi 
appointment appuntamento (m) 
apprentice apprendista (m/f) 
charity sale (e.g. bake sale) vendita di beneficenza (es., vendita di dolci 
per beneficenza) 
data base database (m) 
enclosed allegato/a 
hard disk disco fisso (m), hard disk (m) 
higher education istruzione superiore (f) 
impression impressione (f) 
in aid of a sostegno di 
internship stage (m), tirocinio (m) 
job advert, vacancy annuncio di lavoro (m), posto di lavoro (m) 
job, position lavoro (m), impiego (m), posizione (f) 
key (on keyboard) tasto (su tastiera) (m) 
keyboard tastiera (f) 
law (study of the subject) legge (f) 
letter of application lettera di domanda (f) 
link collegamento (m), link (m) 
medicine (study of the subject) medicina (f) 
memory card scheda di memoria (f) 
mouse mouse (m) 
printer stampante (f) 
profession, job, occupation professione (f), lavoro (m), occupazione (f) 
promotion prospects prospettive di promozione (fpl) 
qualification qualifica (f) 
qualified qualificato/a 
school education istruzione scolastica (f) 
signature firma (f) 
success successo (m) 
successful di successo 
teaching, education (as a subject) insegnamento (m), istruzione (f) 
to enclose, to attach allegare 
to introduce oneself presentarsi 
to send mandare, inviare 
to volunteer lavorare come volontario 
touch screen touch screen 
underscore trattino basso (m) 
university  università (f) 
voluntary work volontariato (m) 
volunteer volontario (m) 
webmail webmail (f) 
word processing word processing (m), elaborazione testi (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
131 
 
International and global dimension: bringing the world together, 
environmental issues 
Foundation tier 
 
access  accesso (m) 
advantages/disadvantages vantaggi/svantaggi (mpl) 
animal animale (m) 
being "green" essere "verde" 
campaign campagna (f) 
campaigns/good causes campagne (fpl)/buone cause (fpl) 
charity associazione di beneficenza (f), ente di 
beneficenza (m) 
coal carbone (m) 
country Paese (m) 
disaster disastro (m) 
drinking water acqua potabile (f) 
drought siccità (f) 
earth terra (f) 
electricity elettricità (f) 
energy, power energia (f) 
environment ambiente (m) 
environmental issues problemi ambientali (mpl) 
fair trade commercio equo (m) 
(music) festival festival (di musica) (m) 
flood, flooding inondazione (f), alluvione (f), allagamento (m) 
for/against pro/contro 
(rain) forest foresta (pluviale) (f) 
gas gas (m) 
global, world wide globale, mondiale 
hunger, famine fame (f), carestia (f) 
hurricane uragano (m) 
international internazionale 
international/global dimension dimensione internazionale/globale (f) 
lack (of) mancanza (di) (f), carenza (di) (f) 
music event evento musicale (m) 
natural resources risorse naturali (fpl) 
oil petrolio (m) 
Olympic games giochi olimpici (mpl), Olimpiadi (fpl) 
people gente (f sing), popolazione (f) 
planet pianeta (m) 
pollution inquinamento (m) 
poverty povertà (f) 
protection protezione (f), tutela (f) 
recycling riciclaggio (m) 
rubbish rifiuti (mpl), spazzatura (f) 
sports event evento sportivo 
to die morire 
to live vivere 
to pollute inquinare 
to protect proteggere, tutelare 
to recycle riciclare 
to save (water) risparmiare (acqua) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
132 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
war guerra (f) 
world mondo (m) 
world cup (football) coppa del mondo (di calcio) (f) 
Higher tier 
 
climatic (adjective) climatico/a  
earthquake terremoto (m) 
fresh water acqua dolce (f) 
global warming riscaldamento globale (m) 
instant istante (m) 
rights of man, peoples’ rights diritti dell’uomo (mpl), diritti umani (mpl) 
salt water acqua salata (f) 
security sicurezza (f) 
solar power energia solare (f) 
species specie (fpl) 
sports event evento sportivo (m) 
spying spionaggio (m) 
starving affamato/a 
to (make) compost trasformare in concime, fare compostaggio 
to benefit beneficiare 
to lack aver bisogno di, essere privo di 
to contaminate contaminare 
to save, to keep safe salvare, , custodire 
to sort/separate (e.g. rubbish) separare (es.rifiuti) 
to stay in contact restare in contatto 
to survive sopravvivere 
to threaten minacciare 
unfortunate, needy sfortunato, bisognoso 
volcano vulcano (m) 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
133 
 
Appendix 4: The context for the 
development of this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] and our 
ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
● reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with those 
taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
● consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including subject 
associations, academics and advisors, teachers and students to ensure this qualification is 
suitable for a UK context 
● reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in their 
documents GCSE (9 to 1) Subject Level Guidance and GCSE Subject Level Conditions and 
Requirements for Modern Foreign Languages, published in April 2016. 
 
 
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification Principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
● demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning and 
measuring higher-order skills 
● rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and valid 
assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in end users of the knowledge, skills and 
competencies of certified students 
● inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students develop at 
different rates and have different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
● empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills, see Appendix 5.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
134 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
May 2014 
“The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important change to the 
education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications will assist them in 
helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an ‘Expert 
Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or because of 
our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the world as diverse as 
Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification development 
process that has included: 
● extensive international comparability of subject content against the highest-performing 
jurisdictions in the world 
● benchmarking assessments against UK and overseas providers to ensure that they are at 
the right level of demand 
● establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-specific 
expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
● subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future oriented. The 
design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, meaning learner outcomes 
have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a learner’s 
success in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident that we have 
supported the development of qualifications that are outstanding for their coherence, 
thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as representing world-class best 
practice.”    
  
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Lee Sing Kong  
Director, National Institute of Education, 
Singapore 
  
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
  
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
 
All titles correct as at May 2014 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
135 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently flagged the 
need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable them to respond with 
confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines skills, or 
competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that can be learned and 
that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform an activity or task and can be 
built upon and extended through learning.’[1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected and 
evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this process, we 
identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the most evidence-based and 
robust skills framework. We adapted the framework slightly to include the Program for 
International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT Literacy and Collaborative Problem Solving 
(CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves:[2] 
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve general 
cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and communicate. [3]  
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, oral communication, written communication, assertive 
communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, service 
orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared understanding, 
taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team organisation. 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work stress, 
adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, and physical 
adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual teams, 
work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and able to acquire 
new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher education, 
as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the teaching and learning of 
this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning materials, developed with 
stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
 
[1]  OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012) 
[2]  Koenig J A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop (National 
Academies Press, 2011) 
[3]  PISA – The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy (2011) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Italian – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
136 
Appendix 6: Codes 
 
Type of code Use of code Code 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for performance 
tables is assigned a discount code 
indicating the subject area to which it 
belongs. 
Discount codes are published by the DfE.  
Please see the GOV.UK 
website* 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an 
Ofqual Regulated Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) code. 
The RQF code is known as a Qualification 
Number (QN). This is the code that 
features in the DfE Section 96 and on the 
LARA as being eligible for 16–18 and 19+ 
funding, and is to be used for all 
qualification funding purposes. The QN will 
appear on students’ final certification 
documentation. 
The QN for this 
qualification is: 
603/0986/6 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to 
enter students for a qualification. Centres 
will need to use the entry codes only when 
claiming students’ qualifications. 
GCSE – 1IN0 
 
Paper codes These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be 
entered for individual papers. 
Paper 1: 1IN0/01 
Paper 2: 1IN0/02 
Paper 3: 1IN0/03 
Paper 4: 1IN0/04 
 
*www.gov.uk/government/publications/2018-performance-tables-discount-codes 
 
 
TM290922 9781446956434_GCSE2017_L12_ITALIAN_ISSUE5.DOC 
 
 
About Pearson 
We are the world’s leading learning company operating in countries all around the world. We 
provide content, assessment and digital services to schools, colleges and universities, as well 
as professional and vocational education to learners to help increase their skills and lifelong 
employability prospects. We believe that wherever learning flourishes so do people.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This specification is Issue 5. We will inform centres of any changes to this issue. The latest 
issue can be found on the Pearson website: qualifications.pearson.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References to third party materials made in this specification are made in good faith. Pearson 
does not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may 
be subject to change, or any opinions expressed therein. (Materials may include textbooks, 
journals, magazines and other publications and websites.) 
 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
 
ISBN 978 1 446 95643 4 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2022 
 
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office:  80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121