GCSE (9-1)
Computer Science
Specification
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9 - 1) in Computer Science (1CP2)
First teaching September 2020
First certification 2022 Issue 1
 
` 
 
 
 
Contents 
1 Introduction 2 
Why choose the Pearson Edexcel GCSE Computer Science 2020? 2 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this qualification 3 
Qualification at a glance 4 
2 Subject content 6 
Paper 1: Principles of Computer Science 7 
Paper 2: Application of Computational Thinking 13 
3 Assessment information 18 
4 Administration and general information 19 
Entries 19 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special consideration and 
malpractice 20 
Student recruitment and progression 23 
Appendix 1: Command word taxonomy 27 
Appendix 2: Flowchart symbols 29 
Appendix 3: The context for the development of this 
qualification 30 
Appendix 4: Codes 32 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Computer Science  
Specification – Issue 1 – January 2020 © Pearson Education Limited 2020 
2 
1 Introduction 
Why choose the Pearson Edexcel GCSE Computer 
Science 2020? 
An exciting, practical focus on real-life programming, developing skills relevant to 
the future. 
We have developed our GCSE Computer Science 2020 in collaboration with teachers and the 
computer science community to create an engaging qualification that equips students with 
the knowledge and practical skills to thrive in the fast-changing world of computer science. 
Our qualification provides a practical approach to developing computational skills. This 
includes innovative, practical onscreen assessment to ensure all students develop the 
computational skills they need for an exciting digital future beyond the classroom. 
Clear and simple structure 
Our qualification has a straightforward structure with six comprehensive topic areas, 
assessed through two externally-examined papers. One of these is a written paper focused 
on computational thinking, data, computers, networks, and issues and impact of computing 
in the world today. The other is a practical onscreen assessment, which focuses on the ability 
to analyse and solve problems by designing, writing, testing and refining programs. 
The qualification’s combination of written and practical elements balances theory and 
practical application, providing students with a rounded experience of computer science. 
Practical programming experience 
Our approach of assessing programming practically via our new onscreen assessment allows 
schools to choose which Integrated Development Environment (IDE) to use. This means that 
students will be able to build their practical skills and experience by programming in a 
familiar environment. 
Clear and accessible assessment for all 
The ramping in our papers means they have a gradual increase in difficulty, helping build 
confidence for students as they work through the questions. The papers' consistent 
assessment structure and straightforward mark schemes make expectations clear to both 
teachers and students. 
A full support package and expert advice 
Our comprehensive teaching and learning support is rich in purposeful activities designed to 
apply learning to the real world. We provide extensive free and paid for teaching and 
learning support, designed to support all teachers delivering this qualification. 
To help you prepare for the practical onscreen assessment, we will provide a digital 
repository of programming activities. These will consist of exercises, downloadable data files, 
sample solutions and commentaries. You can use these programming activities to develop 
the necessary knowledge and skills. 
Our Computer Science Subject Advisor is Tim Brady, a former teacher who is available to 
offer you the support and advice you need – every step of the way. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Computer Science 
Specification – Issue 1 – January 2020 © Pearson Education Limited 2020 
3 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this 
qualification 
Planning 
● Our Getting Started guide gives you an overview of our 2020 GCSE qualification to help 
you to get to grips with the changes to content and assessment, and to help you 
understand what these changes mean for you and your students. 
● We will give you an editable course planner and scheme of work, including an 
interactive scheme of work that you can adapt to suit your department. 
Teaching and learning 
There will be a range of free teaching and learning support to help you deliver this 
qualification, including: 
● suggested resource lists 
● lesson activities and solutions 
● a student guide 
● materials for your options evenings. 
Preparing for exams 
We will also provide a range of resources to help you prepare your students for the 
assessments, including marked exemplars of student work with examiner commentaries. 
ResultsPlus 
ResultsPlus provides the most detailed analysis available of your students’ exam 
performance. It can help you identify the topics and skills where further learning would 
benefit them. 
Access to Scripts 
Our Access to Scripts service allows you to view your students’ marked scripts online or 
download them in PDF format. Our Access to Script service: 
● provides visibility and transparency of marking 
● helps to inform post-results decisions for students and boost their confidence 
● helps identify skills gaps, so you can tailor future teaching plans and refine approaches 
● supports departmental CPD. 
Get help and support 
Our Subject Advisor service and online community, led by Tim Brady, will ensure you receive 
help and guidance from us, and that you can share ideas and information with other 
teachers. You can sign up to receive e-newsletters from Tim to keep up to date with 
qualification updates and product and service news. 
Subject Advisor contact details 
UK: 0333 016 4160  
International: +44 (0) 333 016 4160  
Contact us at: https://support.pearson.com/uk/s/qualification-contactus 
 
Learn more at qualifications.pearson.com 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Computer Science  
Specification – Issue 1 – January 2020 © Pearson Education Limited 2020 
4 
Qualification at a glance 
Content and assessment overview 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Computer Science consists of two 
externally-examined papers.  
 
Paper 1 is a written examination and Paper 2 is a practical onscreen assessment. 
 
Paper 1: Principles of Computer Science (*Paper code: 1CP2/01) 
Written examination: 1 hour and 30 minutes 
50% of the qualification 
75 marks 
Content overview 
This paper will assess Topics 1 to 5. 
● Topic 1: Computational thinking – understanding of what algorithms are, what they 
are used for and how they work; ability to follow, amend and write algorithms; ability 
to construct truth tables. 
● Topic 2: Data – understanding of binary, data representation, data storage and 
compression. 
● Topic 3: Computers – understanding of hardware and software components of 
computer systems and characteristics of programming languages. 
● Topic 4: Networks – understanding of computer networks and network security. 
● Topic 5: Issues and impact – awareness of emerging trends in computing 
technologies, and the impact of computing on individuals, society and the 
environment, including ethical, legal and ownership issues. 
Assessment overview 
This paper consists of five compulsory questions, each one focused on one of the topic 
areas. The questions consist of multiple-choice, short-, medium- and extended-open-
response, tabular and diagrammatic items. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Computer Science 
Specification – Issue 1 – January 2020 © Pearson Education Limited 2020 
5 
 
Paper 2: Application of Computational Thinking (*Paper code: 1CP2/02) 
Onscreen examination: 2 hours 
50% of the qualification 
75 marks 
Content overview 
This paper will assess Topic 6: Problem solving with programming. 
The main focus of this paper is: 
● understanding what algorithms are, what they are used for and how they work in 
relation to creating programs 
● understanding how to decompose and analyse problems 
● ability to read, write, refine and evaluate programs. 
Assessment overview 
This practical paper requires students to design, write, test and refine programs in order 
to solve problems. 
Students will complete this assessment onscreen using their Integrated Development 
Environment (IDE) of choice. 
They will be provided with: 
● coding files 
● a hard copy of the question paper 
● the Programming Language Subset (PLS) – as an insert in the question paper and in 
electronic format. 
Students should then answer the questions onscreen using Python 3.   
This assessment consists of six compulsory questions. 
 
*See Appendix 4: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to this 
qualification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Computer Science  
Specification – Issue 1 – January 2020 © Pearson Education Limited 2020 
6 
2 Subject content 
Qualification aims and objectives 
The aims and objectives of this qualification are to enable students to: 
● understand and apply the fundamental principles and concepts of computer science, 
including abstraction, decomposition, logic, algorithms, and data representation 
● analyse problems in computational terms through practical experience of solving such 
problems, including designing, writing and debugging programs 
● think creatively, innovatively, analytically, logically and critically 
● understand the components that make up digital systems and how they communicate 
with one another and with other systems 
● understand the impact of digital technology on wider society, including issues of privacy 
and cybersecurity 
● apply mathematical skills relevant to computer science. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Computer Science 
Specification – Issue 1 – January 2020 © Pearson Education Limited 2020 
7 
Paper 1: Principles of Computer Science 
Overview 
In order to become proficient computer scientists, it is essential that students have 
knowledge and understanding of the field’s fundamental principles and concepts. 
Content 
Topic 1: Computational thinking 
Students are expected to develop a set of computational thinking skills that enable them to 
design, implement and analyse algorithms for solving problems. 
Students are expected to be familiar with and use the Programming Language Subset (PLS) 
document provided on the GCSE in Computer Science section of our website.  
The flowchart symbols students are expected to be familiar with and use are shown in 
Appendix 2.  
 
Subject content Students should: 
1.1 Decomposition 
and abstraction 
1.1.1 understand the benefit of using decomposition and 
abstraction to model aspects of the real world and analyse, 
understand and solve problems 
1.1.2 understand the benefits of using subprograms  
1.2 Algorithms 1.2.1 be able to follow and write algorithms (flowcharts, 
pseudocode*, program code) that use sequence, selection, 
repetition (count-controlled, condition-controlled) and 
iteration (over every item in a data structure), and input, 
processing and output to solve problems 
1.2.2 understand the need for and be able to follow and write 
algorithms that use variables and constants and one- and 
two-dimensional data structures (strings, records, arrays) 
1.2.3 understand the need for and be able to follow and write 
algorithms that use arithmetic operators (addition, subtraction, 
division, multiplication, modulus, integer division, 
exponentiation), relational operators (equal to, less than, 
greater than, not equal to, less than or equal to, greater than 
or equal to) and logical operators (AND, OR, NOT) 
1.2.4 be able to determine the correct output of an algorithm for 
a given set of data and use a trace table to determine what 
value a variable will hold at a given point in an algorithm 
1.2.5 understand types of errors that can occur in programs 
(syntax, logic, runtime) and be able to identify and correct 
logic errors in algorithms 
1.2.6 understand how standard algorithms (bubble sort, merge 
sort, linear search, binary search) work 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Computer Science  
Specification – Issue 1 – January 2020 © Pearson Education Limited 2020 
8 
Subject content Students should: 
 1.2.7 be able to use logical reasoning and test data to evaluate 
an algorithm’s fitness for purpose and efficiency (number of 
compares, number of passes through a loop, use of 
memory) 
1.3 Truth tables 1.3.1 be able to apply logical operators (AND, OR, NOT) in truth 
tables with up to three inputs to solve problems 
 
*In this specification, the term ‘pseudocode’ is used to denote an informal written description 
of a program. Pseudocode uses imprecise English language statements and does not require 
any strict programming syntax. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Computer Science 
Specification – Issue 1 – January 2020 © Pearson Education Limited 2020 
9 
Topic 2: Data 
Computers use binary to represent different types of data. 
Students are expected to learn how different types of data are represented in a computer.  
 
Subject content Students should: 
2.1 Binary 2.1.1 understand that computers use binary to represent data 
(numbers, text, sound, graphics) and program instructions 
and be able to determine the maximum number of states 
that can be represented by a binary pattern of a given 
length  
2.1.2 understand how computers represent and manipulate 
unsigned integers and two’s complement signed integers 
2.1.3 be able to convert between denary and 8-bit binary 
numbers (0 to 255, -128 to +127) 
2.1.4 be able to add together two positive binary patterns and 
apply logical and arithmetic binary shifts   
2.1.5 understand the concept of overflow in relation to the 
number of bits available to store a value 
2.1.6 understand why hexadecimal notation is used and be able to 
convert between hexadecimal and binary 
2.2 Data 
representation 
2.2.1 understand how computers encode characters using 7-bit 
ASCII  
2.2.2 understand how bitmap images are represented in binary 
(pixels, resolution, colour depth) 
2.2.3 understand how analogue sound is represented in binary 
(amplitude, sample rate, bit depth, sample interval)  
2.2.4 understand the limitations of binary representation of data 
when constrained by the number of available bits 
2.3 Data storage 
and compression 
2.3.1 understand that data storage is measured in binary 
multiples (bit, nibble, byte, kibibyte, mebibyte, gibibyte, 
tebibyte) and be able to construct expressions to calculate 
file sizes and data capacity requirements 
2.3.2 understand the need for data compression and methods of 
compressing data (lossless, lossy)  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Computer Science  
Specification – Issue 1 – January 2020 © Pearson Education Limited 2020 
10 
Topic 3: Computers 
Students must be familiar with the hardware and software components that make up a 
computer system. 
 
Subject content Students should:  
3.1 Hardware 3.1.1 understand the von Neumann stored program concept and 
the role of main memory (RAM), CPU (control unit, 
arithmetic logic unit, registers), clock, address bus, data 
bus, control bus in the fetch-decode-execute cycle  
 3.1.2 understand the role of secondary storage and the ways in 
which data is stored on devices (magnetic, optical, solid 
state) 
 3.1.3 understand the concept of an embedded system and what 
embedded systems are used for  
3.2 Software 3.2.1 understand the purpose and functionality of an operating 
system (file management, process management, 
peripheral management, user management) 
 3.2.2 understand the purpose and functionality of utility software 
(file repair, backup, data compression, disk 
defragmentation, anti-malware) 
 3.2.3 understand the importance of developing robust software 
and methods of identifying vulnerabilities (audit trails, code 
reviews) 
3.3 Programming 
languages 
3.3.1 understand the characteristics and purposes of low-level 
and high-level programming languages  
 3.3.2 understand how an interpreter differs from a compiler in 
the way it translates high-level code into machine code 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Computer Science 
Specification – Issue 1 – January 2020 © Pearson Education Limited 2020 
11 
Topic 4: Networks 
Most computer applications in use today would not be possible without networks. Students 
should understand the key principles behind the organisation of computer networks.  
 
Subject content Students should: 
4.1 Networks 4.1.1 understand why computers are connected in a network 
 4.1.2 understand different types of networks (LAN, WAN) 
 4.1.3 understand how the internet is structured 
(IP addressing, routers) 
 4.1.4 understand how the characteristics of wired and wireless 
connectivity impact on performance (speed, range, latency, 
bandwidth) 
 4.1.5 understand that network speeds are measured in bits per 
second (kilobit, megabit, gigabit) and be able to construct 
expressions involving file size, transmission rate and time 
 4.1.6 understand the role of and need for network protocols 
(Ethernet, Wi-Fi, TCP/IP, HTTP, HTTPS, FTP) and email 
protocols (POP3, SMTP, IMAP) 
4.1.7 understand how the 4-layer (application, transport, 
internet, link) TCP/IP model handles data transmission 
over a network 
4.1.8 understand characteristics of network topologies (bus, star, 
mesh) 
4.2 Network 
security 
4.2.1 understand the importance of network security, ways of 
identifying network vulnerabilities (penetration testing, 
ethical hacking) and methods of protecting networks 
(access control, physical security, firewalls) 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Computer Science  
Specification – Issue 1 – January 2020 © Pearson Education Limited 2020 
12 
Topic 5: Issues and impact 
Students should be aware of the influence of digital technology and recognise some of the 
issues and the impact on wider society associated with its use.  
 
Subject content Students should: 
5.1 Environmental  5.1.1 understand environmental issues associated with the use 
of digital devices (energy consumption, manufacture, 
replacement cycle, disposal)
 
5.2 Ethical and legal 5.2.1 understand ethical and legal issues associated with the 
collection and use of personal data (privacy, ownership, 
consent, misuse, data protection) 
5.2.2 understand ethical and legal issues associated with the use 
of artificial intelligence, machine learning and robotics 
(accountability, safety, algorithmic bias, legal liability) 
5.2.3 understand methods of intellectual property protection for 
computer systems and software (copyright, patents, 
trademarks, licencing) 
5.3 Cybersecurity 5.3.1 understand the threat to digital systems posed by malware 
(viruses, worms, Trojans, ransomware, key loggers) and 
how hackers exploit technical vulnerabilities (unpatched 
software, out-of-date anti-malware) and use social 
engineering to carry out cyberattacks 
5.3.2 understand methods of protecting digital systems and data 
(anti-malware, encryption, acceptable use policies, backup 
and recovery procedures) 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2022.  
● The paper is 1 hour and 30 minutes. 
● The paper consists of five questions (one question per topic). 
● The paper is out of 75 marks. 
● Students must answer all questions. 
● The paper consists of multiple-choice, short-, medium- and extended-open-response, 
tabular and diagrammatic items. 
● The paper will include questions that target mathematics at Level 2. 
● The paper will include questions that target computer-related mathematics. 
● Calculators must not be used in the examination. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample question paper and mark scheme for this paper can be found in the Pearson 
Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Computer Science Sample Assessment Materials 
(SAMs) document. 
The SAMs will be available on the GCSE in Computer Science section of our website. Please 
note that the order of the topics will vary in each live assessment. A full list of command 
words that will be used in assessments are shown in Appendix 1: Command word taxonomy. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Computer Science 
Specification – Issue 1 – January 2020 © Pearson Education Limited 2020 
13 
Paper 2: Application of Computational Thinking 
Overview 
Learning to program is a core component of a computer science course. Students should be 
competent at designing, reading, writing and debugging programs. They must be able to 
apply their skills to solve real problems and produce readable, robust programs. 
Content 
Topic 6: Problem solving with programming 
All problems set in the practical programming tasks in the examination can be solved with 
the functionalities presented in the Programming Language Subset (PLS) document provided 
on the GCSE in Computer Science section of our website.  
 
Subject content Students should: 
6.1 Develop code 6.1.1 be able to use decomposition and abstraction to analyse, 
understand and solve problems  
6.1.2  be able to read, write, analyse and refine programs written 
in a high-level programming language 
6.1.3 be able to convert algorithms (flowcharts, pseudocode*) 
into programs  
6.1.4  be able to use techniques (layout, indentation, comments, 
meaningful identifiers, white space) to make programs 
easier to read, understand and maintain 
6.1.5  be able to identify, locate and correct program errors 
(logic, syntax, runtime)  
6.1.6  be able to use logical reasoning and test data to evaluate a 
program’s fitness for purpose and efficiency (number of 
compares, number of passes through a loop, use of 
memory)  
 
*In this specification, the term ‘pseudocode’ is used to denote an informal written description 
of a program. Pseudocode uses imprecise English language statements and does not require 
any strict programming syntax. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Computer Science  
Specification – Issue 1 – January 2020 © Pearson Education Limited 2020 
14 
 
Subject content Students should: 
6.2 Constructs 6.2.1 understand the function of and be able to identify the 
structural components of programs (constants, variables, 
initialisation and assignment statements, command 
sequences, selection, repetition, iteration, data structures, 
subprograms, parameters, input/output) 
6.2.2  be able to write programs that make appropriate use of 
sequencing, selection, repetition (count-controlled,  
condition-controlled), iteration (over every item in a data 
structure) and single entry/exit points from code blocks 
and subprograms 
6.3 Data types and 
structures 
6.3.1 be able to write programs that make appropriate use of 
primitive data types (integer, real, Boolean, char) and one- 
and two-dimensional structured data types (string, array, 
record) 
6.3.2 be able to write programs that make appropriate use of 
variables and constants 
6.3.3 be able to write programs that manipulate strings (length, 
position, substrings, case conversion) 
6.4 Input/output 6.4.1 be able to write programs that accept and respond 
appropriately to user input 
6.4.2 be able to write programs that read from and write to 
comma separated value text files 
6.4.3 understand the need for and be able to write programs 
that implement validation (length check, presence check, 
range check, pattern check) 
6.4.4 understand the need for and be able to write programs 
that implement authentication (ID and password, lookup) 
6.5 Operators 6.5.1 be able to write programs that use arithmetic operators 
(addition, subtraction, division, multiplication, modulus, 
integer division, exponentiation) 
6.5.2 be able to write programs that use relational operators 
(equal to, less than, greater than, not equal to, less than 
or equal to, greater than or equal to) 
6.5.3 be able to write programs that use logical operators (AND, 
OR, NOT) 
6.6 Subprograms 6.6.1 be able to write programs that use pre-existing (built-in, 
library) and user-devised subprograms (procedures, 
functions) 
6.6.2 be able to write functions that may or may not take 
parameters but must return values, and procedures that 
may or may not take parameters but do not return values 
6.6.3 understand the difference between and be able to write 
programs that make appropriate use of global and local 
variables  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Computer Science 
Specification – Issue 1 – January 2020 © Pearson Education Limited 2020 
15 
Onscreen problem solving with programming  
Students should engage with a broad range of activities to enable them to learn to program 
to the standard required for this qualification.   
Mastering programming involves much more than simply learning the syntax/semantics of a 
programming language. It also involves learning strategies for problem solving, embracing 
mistakes as opportunities to learn, mastering a few simple tools and working together with 
others to achieve goals. 
We have adopted Python programming language as the vehicle to explore, learn and assess 
the aspects of problem solving and programming covered in this qualification. Python is 
popular and commonly used in education. 
The requirements of this qualification can be met using the Python 3 programming language.  
Centres are advised to choose the most up-to-date version of an interpreter that supports 
Python 3. There are many freely available Python 3 interpreters, often installable as part of 
an integrated development environment (IDE). 
Programming environments 
Online guided tutorials are useful in motivating and engaging students. They normally 
present small challenges where students copy or reproduce code to achieve a short-term 
goal, often based on moving up levels. Using these environments exclusively may not 
prepare students for the type of problems they will encounter in Paper 2. Teachers should 
consider highlighting how each level relates directly to the requirements of the specification. 
For example, if students are directing a tank to move forward until it encounters an obstacle 
using a while loop, then the corresponding structure of the while loop could be explored in a 
non-graphical text-based environment, including on paper. 
Students will need experience using an IDE to write, run and debug their programming code. 
Developing skills in using an IDE will allow students to be more productive, especially in 
time-constrained activities. A suitable IDE includes these functionalities: 
● an editor, with line numbers 
● a syntax highlighter and checker 
● breakpoints and stepping 
● a variable inspector. 
There are many IDEs available to freely download online. Teachers are advised to evaluate 
several before selecting one suitable for their students. 
Classroom strategies 
Several professional organisations exist for computing and computer science teachers. It is 
advisable to join one or more of these organisations to keep up to date and share current 
best practice in the teaching of computer science. A range of strategies that teachers could 
consider in teaching programming include: 
● unplugged activities, which focus on reading and tracing code before attempting to write 
code 
● correcting errors in code, both on paper and in an IDE 
● an approach such as PRIMM (predict, run, investigate, modify, make) to build on small 
steps 
● paired programming to write and debug code 
● faded worked examples, where scaffolding is slowly removed  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Computer Science  
Specification – Issue 1 – January 2020 © Pearson Education Limited 2020 
16 
● peer instruction to encourage students to learn from each other and develop skills in 
reading code 
● Parsons problems, where code must be arranged in order, reducing the need for copying 
or typing in code 
● showing consistent exemplar code, using the good programming practices set out in the 
Programming Language Subset (PLS). 
Information on any unfamiliar strategies can be found online, using a search engine. 
Programming Language Subset (PLS) 
Both teachers and students are encouraged to look at the Programming Language Subset (PLS). 
The PLS represents a specific set of constructs that are sufficient to successfully answer any 
question in Paper 2. Any student successfully using more esoteric or complex constructs or 
approaches not included in the PLS will still be awarded marks in Paper 2 if the solution is 
valid. The constructs contained in the PLS are found in most high-level programming languages 
and therefore form a foundation of computer science knowledge required in the assessment.  
The PLS will be valid for the lifetime of the qualification. However, if updates are required, we will 
ensure the latest version is published by the 31st of January in the year of the examination. Please 
note that students will be given both printed and electronic versions of the PLS during the 
examination. Please see the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Computer Science – 
Paper 2 Instructions for the Conduct of the Examination (ICE) for further information. The PLS and 
ICE are available to download on the GCSE in Computer Science section of our website. 
Teacher support 
We will develop a range of teaching and learning materials to help centres prepare for the 
onscreen assessment of problem solving with programming. These include a good 
programming practice guide elaborating on and exemplifying the constructs in the PLS, and 
programming exercises with commentaries and solutions. The exercises can be used by 
teachers either as classroom activities or for formative assessment purposes. These teacher 
support materials will be made available on the GCSE in Computer Science section of our 
website. 
Practical Programming Statement (PPS) 
Centres are required to complete a Practical Programming Statement (PPS), which 
confirms they have taken reasonable steps to ensure that each student sitting our GCSE in 
Computer Science has had the opportunity to demonstrate their programming skills in terms 
of design, write, test and refine programs in Python during their course of study. The PPS 
should be completed by a member of the senior leadership team at the centre. Failure by a 
centre to provide a completed PPS to us in a timely manner will result in potential 
malpractice and/or maladministration. 
The PPS will be made available by the 31st of January in the year of the examination on the 
GCSE in Computer Science section of our website. 
The completed PPS must be submitted to us by the 31st of May in the year of the 
examination. Centres are reminded that if they do not submit this form it may result in 
malpractice/maladministration. 
Instructions for the conduct of the examination (ICE) 
For detailed information on the set up of candidate secure user areas, download of coding 
files, administration of the examination and transmission of candidates’ completed coding 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Computer Science 
Specification – Issue 1 – January 2020 © Pearson Education Limited 2020 
17 
files to us for marking, please refer to the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in 
Computer Science – Paper 2 Instructions for the Conduct of the Examination (ICE).  
This document will be updated on an annual basis so that in each year of examination the 
version to be used will be available by the 31st of January. It is available on the GCSE in 
Computer Science section of our website. 
Security and backups 
For materials stored electronically, centres are strongly advised to utilise firewall protection 
and virus-checking software, and to employ an effective backup strategy, so that an up-to-
date archive of students’ evidence is ensured following the examination. 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2022.  
● The paper is 2 hours. 
● The paper consists of six compulsory questions.  
● The paper is out of 75 marks. 
● Students must answer all questions. 
● The questions are practical in nature and require students to design, write, test and 
refine programs in order to solve problems. 
● Students will complete this assessment onscreen using their Integrated Development 
Environment (IDE) of choice. 
● Students will be provided with coding files, a hard copy of the question paper, and the 
Programming Language Subset (PLS) document. Students should then answer the 
questions onscreen using Python 3. 
● Students must not have access to the internet. 
● The paper will include questions that target computer-related mathematics. 
● The paper will include questions that target mathematics at Level 2. 
Synoptic assessment 
Synoptic assessment requires students to work across different parts of a qualification by 
applying their accumulated knowledge and understanding of multiple topic or subject areas 
to practical contexts. 
Synoptic assessment enables students to show their ability to combine their skills, knowledge 
and understanding within the breadth and depth of the subject. 
Synoptic assessment will be tested in Paper 2. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample question paper and mark scheme can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 
1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Computer Science Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
The SAMs will be available on the GCSE in Computer Science section of our website. Coding 
files for the Paper 2 SAMs will also be available for download. These include the original 
coding files that accompany the sample question paper, and exemplar finished coding files to 
accompany the mark scheme. A copy of the PLS will also be available. 
A full list of command words that will be used in assessments are shown in  
Appendix 1: Command word taxonomy. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Computer Science  
Specification – Issue 1 – January 2020 © Pearson Education Limited 2020 
18 
3 Assessment information 
Assessment Objectives 
Students must: % in GCSE 
AO1 Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of the key concepts 
and principles of computer science 
30 
AO2 Apply knowledge and understanding of key concepts and 
principles of computer science 
40 
AO3 Analyse problems in computational terms: 
● to make reasoned judgements 
● to design, program, evaluate and refine solutions. 
30 
Total 100 
 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
Paper  
Assessment Objectives Total % for all 
Assessment 
Objectives 
AO1 % AO2 % AO3 % 
Paper 1: Principles of 
Computer Science 
30 20 0 50 
Paper 2: Application of 
Computational Thinking 
0 20 30 50 
Total for GCSE 30 40 30 100 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Computer Science 
Specification – Issue 1 – January 2020 © Pearson Education Limited 2020 
19 
4 Administration and general information 
Entries 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for this qualification can be found in 
our UK Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations officers and is 
available on our website: qualifications.pearson.com 
Re-taking the qualification 
Students wishing to re-take this qualification are required to re-take both external papers in 
May/June in any single year. 
Discount code and performance tables  
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more than one GCSE, or other Level 2 
qualifications with the same discount code, will have only the grade for their ‘first entry’ 
counted for the purpose of the school and college performance tables (please see  
Appendix 4: Codes). For further information about what constitutes 'first entry' and full 
details of how this policy is applied, please refer to the DfE website: 
www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-education 
Students should be advised that if they take two GCSEs with the same discount code, 
schools and colleges they wish to progress to are likely to take the view that this 
achievement is equivalent to only one GCSE. The same view may be taken if students take 
two GCSE or other Level 2 qualifications that have different discount codes but which have 
significant overlap of content. Students or their advisers who have any doubts about their 
subject combinations should check with the institution they wish to progress to before 
embarking on their programmes. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Computer Science  
Specification – Issue 1 – January 2020 © Pearson Education Limited 2020 
20 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, 
special consideration and malpractice 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality policy requires all students to 
have equal opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our qualifications 
to be awarded in a way that is fair to every student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the Equality Act 2010) are not, 
when they are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in comparison to 
students who do not share that characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification and that 
this achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their peers. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be available in English. All student work must be  
in English. 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with special 
educational needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to: 
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the assessment. 
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an individual 
student with a disability, without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding bodies comply with the duty under the 
Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students will 
then know what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for assessment. 
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable adjustments 
where a person with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in undertaking an 
assessment. The awarding organisation is required to take reasonable steps to overcome 
that disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be unique to that individual and 
therefore might not be in the list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of factors, 
which will include: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding 
organisation, timeframes or affects the security or integrity of the assessment. This is 
because the adjustment is not ‘reasonable’. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Computer Science 
Specification – Issue 1 – January 2020 © Pearson Education Limited 2020 
21 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student's mark or grade to 
reflect temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the assessment, which 
has had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a material effect on a candidate’s ability to take 
an assessment or demonstrate their level of attainment in an assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to apply for access arrangements 
and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special 
consideration, please refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk. 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that compromises or seeks to 
compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in examinations must be reported to us on a JCQ Form M1 (available 
at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form should be emailed to 
candidatemalpractice@pearson.com. Please provide as much information and supporting 
documentation as possible. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies 
with us. 
Failure to report malpractice constitutes staff or centre malpractice.  
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and maladministration of 
our qualifications. As with candidate malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is any act that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the 
integrity of the qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported 
immediately, before any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to us on a  
JCQ Form M2(a) (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form, 
supporting documentation and as much information as possible should be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com. Note that the final decision regarding  
appropriate sanctions lies with us. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More-detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the document 
General and Vocational Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments Policies and Procedures, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Computer Science  
Specification – Issue 1 – January 2020 © Pearson Education Limited 2020 
22 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to comply with the requirements of 
Ofqual’s General Conditions of Recognition. 
This GCSE qualification will be graded and certificated on a nine-grade scale from 9 to 1, 
using the total subject mark where 9 is the highest grade. Individual papers are not graded. 
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum judged by Pearson to be of 
sufficient standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U result. 
The first certification opportunity for this qualification is 2022. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Computer Science 
Specification – Issue 1 – January 2020 © Pearson Education Limited 2020 
23 
Student recruitment and progression 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this qualification. 
Progression 
Students can progress from this qualification to: 
● further studies, for example A Levels, a BTEC in Computer Science 
● employment, where further training may be available. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Computer Science  
Specification – Issue 1 – January 2020 © Pearson Education Limited 2020 
24 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Computer Science 
Specification – Issue 1 – January 2020 © Pearson Education Limited 2020 
25 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Command word taxonomy 27 
Appendix 2: Flowchart symbols 29 
Appendix 3: The context for the development of this qualification 30 
Appendix 4: Codes 32 
 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Computer Science  
Specification – Issue 1 – January 2020 © Pearson Education Limited 2020 
26 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Computer Science 
Specification – Issue 1 – January 2020 © Pearson Education Limited 2020 
27 
Appendix 1: Command word taxonomy 
The following tables show the list of command verbs and their definitions for use in the 
question papers. Only the verbs listed in these tables will be used in question papers. Please 
note that the command words listed for Paper 1 will not all be used in each examination series. 
Paper 1 
Command 
word  
Mark Tariff Definition 
Amend 1 to 6 marks Requires changes or additions to code, or deletions or 
rearrangement of code. 
Calculate 2 to 4 marks Obtain a numerical answer, showing relevant working.      
If the answer has a unit, this must be included. 
Complete 2 to 6 marks Requires the completion of a table/diagram/algorithm     
(in any notation). 
Construct 2 to 4 marks Usually requires creation of an artefact using subject-
specific symbolic representation, rules and syntax. 
Convert 2 to 6 marks Requires changing information from one symbolic 
representation to another representation. May require 
amending to provide new functionality/facility. 
Define  1 to 2 marks When the meaning of a term is expected but there are 
different ways of how this can be described.  
Describe  2 to 4 marks To give an account of something. Statements in the 
response need to be developed, as they are often linked, 
but do not need to include a justification or reason. 
Discuss  6 marks ● Identify the issue/situation/problem/argument that is 
being assessed within the question. 
● Explore all aspects of an 
issue/situation/problem/argument. 
● Investigate the issue/situation by reasoning or 
argument.  
Draw 2 to 6 marks Produce a diagram/image either using a ruler or 
freehand. May require labelling/annotation to express 
meaning. Used when symbolic representations need to be 
manipulated. 
Explain 2 to 4 marks An explanation requires a justification/exemplification of 
a point. The answer must contain some element of 
reasoning/justification, this can include 
mathematical/logical explanations. The mark scheme will 
have marking points which are linked. 
Give/State/Name  1 mark  
(for each) 
All these command words are really synonyms. They all 
require recall of one or more pieces of information. 
Identify 1 mark  
(for each) 
Usually requires some key information to be selected 
from a given stimulus/resource/set of options. 
Write 1 to 6 marks Usually requires creation/manipulation of an artefact 
using a subject-specific notation. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Computer Science  
Specification – Issue 1 – January 2020 © Pearson Education Limited 2020 
28 
Paper 2 
Command 
word  
Mark Tariff Definition 
Amend 5 to 15 marks Requires changes or additions to code, or deletions or 
rearrangement of code. 
Write 5 to 15 marks Usually requires creation/manipulation of a program 
using a high-level programming language. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Computer Science 
Specification – Issue 1 – January 2020 © Pearson Education Limited 2020 
29 
Appendix 2: Flowchart symbols 
Students are expected to be familiar with and use the following flowchart symbols for  
Paper 1: Principles of Computer Science. Students can answer any/all questions using these 
symbols but if they use other symbols that are valid and understandable in their flowchart, 
they will be given credit and will gain marks. Whenever we phrase a question, we will only 
use these symbols. 
 
 
Denotes the start and end of an algorithm. 
 Denotes a process to be carried out. 
 Denotes an input or output. 
 Denotes a decision to be made. 
 
Shows the logical flow of the program. 
 
Denotes a pre-defined subprogram. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Computer Science  
Specification – Issue 1 – January 2020 © Pearson Education Limited 2020 
30 
Appendix 3: The context for the 
development of this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] and our 
ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
● reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with those 
taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
● consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including learned bodies, 
subject associations, higher-education academics and teachers to ensure this 
qualification is suitable for a UK context 
● reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in their 
documents GCSE (9 to 1) Qualification Level Conditions and Requirements and GCSE Subject 
Level Conditions and Requirements for Computer Science, published in April 2014 and 
February 2019 respectively. 
                                                
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification Principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
● demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning and 
measuring higher-order skills 
● rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and valid 
assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in end users of the knowledge, skills and 
competencies of certified students 
● inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students develop at 
different rates and have different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
● empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills. 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Computer Science 
Specification – Issue 1 – January 2020 © Pearson Education Limited 2020 
31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications
Ma
y 2014 
“The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important change to the
education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications will assist them in 
helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an ‘Expert 
Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or because of 
our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the world as diverse as 
Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia, and a number of countries across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification development 
process that has included: 
● Extensive international comparability of subject content against the highest-performing
jurisdictions in the world
● Benchmarking assessments against UK and overseas providers to ensure that they are at
the right level of demand
● Establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-specific
expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications
● Subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future oriented. The 
design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, meaning learner outcomes 
have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a learner’s 
success in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident that we have 
supported the development of qualifications that are outstanding for their coherence, 
thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as representing world-class best 
practice.
”
 
Professor Lee Sing Kong 
Director, National Institute of Education, 
Singapore 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
All titles correct as at May 2014 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Computer Science  
Specification – Issue 1 – January 2020 © Pearson Education Limited 2020 
32 
Appendix 4: Codes 
 
Type of code Use of code Code 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for performance 
tables is assigned a discount code 
indicating the subject area to which it 
belongs. 
Discount codes are published by the DfE. 
Please see the GOV.UK 
website* 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an 
Ofqual Regulated Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) code. 
The RQF code is known as a Qualification 
Number (QN). This is the code that 
features in the DfE Section 96 and on the 
LARA as being eligible for 16–18 and 19+ 
funding, and is to be used for all 
qualification funding purposes. The QN will 
appear on students’ final certification 
documentation. 
The QN for this 
qualification is:  
601/8058/4 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to 
enter students for a qualification. Centres 
will need to use the entry codes only when 
claiming students’ qualifications. 
GCSE – 1CP2 
Paper codes These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be 
entered for individual papers. 
Paper 1: 1CP2/01 
Paper 2: 1CP2/02 
 
*https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/key-stage-4-qualifications-discount-codes-
and-point-scores  
 
DB211219 9781446965795_GCSE_2020_L12_COMPSCI_ISS1_1CP2 PPDB.DOC.1–36/0 
 
 
Edexcel, BTEC and LCCI qualifications 
Edexcel, BTEC and LCCI qualifications are awarded by Pearson, the UK’s largest awarding 
body offering academic and vocational qualifications that are globally recognised and 
benchmarked. For further information, please visit our qualification website at 
qualifications.pearson.com. Alternatively, you can get in touch with us using the details on 
our contact us page at qualifications.pearson.com/contactus 
About Pearson 
Pearson is the world's leading learning company, with 35,000 employees in more than  
70 countries working to help people of all ages to make measurable progress in their lives 
through learning. We put the learner at the centre of everything we do, because wherever 
learning flourishes, so do people. Find out more about how we can help you and your 
learners at qualifications.pearson.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References to third party materials made in this specification are made in good faith. Pearson 
does not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may 
be subject to change, or any opinions expressed therein. (Materials may include textbooks, 
journals, magazines and other publications and websites.) 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
 
 
ISBN 978 1 446 96579 5 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2020 
 
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office:  80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121
© Valery Brozhinsky/Shutterstock