This draft qualification has not yet been accredited by Ofqual. It is published to enable teachers to have early sight of our 
proposed approach to Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9 - 1) in Music (1MU0). Further chang
es may be required 
and no assurance can be given at this time that the proposed qualification will be made available in its current form, or 
that it will be accredited in time for first teaching in September 2016 and first award in 2018.
Specification
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9 - 1) in Chinese
(spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) (1CN0)
First teaching from September 2017
First certification from June 2019
GCSE (9-1)
Chinese  
(spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese)
Issue 5

 
 
 
 
Summary of Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) 
in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Specification  
Issue 5 changes  
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this current 
issue 
Page 
number 
Removal of Subject Advisor name: 
‘Our subject advisor service and online community’ 
3 
Update to Foundation tier paper timing: 
‘Foundation tier: 1 hour 20 minutes…’ 
6 and 41 
Update to Foundation tier Assessment Information for Paper 4, bullet point 5: 
‘Question 2 has two options from which students have to select one. This 
question assesses students on their ability to note down key points and convey 
information. Students must use the formal register.’ 
41 
Reference to ‘GCE AS’ removed in the following sentence: 
This qualification offers a suitable progression route to GCE A level in Chinese.  
69 
 
If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, contact us via our website at: 
qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/contact-us.html. 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents 
1 Introduction 2 
Why choose Edexcel GCSE Chinese? 2 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this qualification 3 
Qualification at a glance 4 
2 Subject content 7 
Themes and topics 8 
Paper 1: Listening and understanding in Chinese 10 
Paper 2: Speaking in Chinese 12 
Paper 3: Reading and understanding in Chinese 38 
Paper 4: Writing in Chinese 40 
Assessment Objectives 65 
3 Administration and general information 66 
Entries 66 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special consideration and 
malpractice 66 
Student recruitment and progression 69 
Appendix 1: Candidate speaking examination record form (CS2) 73 
Appendix 2: Grammar list 74 
Appendix 3: Vocabulary list 82 
Appendix 4: The context for the development of this qualification 132 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 134 
Appendix 6: Codes 135 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
2 
1 Introduction 
Why choose Edexcel GCSE Chinese? 
We believe languages should be accessible for all students. Our new Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) has been 
developed to help students of all abilities progress and develop a passion for languages, 
through culturally engaging content. 
We’ve listened to feedback from the languages community and have developed an engaging 
and inspirational course of study that will enable your students to manipulate and use the 
target language effectively, independently and creatively, so that they have a solid basis 
from which to progress to A Level or employment. 
Engaging and popular topics 
Our specification includes both familiar and new topics that you have told us you like and 
that motivate your students. 
Manageable content 
Our content has been structured across five themes. This flexible programme of study allows 
time for a focused revision period at the end of the course. 
Content and assessments that provide an engaging real-world focus 
The authentic situations and stimuli enable students to see language in context and learn 
about the culture of the target language country. Our assessments allow for spontaneity and 
test grammar as well as providing plenty of opportunities for students to apply their 
knowledge independently, creatively and in authentic situations. 
Straightforward assessments that are accessible to all students 
Special care has been taken to ensure that all our papers are designed to be clear and 
concise and, where appropriate, questions feature scaffolding to help all students’ progress 
through the assessments confidently. Both papers are also structured so that they are 
progressive in their level of demand with the most demanding question being the final 
question in the paper. Translation tasks are progressive in their level of difficulty and are of 
appropriate demand at each tier. 
Carefully selected texts 
We have worked closely with teachers and expert practitioners to ensure we include 
interesting and relevant texts at the right level for students at each tier and that will 
encourage the use of a wide range of texts in the classroom. 
Clear and precise assessment criteria 
Our mark schemes have been trialled with sample student answers to ensure they reward 
students appropriately and that it is clear what is expected of students at each band. 
Continuous progression 
Our content builds on the understanding developed at prior language learning experience at 
Key Stage 3 while also ensuring that students new to the subject are appropriately 
supported, and provides a firm foundation for students to make a smooth transition to 
A Level. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
3 
Supporting you in planning and implementing 
this qualification 
Planning 
● To support you in delivering this specification, our Getting Started Guide, available on 
our website, gives you an overview of the new GCSE qualification to help you to get to 
grips with the changes to content and assessment and to help you understand what these 
changes mean for you and your students. 
● We will give you an editable course planner and scheme of work that you can adapt to 
suit your department. 
● Our mapping documents highlight key differences between the new and 2009 
qualification. 
Teaching and learning 
There are lots of free teaching and learning support to help you deliver the new qualification, 
including: 
● a guide to questions in the target language 
● student guide 
● online and face-to-face training events. 
Preparing for exams 
We also provide a range of resources to help you prepare your students for the assessments, 
including: 
● marked exemplars of student work with examiner commentaries 
ResultsPlus 
ResultsPlus provides the most detailed analysis available of your students’ exam 
performance. It can help you identify the topics and skills where further learning would 
benefit your students. 
Get help and support 
Our subject advisor service and online community will ensure you receive help and guidance 
from us and that you can share ideas and information with other teachers. You can sign up 
to receive e-newsletters to keep up to date with qualification updates and product and 
service news. 
Learn more at qualifications.pearson.com 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
4 
Qualification at a glance 
Content and assessment overview 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken 
Cantonese) consists of four externally examined papers based on the following skills: 
listening, speaking, reading and writing. 
Students must complete their speaking assessment in April/May and all other assessments in 
May/June in any single year. 
Each paper is available at Foundation tier or Higher tier. Students must be entered for a 
single tier across all papers. 
The use of dictionaries is not permitted. For Paper 2 this includes during the 
preparation time. 
 
Paper 1: Listening and understanding in Chinese (*Paper code: 1CN0/1F and 1H) 
Written examination 
Foundation tier: 35 minutes, including 5 minutes’ reading time; 50 marks 
Higher tier: 45 minutes, including 5 minutes’ reading time; 50 marks 
25% of the total qualification 
Content overview 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes and topics. 
Assessment overview 
Students are assessed on their understanding of standard spoken Chinese by one or more 
speakers in a range of public and social settings. Students will respond to multiple-response 
and short-answer open-response questions based on a recording featuring male and female 
Chinese speakers. 
Students must answer all questions in both sections. 
There is no requirement for students to produce written responses in Chinese. 
Foundation tier 
All questions are set in English. The instructions to students are in English. 
Higher tier 
All questions are set in English. The instructions to students are in English. 
The listening audio files are available on our website. Recordings of spoken Chinese will be 
available in Mandarin and Cantonese. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
5 
 
Paper 2: Speaking in Chinese (*Paper code: 1CN0/2MF and 2MH/2CF and 2CH) 
Internally conducted and externally assessed 
Foundation tier: 7–9 minutes plus 12 minutes’ preparation time; 70 marks 
Higher tier: 10–12 minutes plus 12 minutes’ preparation time; 70 marks 
25% of the total qualification 
Content overview 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes and topics. 
Assessment overview 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate and interact effectively through 
speaking in Chinese for different purposes and in different settings. 
There are three tasks which must be conducted in the following order: 
● Task 1 – a role play based on one topic that is allocated by Pearson 
● Task 2 – questions based on a picture stimulus based on one topic that is allocated by 
Pearson 
● Task 3 – conversation based on two themes. The first theme is based on the topic chosen by 
the student in advance of the assessment. The second theme is allocated by Pearson. 
The assessment will be available in Mandarin and Cantonese. The option chosen for each 
student is indicated by entry code: 
Mandarin – 1CN0/2MF and 2MH  
Cantonese – 1CN0/2CF and 2CH  
The assessments are conducted by teachers in one session within a prescribed assessment 
window, the recordings are then submitted to Pearson for external marking. 
 
 
Paper 3: Reading and understanding in Chinese (*Paper code: 1CN0/3F and 3H) 
Written examination 
Foundation tier: 50 minutes; 50 marks. Higher tier: 1 hour 5 minutes; 50 marks 
25% of the total qualification 
Content overview 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes and topics. 
Assessment overview 
Students are assessed on their understanding of written Chinese across a range of different 
types of texts, including advertisements, emails, letters, articles and literary texts. Students 
are required to respond to multiple-response and short-answer questions based on these texts. 
Students must answer all questions in each of the two sections: 
● Section A is set in English. The instructions to students are in English. 
● Section B includes a translation passage from Chinese into English with instructions in 
English. 
The assessment will be available in traditional and simplified characters. All questions and 
texts are printed twice, once with texts using traditional/full characters and once with texts in 
simplified characters. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
6 
 
Paper 4: Writing in Chinese (*Paper code: 1CN0/4F and 4H) 
Written examination 
Foundation tier: 1 hour 20 minutes; 60 marks 
Higher tier: 1 hour 25 minutes; 60 marks 
25% of the total qualification 
Content overview 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes and topics. 
Assessment overview 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate effectively through writing in Chinese for 
different purposes and audiences. Students are required to produce responses of varying 
lengths and types to express ideas and opinions in Chinese. The instructions to students are in 
English. Character counts are specified for each question. Students must answer all questions. 
Foundation tier  
There are three open-response questions and one translation into Chinese. 
Higher tier 
There are two open-response questions and one translation into Chinese. 
Students can complete the assessment using either traditional or simplified characters. All 
questions are printed twice, once for students opting to write using traditional/full characters 
and once for students opting to write using simplified characters. 
 
*See Appendix 6: Codes for a description of this code and all codes related to this 
qualification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
7 
2 Subject content 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken 
Cantonese) allows students to develop their ability to communicate with Chinese native 
speakers in both speech and writing. Students will study across a variety of contexts relevant 
to their age and interests and will also develop a greater awareness of the culture of 
Chinese-speaking communities and countries. These contexts are listed under Themes and 
topics. 
Students will need to develop and use their knowledge and understanding of Chinese 
grammar progressively through their course of study. Grammar requirements are given in 
the grammar list (see Appendix 2: Grammar list). 
To help students build on their range of vocabulary, a list is provided of words that students 
are expected to use and understand (see Appendix 3: Vocabulary list). These lists are not 
exhaustive but are intended as a guide; students at both tiers will be required to understand 
and respond to familiar characters (appropriate to the tier) that are not on the lists. 
Qualification aims and objectives 
The aims and objectives of this qualification are to enable students to: 
● develop their ability to communicate confidently and coherently with native speakers in 
speech and writing, conveying what they want to say with increasing accuracy 
● express and develop thoughts and ideas spontaneously and fluently 
● listen to and understand clearly articulated, standard speech at near normal speed 
● deepen their knowledge about how language works and enrich their vocabulary in order 
for them to increase their independent use and understanding of extended language in a 
wide range of contexts 
● acquire new knowledge, skills and ways of thinking through the ability to understand and 
respond to a rich range of authentic spoken and written material, adapted and abridged, 
as appropriate, including literary texts 
● develop awareness and understanding of the culture and identity of the countries and 
communities where the language is spoken 
● be encouraged to make appropriate links to other areas of the curriculum to enable 
bilingual and deeper learning, where the language may become a medium for constructing 
and applying knowledge 
● develop language-learning skills both for immediate use and to prepare them for further 
language study and use in school, higher education or employment 
● develop language strategies, including repair strategies. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
8 
Themes and topics 
Questions across all four language skills are set in common contexts, addressing a range of 
relevant contemporary and cultural themes. They are organised into five themes, each 
broken down into topics and sub-topics. 
The five themes are: 
1. Identity and culture 
2. Local area, holiday, travel 
3. School 
4. Future aspirations, study and work 
5. International and global dimension. 
All themes and topics must be studied in the context of both the students’ home 
country and that of countries and communities where Chinese is spoken. 
For listening and reading assessments, the majority of contexts are based on the culture and 
countries where the assessed language is spoken. Students may also refer to the culture of 
the assessed language country/countries or communities in the speaking and writing papers. 
It is, therefore, important that students are exposed to materials relating to Chinese-
speaking countries throughout the course. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
9 
Each topic has been highlighted in bold. 
All topics must be studied in the context of both the students’ home country and 
that of countries and communities where Chinese is spoken. 
 
Theme 1: Identity and culture 
● Who am I?: relationships; when I was younger; what my friends and family are like; 
what makes a good friend; interests; socialising with friends and family; role models 
● Daily life: customs and everyday life; food and drink; shopping; social media and 
technology (use of, advantages and disadvantages) 
● Cultural life: celebrations and festivals; reading; music; sport; film and television 
 
Theme 2: Local area, holiday and travel 
● Holidays: preferences; experiences; destinations 
● Travel and tourist transactions: travel and accommodation; asking for help and 
dealing with problems; directions; eating out; shopping 
● Town, region and country: weather; places to see; things to do 
 
Theme 3: School 
● What school is like: school types; school day; subjects; rules and pressures; celebrating 
success 
● School activities: school trips; events and exchanges 
 
Theme 4: Future aspirations, study and work 
● Using languages beyond the classroom: forming relationships; travel; employment 
● Ambitions: further study; volunteering; training 
● Work: jobs; careers and professions 
 
Theme 5: International and global dimension 
● Bringing the world together: sports events; music events; campaigns and 
good causes 
● Environmental issues: being ‘green’; access to natural resources 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
10 
Paper 1: Listening and understanding in Chinese 
Content 
Students are assessed on their understanding of standard spoken Chinese in a variety of 
scenarios. 
Students will need to:  
● identify the overall message, key points, details and opinions 
● deduce meaning from a variety of spoken texts 
● recognise the relationship between past, present and future events 
● recognise and respond to key information, important themes and ideas in spoken text, 
including authentic sources, adapted and abridged, as appropriate 
● be able to answer questions, extract information, evaluate and draw conclusions. 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes 
(see Themes and topics). 
Students are presented with recorded scenarios involving one or more speakers in public and 
social settings. Recordings include authentic sources and are based on the themes. Recorded 
material features both male and female voices and represents different age groups.  
Students should be given the opportunity to become accustomed to hearing the Chinese 
language spoken in a range of styles. 
Recordings for individual questions within the assessment vary in length, including both short 
and longer spoken passages, using both familiar language and, where appropriate, more 
complex language and abstract material, as appropriate to the tier. 
To prepare students adequately for this assessment, teachers should present and exploit a 
range of vocabulary relevant to each theme listed and build on the Key Stage 3 Programme 
of Study, where appropriate. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
11 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2019. 
● The assessment is out of 50 marks. 
● Students must be allocated five minutes in which to read through the paper before the 
first extract of the recording starts. This gives students an opportunity to familiarise 
themselves with the length and the layout of the paper and to read the questions before 
hearing the first extract. 
● Students will listen to the recording featuring Chinese-language speakers who will speak 
at a rate appropriate to the expected level of student understanding. 
● The recordings will be available in Mandarin and Cantonese. 
● Each passage is recorded twice, with pauses following the second hearing to allow each 
student sufficient time to write or note their response to each question (or part of a 
question) and to read the next question before the related extract is played. 
● Recordings will be issued as digital sound files accessed via a secure download. 
● Each question is set in a context drawn from the topics. The assessment tasks will feature 
general content that is familiar and accessible to all students. 
● Students must answer all questions in both sections.  
● Foundation tier 
o 35 minutes is given for the assessment, including 5 minutes’ reading time. 
o The question paper contains 14 questions set in English. Question types comprise both 
multiple-response and short-answer open-response questions. The instructions to 
students are in English. 
● Higher tier 
o 45 minutes is given for the assessment, including 5 minutes’ reading time. 
o The question paper contains 10 questions set in English. Question types comprise both 
multiple-response and short-answer open-response questions. The instructions to 
students are in English. 
● Four of the questions will be common to both tiers. 
● For both tiers, there is no requirement for students to produce written responses in 
Chinese. 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and mark scheme for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) Sample 
Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
12 
Paper 2: Speaking in Chinese 
Content 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate and interact effectively through 
speaking in Chinese for different purposes. 
Students will need to: 
● convey information and narrate events coherently and confidently, using and adapting 
language for different purposes 
● speak spontaneously, responding to unpredictable questions, points of view or situations, 
sustaining communication by using rephrasing or repair strategies, as appropriate 
● use a range of vocabulary and grammatical structures accurately, including some more 
complex forms, with reference to past, present and future events 
● make creative and more complex use of the language, as appropriate, to express and 
justify their own thoughts and points of view 
● use accurate pronunciation and intonation in order to be understood by a native speaker, 
however they will be able to access the highest marks available for each task without a 
‘perfect’ command of Chinese. 
These are assessed through a series of three consecutive tasks. 
Task 1 – Role play 
The role play is an interaction requiring the student to ask and answer questions, to 
exchange information and to use different registers (see definition of registers beneath the 
Role play mark grid within the marking guidance section of the specification). The role play 
relates to either formal or informal scenarios, in turn inviting the student to use either formal 
or informal language relevant to the scenario. 
Each role play stimulus card includes an instruction to the student on whether to use 
language appropriate for a formal or informal conversation. 
The role plays are set and provided by Pearson at the time of assessment together with a 
sequencing grid and instructions. For an example, please see the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) Sample 
Assessment Materials (SAMs) document – Paper 2: Speaking in Chinese, General instructions 
to the teacher section. 
Scenarios require an exchange of information. Some scenarios are transactional in nature. 
The scenarios are based on any of the topics from themes 1 to 4 (listed on page 9), i.e. not 
on the theme International and global dimension as this theme lends itself better to the 
picture-based task and the conversation. 
Task 2 – Picture-based task 
The assessment scenario is based on any of the topics (listed on page 9). The topic is 
allocated by Pearson at the time of assessment together with a sequencing grid and 
instructions. For an example, please see the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in 
Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) 
document – Paper 2: Speaking in Chinese, General instructions to the teacher section.  
This assessment allows students to: 
● describe and narrate events 
● give information 
● express, justify and exchange opinions. 
Students are required to refer to past, present and future events in this assessment at both 
Foundation and Higher tiers, using different timeframes. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
13 
Task 3 – Conversation 
The conversation allows students to cover all of the requirements outlined in the Content 
section on page 12, including conveying information, giving points of view, developing and 
initiating conversation and discussion and producing extended sequences of speech. 
The conversation is based on any two themes (see Themes and topics) and is in two parts. 
For the first part of the conversation, the student selects one topic from one theme in 
advance of the assessment. The choice of topic must be agreed between the student and the 
teacher and must be selected no later than two weeks before the assessment takes place. 
This part of the conversation task starts with this first topic and then may move on to other 
topics within the same theme. 
The second part of the conversation must be on a different theme. This will be prescribed by 
Pearson through instructions on a sequencing grid. For an example please see the Pearson 
Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document – Paper 2: Speaking in Chinese, General 
instructions to the teacher section. 
This part of the conversation may focus on one or more topics from within the selected 
theme (see page 9). 
Students are required to refer to past, present and future events in this assessment, using a 
range of timeframes. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
14 
Assessment information 
General information  
● First assessment: April/May 2019. 
● The entire assessment must be conducted in Chinese. 
● The assessment will be available in Mandarin and Cantonese. 
● Students complete three tasks. 
o Task 1 – a role play based on one topic. This is allocated by Pearson at the time of 
assessment. 
o Task 2 – a task containing a picture and questions drawn from one topic. This is 
allocated by Pearson at the time of assessment. 
o Task 3 – conversation based on two themes. The first theme is based on the topic 
chosen by the student in advance of the assessment. The second theme is selected by 
the teacher from a choice of two themes allocated by Pearson. 
Each role play stimulus card includes an instruction to the student on whether to use 
language appropriate for a formal or informal conversation. 
At the time of assessment, Pearson will issue a prescribed order per student for their role 
play, picture-based task and two themes for the second part of the conversation. The 
teacher does not choose the order of the cards. Pearson will provide instructions on 
sequencing and a sequencing grid. For an example please see the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) Sample 
Assessment Materials (SAMs) document – Paper 2: Speaking in Chinese, General instructions 
to the teacher, section. 
This grid has been designed to help ensure that each student covers a broad range of 
themes from this specification. 
● Assessments are conducted by centres within a five-week assessment period in April and 
May in any single year. Dates for the assessment period will be confirmed in the UK 
Information Manual at the start of each academic year. The assessment period will not 
always be continuous or be the same period each year, for example it will need to 
accommodate the Easter break which changes each year. 
● The assessment materials provided by Pearson for all tasks may be accessed by the 
teacher no more than three working days before the prescribed five week assessment 
period. This is to enable the teacher to prepare for the assessment. The assessment 
materials in this pack must not be removed from the centre premises.   
● Assessments are conducted by teachers in one session within a prescribed assessment 
window and then submitted to Pearson for external marking. 
● Students are presented with instructions in English but must communicate entirely in 
Mandarin/Cantonese for the duration of the assessment. 
● Complete, unedited recordings of all assessments must be submitted to Pearson via the 
online Learner Work Transfer (LWT) portal. 
● Each question is set in a context drawn from the topics. The assessment tasks will feature 
general content that is familiar and accessible to all students. 
● Students must be permitted 12 minutes’ preparation time to consider the questions and 
stimulus cards for Tasks 1 and 2. 
● Students are assessed on the quality of responses rather than length of assessment, 
however the assessment times are different to reflect the demand of each tier. 
● All assessments are marked against assessment criteria, please see Marking Guidance for 
Paper 2. 
● Centres must have procedures in place to verify the identity of all students at the time of 
the assessment and confirm this on the Candidate speaking examination record form 
(CS2) (see Appendix 1). Centres are required to submit to Pearson one completed CS2 
form for all students for each tier. 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted during the preparation time or during 
the assessment. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
15 
Foundation tier assessment time and marks 
● The total assessment for the three tasks is 7 to 9 minutes plus 12 minutes’ 
preparation time. 
● The assessment is worth 70 marks. 
● The assessment consists of the following three tasks, which must be conducted in the 
following order: 
o Task 1 – one role play recommended to last between one to one-and-a-half minutes for 
10 marks 
o Task 2 – one picture-based task recommended to last between two-and-a-half to  
three minutes for 24 marks 
o Task 3 – a conversation recommended to last between three-and-a-half to 
four-and-a-half minutes for 36 marks. 
Higher tier assessment time and marks 
● The total assessment for the three tasks is 10 to 12 minutes plus 12 minutes’ preparation 
time. 
● The assessment is worth 70 marks. 
● The assessment consists of the following three tasks, which must be conducted in the 
following order: 
o Task 1 – one role play recommended to last between two to two-and-a-half minutes for 
10 marks 
o Task 2 – one picture-based task recommended to last between three to three-and-a-
half minutes for 24 marks 
o Task 3 – a conversation recommended to last between five to six minutes for 36 marks. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
16 
Preparation time 
Students are allocated 12 minutes’ preparation time, under supervised conditions, 
immediately prior to the assessment for Tasks 1 and 2. The purpose is to consider the 
questions and stimulus for the role play and picture-based scenarios allocated. 
Students are permitted to make notes (up to a maximum of one side of A4 for both Tasks 1 
and 2) during this period and they can refer to them during the role play and picture-based 
assessment, but not during the conversation task. Students must return their notes to the 
teacher before commencing Task 3 (conversation). 
The notes should be for reference only and students must not read out whole, prepared 
sentences in answer to questions. 
Any notes made during the preparation time must be kept securely by the centre until the 
end of October in the year the assessment is completed, after which time they should be 
securely destroyed. 
Students cannot have access to a dictionary, or any other resource, during the preparation 
time. 
Task 1 – Role play 
Pearson will set and provide ten different sets of role plays for each tier. Each role play 
consists of two cards – one for the teacher and one for the student. 
Teacher cards 
The teacher cards contain instructions on how to conduct the role play and the exact 
questions to ask. 
Each role play opens with an introduction from the teacher who then asks the first question. 
Candidate cards 
The candidate cards include prompts as a guide and highlight where the candidate needs to 
ask a question (indicated by the symbol ‘?’), and where an unpredictable question is posed 
to them by the teacher (indicated by the symbol ‘!’). 
Students have access to this during their preparation time to help in preparing for the 
assessment. 
For each candidate card, both the instructions and the task are in English. The context of the 
role play is provided in both sections. Candidates must read both sections fully to support 
understanding of each bullet point. 
At Foundation tier, the candidate cards contain five bullet points, eliciting five utterances. 
Students need to ask one question and respond to one unpredictable question.Students are 
required to speak only in the present timeframe or they may use a familiar conditional 
sentence where it is more natural to do so. 
At Higher tier, the candidate cards contain five bullet points, eliciting five utterances. 
Students need to ask two questions and respond to one unpredictable question. For four of 
the prompts, students are required to speak in the present timeframe or they may use a 
familiar conditional sentence if it is more natural to do so. They must respond to one 
question set in the past timeframe. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
17 
Task 2 – Picture-based task 
Pearson will provide ten different sets of picture-based tasks for each tier. Each task consists 
of two cards – one for the teacher and one for the student. 
Teacher cards 
The teacher cards contain instructions on how to conduct this task and the five questions to 
ask the student. Teachers are allowed to repeat questions and use set prompts to enable 
students to give a developed response. They are not allowed to deviate from the set 
prompts. 
Each task opens with the teacher asking the first question, which is based on the picture. 
The first question is directly based on the picture; the remaining questions extend beyond 
the picture, but are based on the overall topic from which the picture is drawn, inviting an 
exchange of views or opinions. 
Candidate cards 
At Foundation tier, students are provided with a picture and five bullets in English to help 
in preparing for the five questions that will be asked during the assessment. Students are 
allowed to ask for questions to be repeated. 
Students have access to this during their preparation time. 
At Higher tier, students are provided with a picture and five bullets in English to help in 
preparing for the five questions that will be asked during the assessment.The final bullet is 
marked by the symbol ‘!’ to denote one unpredictable question. Students are allowed to ask 
for questions to be repeated. 
Students have access to this during their preparation time. 
Task 3 – Conversation 
The first part of the conversation opens with the topic chosen by the student. The student 
may choose to focus on any aspect(s) of the topic as each has a number of different 
features. For example, a student who has selected the topic What school is like may: 
● choose to focus on ‘school types’ and ‘rules and pressures’, or 
● choose to focus only on ‘rules and pressures’. 
To enable them to make a confident start, the teacher should allow the student to state their 
chosen aspect(s) from their nominated topic and to talk about this aspect/these aspects for 
up to one minute. 
The teacher continues the conversation on the chosen topic and then may move on to other 
topics within the same theme, if necessary, to ensure that students use the recommended 
time for this task most effectively. 
The second part of the conversation is based on a different theme allocated by Pearson and 
covers any of the topics across that single theme. 
Teachers must ensure that an equal amount of time is allocated to both parts of 
the conversation. 
Throughout the conversation, in order to facilitate a genuine and spontaneous interaction, 
the nature of questions from the teacher should enable students to: 
● answer questions freely, in turn allowing them to produce extended sequences of speech 
● develop conversations and discussions 
● give and justify own thoughts and opinions 
● refer to past, present and future events. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
18 
Administration and general information about the conduct of the 
speaking assessment 
Preparation time and notes for Tasks 1 and 2 only 
● The notes made during the preparation time should be a reference only, and students 
should not read out whole, prepared sentences. 
● The preparation time must be supervised. It can take place either in the examination 
room with the teacher or outside of the room with an invigilator. 
● Students are not permitted to write on the candidate cards. 
● Students must return their notes and candidate cards to the teacher at the end of the 
second task (picture-based task). 
● Any notes made during the preparation time must be kept securely by the centre until the 
end of October in the year the assessment is completed, after which time they should be 
securely destroyed. 
● Students cannot have access to a dictionary, or any other resource, during the preparation 
time. 
Sample assessment materials 
Sample candidate and teacher cards for the role-play and picture-based tasks and 
accompanying marking guidance and assessment criteria can be found in the Pearson 
Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Marking guidance and assessment criteria are also provided in this document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
19 
Marking guidance for Paper 2: Speaking in Chinese 
This marking guidance is for the use of Pearson-appointed external examiners. The guidance 
has been included for teacher reference to aid understanding of how the assessment criteria 
will be applied. 
General guidance on using levels-based mark schemes 
Step 1 Decide on a band 
● The examiner will first of all consider the answer as a whole and then decide which descriptors 
most closely match the answer and place it in that band. The descriptors for each band 
indicate the different features that will be seen in the student’s answer for that band. 
● When assigning a band they will look at the overall quality of the answer and not focus 
disproportionately on small and specific parts of the answer where the student has not 
performed quite as well as the rest. If the answer covers different aspects of different 
bands of the mark scheme they will use a ‘best fit’ approach for defining the band and 
then use the variability of the response to help decide the mark within the band, for 
example if the response is predominantly band 5–8 with a small amount of band 9–12 
material, it would be placed in band 5–8 but be awarded a mark near the top of the band 
because of the band 9–12 content. 
Step 2 Decide on a mark 
● Once they have decided on a band they will then need to decide on a mark within the 
band. 
● They will decide on the mark to award based on the quality of the answer; they will award 
a mark towards the top or bottom of that band depending on how the student has 
evidenced each of the descriptor bullet points. 
● They will modify the mark based on how securely the trait descriptors are met at that band. 
● They will need to go back through the answer as they apply the mark scheme to clarify 
points and assure themselves that the band and the mark are appropriate. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
20 
Assessment criteria for the Foundation tier – Part 1 
Role play – Foundation tier (10 marks) 
For this task, students’ work is marked by Pearson using the following assessment criteria. 
The mark grid is applied once to each individual response to the prompts. There is a 
maximum of 2 marks for each of the five prompts on the role-play cards. 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable communication; highly ambiguous OR pronunciation prevents 
communication 
1 Partially clear/ambiguous OR partially appropriate within the context of the 
role play; pronunciation may affect clarity of communication 
2 Clearly communicated; appropriate within the context of the role play; 
unambiguous; pronunciation supports clear communication 
 
Exemplification of how to apply the role-play mark grid can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) Sample 
Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Additional guidance 
Appropriate: relevant response related to the prompt, uses appropriate register for the 
scenario. 
Informal register includes language that students would use with friends and people of a 
similar age; informal greetings, endearments and forms of address. 
Formal register includes language that students would use with adults, for example 
teachers, employers, customers, officials, in a formal context. It includes avoidance of slang, 
over-familiar language, exaggeration and endearments. It also includes the use of formal 
greetings and forms of address where appropriate. 
Partially clear/pronunciation may affect clarity of communication: makes speech 
difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is eventually understood)/forces the 
listener to strain to understand what is meant. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
21 
Assessment criteria for the Foundation tier – Part 2 
Picture-based task – Foundation tier (24 marks) 
There are two mark grids to be applied to this task: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
Picture-based task: communication and content – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–4 ● Limited response to set questions, likely to consist of single-word answers 
● Minimal success in adapting language to describe, narrate, inform using 
individual words/phrases; sometimes unable to respond 
● A straightforward opinion may be expressed but without justification 
● Pronunciation and intonation are inconsistently intelligible with inaccuracies that 
lead to frequent impairment in communication 
5–8 ● Responds briefly to set questions, there is much hesitation and continuous 
prompting needed 
● Some limited success in adapting language, to describe, narrate and inform in 
response to the set questions; may occasionally be unable to respond 
● Straightforward, brief opinions are given but without justification 
● Pronunciation and intonation are mostly intelligible but inaccuracies lead to 
some impairment in communication 
9–12 ● Responds to set questions with some development, some hesitation and some 
prompting necessary 
● Some effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform in 
response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions with occasional, brief justification 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, occasionally inaccuracies affect 
clarity of communication 
13–16 ● Responds to set questions with frequently developed responses, occasional 
hesitation, occasional prompting necessary 
● Frequently effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform in 
response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions and gives justification with some development 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, inaccuracies are minimal and have 
no impact on clarity of communication 
 
Additional guidance 
Adaptation of/adapting language to describe, narrate and inform: adapts language to 
achieve different purposes in the language; students may adapt language more effectively 
for one purpose than another, for example they may use language effectively to inform but 
less effectively to narrate. 
Straightforward opinions and justification are those that form part of a 
minimum/standard/predictable response. 
Intonation: the mark grid describes the frequency of inaccuracies and the impact that 
inaccuracies have on clarity. For Chinese, intonation encompasses both intonation and 
tones.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
22 
Inaccuracies in intonation specifically in relation to tones: 
Inaccuracies in tones that have no impact on clarity of communication: 
● infrequent inaccuracies in the use of tones that do not distract the listener from the 
content of what is being said; there is no doubt as to what the candidate is saying. 
Inaccuracies in tones that affect clarity of communication: 
● inaccuracies in the use of tones change the meanings of words and make speech difficult 
to understand immediately (even if the meaning is eventually understood) 
● inaccuracies in the use of tones change the meanings of words and force listeners to strain 
to understand what is meant 
● frequent inaccuracies in the use of tones that hinder clarity as they distract the listener 
from the content of what is being said. 
Inaccuracies in tones that lead to impairment in communication: 
● inaccuracies in tones that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● the tones are so frequently inaccurate or absent that the listener cannot understand the 
message. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
23 
Picture-based task: linguistic knowledge and accuracy – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Limited accuracy when responding to set questions; minimal success when 
referring to past, present and future events 
● Individual words and phrases are coherent when responding to set 
questions; high frequency of errors prevent meaning throughout most of the 
conversation 
3–4 ● Occasionally accurate grammatical structures when responding to set 
questions; occasional success when referring to present events, limited 
success when referring to future or past events, much ambiguity 
● Some coherent phrases and sentences within responses to set questions; 
regular errors prevent coherent overall speech and frequently prevent 
meaning 
5–6 ● Some accurate grammatical structures, including some successful references 
to past, present and future events in response to the set questions, some 
ambiguity 
● Responses are partially coherent, errors occur that sometimes hinder clarity 
of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
7–8 ● Generally accurate grammatical structures, generally successful references to 
past, present and future events in response to the set questions, occasional 
ambiguity 
● Responses are generally coherent although errors occur that occasionally 
hinder clarity of communication 
 
Additional guidance 
Errors: the mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have 
on clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example misuse of measure words 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the listener from the content of what is being said. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make speech difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force listeners to strain to understand what is meant, 
for example incorrect timeframe 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the listener from the content of what is 
being said. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, for example incorrect word order 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
24 
Assessment criteria for the Foundation tier – Part 3 
Conversation – Foundation tier (36 marks) 
There are three mark grids to be applied to this task: 
● communication and content 
● interaction and spontaneity 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
Conversation: communication and content – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Communicates limited information relevant to the topics and questions 
● Uses language to express limited, straightforward ideas and thoughts; 
occasional straightforward opinion expressed without justification 
● Uses limited, familiar vocabulary and expression with much repetition; 
communication is disjointed and frequently breaks down because of restricted 
range of vocabulary 
● Pronunciation and intonation are inconsistently intelligible with inaccuracies 
that lead to frequent impairment in communication 
4–6 ● Communicates brief information relevant to the topics and questions 
● Uses language to produce straightforward ideas and thoughts; expresses 
straightforward opinions with limited justification 
● Uses repetitive, familiar vocabulary and expression; communication is often 
constrained and occasionally breaks down because of restricted range of 
vocabulary 
● Pronunciation and intonation are mostly intelligible but inaccuracies lead to 
some impairment in communication 
7–9 ● Communicates information relevant to the topics and questions, with 
occasionally extended sequences of speech 
● Uses language to produce straightforward ideas, thoughts and opinions with 
occasional justification 
● Uses a limited variety of mainly straightforward vocabulary, communication for 
some purposes is constrained because of restricted range of vocabulary 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, occasionally inaccuracies affect 
clarity of communication  
10–12 ● Communicates information relevant to the topics and questions, with some 
extended sequences of speech 
● Occasionally uses language creatively to express some individual thoughts, 
ideas and opinions, some of which are justified 
● Occasional variety in use of vocabulary, including some examples of 
uncommon language with some variation of expression, fulfils 
most purposes 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, inaccuracies are minimal and 
have no impact on clarity of communication 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
25 
 
Additional guidance 
Uses language creatively – examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● manipulating language, including familiar, high-frequency and simple language, to 
respond to unfamiliar/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to maintain 
interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, to 
convince. 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view which go 
beyond the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
Straightforward ideas, thoughts and opinions are those that give the 
minimum/standard/predictable response. 
Intonation: the mark grid describes the frequency of inaccuracies and the impact that 
inaccuracies have on clarity. For Chinese, intonation encompasses both intonation and 
tones.  
Inaccuracies in intonation specifically in relation to tones: 
Inaccuracies in tones that have no impact on clarity of communication: 
● infrequent inaccuracies in the use of tones that do not distract the listener from the 
content of what is being said; there is no doubt as to what the candidate is saying. 
Inaccuracies in tones that affect clarity of communication: 
● inaccuracies in the use of tones change the meanings of words and make speech difficult 
to understand immediately (even if the meaning is eventually understood) 
● inaccuracies in the use of tones change the meanings of words and force listeners to strain 
to understand what is meant 
● frequent inaccuracies in the use of tones that hinder clarity as they distract the listener 
from the content of what is being said. 
Inaccuracies in tones that lead to impairment in communication: 
● inaccuracies in tones that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● the tones are so frequently inaccurate or absent that the listener cannot understand the 
message. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
26 
Conversation: interaction and spontaneity – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Basic exchange where only some questions are responded to; answers rely 
on rehearsed language that is frequently irrelevant to the question 
● Short, undeveloped responses, many incomplete 
● Isolated examples of ability to sustain communication, pace is slow and 
hesitant throughout 
4–6 ● Responds with limited spontaneity; answers rely on rehearsed language that 
is occasionally irrelevant to the question 
● Short responses, any development depends on teacher prompting 
● Limited ability to sustain communication, pace is mostly slow and hesitant 
7–9 ● Occasionally able to respond spontaneously with some examples of natural 
interaction although often stilted 
● Occasionally able to initiate and develop responses independently but regular 
prompting needed 
● Occasionally able to sustain communication, using rephrasing/repair 
strategies if necessary to continue the flow; frequent hesitation 
10–12 ● Responds spontaneously to some questions, interacting naturally for parts of 
the conversation 
● Sometimes able to initiate and develop the conversation independently, 
some prompting needed 
● Sometimes able to sustain communication, using rephrasing/repair strategies 
if necessary to continue the flow; some hesitation 
 
Additional guidance 
Rephrasing/repair strategies: strategies that aid communication and allow the 
conversation to be sustained, for example rephrasing, circumlocution, adjusting the 
message, asking for clarification/repetition, repair strategies such as self-correction; these 
strategies enable students to deliver the message when exact vocabulary or expressions are 
not known. 
Responds/responding spontaneously: gives a relevant, impromptu response based on 
what they have heard. 
Rehearsed language: language learned by heart, which may not give a relevant, 
impromptu response based on what has been heard (not spontaneous). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
27 
Conversation: linguistic knowledge and accuracy – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Uses straightforward, individual words/phrases; limited evidence of language 
manipulation 
● Limited accuracy, minimal success when referring to past, present and future 
events 
● Individual words and phrases are coherent; high frequency of errors prevent 
meaning throughout much of the conversation 
4–6 ● Uses straightforward, repetitive, grammatical structures 
● Occasionally accurate grammatical structures, occasional success when 
referring to present events, limited success when referring to future or past 
events, much ambiguity 
● Some coherent phrases and sentences; regular errors prevent coherent 
overall speech and frequently prevent meaning 
7–9 ● Manipulates a limited variety of mainly straightforward grammatical 
structures, minimal use of complex structures 
● Some accurate grammatical structures, some successful references to past, 
present and future events, some ambiguity 
● Sequences of coherent speech although errors occur that often hinder clarity 
of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
10–12 ● Manipulates grammatical structures with occasional variation, complex 
structures used but repetitive 
● Generally accurate grammatical structures, generally successful references to 
past, present and future events 
● Generally coherent speech although errors occur that sometimes hinder 
clarity of communication 
 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be:  
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language. 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: the mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have 
on clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example misuse of measure words 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the listener from the content of what is being said. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
28 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make speech difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force listeners to strain to understand what is meant, 
for example incorrect timeframe 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the listener from the content of what is 
being said. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, for example incorrect word order 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
29 
Assessment criteria for the Higher tier – Part 1 
Role play – Higher tier (10 marks) 
For this task, students’ work is marked by Pearson using the following assessment criteria. 
The mark grid is applied once to each individual response to the prompts. There is a 
maximum of 2 marks for each of the five prompts on the role-play cards. 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable communication; highly ambiguous OR pronunciation prevents 
communication 
1 Partially clear/ambiguous OR partially appropriate within the context of the role 
play; pronunciation may affect clarity of communication 
2 Clearly communicated; appropriate within the context of the role play; 
unambiguous; pronunciation supports clear communication 
 
Exemplification of how to apply the role-play mark grid can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) Sample 
Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Additional guidance 
Appropriate: relevant response related to the prompt, uses appropriate register for the 
scenario. 
Informal register includes language that students would use with friends and people of a 
similar age; informal greetings, endearments and forms of address. 
Formal register includes language that students would use with adults, for example 
teachers, employers, customers, officials, in a formal context. It includes avoidance of slang, 
over-familiar language, exaggeration and endearments. It also includes the use of formal 
greetings and forms of address where appropriate.  
Partially clear/pronunciation may affect clarity of communication: makes speech 
difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is eventually understood)/forces the 
listener to strain to understand what is meant. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
30 
Assessment criteria for the Higher tier – Part 2 
Picture-based task – Higher tier (24 marks) 
There are two mark grids to be applied to this task: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
Picture-based task: communication and content – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–4 ● Responds to set questions with some development, some hesitation and 
some prompting necessary 
● Some effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform in 
response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions with occasional, brief justification 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, occasionally inaccuracies affect 
clarity of communication 
5–8 ● Responds to set questions with frequently developed responses, occasional 
hesitation, occasional prompting necessary 
● Frequently effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform 
in response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions and gives justification with some development 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, inaccuracies are minimal and 
have no impact on clarity of communication 
9–12 ● Responds to set questions with mostly developed and fluent responses, 
minimal hesitation and minimal prompting necessary 
● Predominantly effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and 
inform, in response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions effectively and gives justification which is mostly 
developed  
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible and predominantly accurate  
13–16 ● Responds to the set questions with consistently fluent and developed 
responses 
● Consistently effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and 
inform, in response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions with ease and gives fully-developed justification 
● Pronunciation and intonation are consistently accurate and intelligible 
Additional guidance 
Adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform: adapts language to achieve 
different purposes in the language; students may adapt language more effectively for one 
purpose than another, for example they may use language effectively to inform but less 
effectively to narrate. 
Intonation: the mark grid describes the frequency of inaccuracies and the impact that 
inaccuracies have on clarity. For Chinese, intonation encompasses both intonation and 
tones.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
31 
Inaccuracies in intonation specifically in relation to tones: 
Inaccuracies in tones that have no impact on clarity of communication: 
● infrequent inaccuracies in the use of tones that do not distract the listener from the 
content of what is being said; there is no doubt as to what the candidate is saying. 
Inaccuracies in tones that affect clarity of communication: 
● inaccuracies in the use of tones change the meanings of words and make speech difficult 
to understand immediately (even if the meaning is eventually understood) 
● inaccuracies in the use of tones change the meanings of words and force listeners to strain 
to understand what is meant 
● frequent inaccuracies in the use of tones that hinder clarity as they distract the listener 
from the content of what is being said. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
32 
Picture-based task: linguistic knowledge and accuracy – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Some accurate grammatical structures, including some successful 
references to past, present and future events in response to the set 
questions, some ambiguity 
● Responses are partially coherent, errors occur that sometimes hinder clarity 
of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Generally accurate grammatical structures, generally successful references 
to past, present and future events in response to the 
set questions, occasional ambiguity 
● Responses are generally coherent although errors occur that occasionally 
hinder clarity of communication 
5–6 ● Predominantly accurate grammatical structures, mostly successful 
references to past, present and future events in response to the set 
questions 
● Responses are predominantly coherent, errors occur but they rarely hinder 
clarity of communication 
7–8 ● Consistently accurate grammatical structures, successful references to 
past, present and future events in response to the set questions 
● Responses are coherent, any errors do not hinder the clarity of the 
communication 
 
Additional guidance 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free speech in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example misuse of measure words 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the listener from the content of what is being said. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make speech difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force listeners to strain to understand what is meant, 
for example incorrect timeframe 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they distract the listener from the content of what is 
being said. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message  
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, for example incorrect word order 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
33 
Assessment criteria for the Higher tier – Part 3 
Conversation – Higher tier (36 marks) 
There are three mark grids to be applied to this task: 
● communication and content 
● interaction and spontaneity 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
Conversation: communication and content – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Communicates information relevant to the topics and questions, with 
occasionally extended sequences of speech 
● Uses language to produce straightforward ideas, thoughts and opinions with 
occasional justification 
● Uses a limited variety of mainly straightforward vocabulary, communication 
for some purposes is constrained because of restricted range of vocabulary 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, occasionally inaccuracies affect 
clarity of communication 
4–6 ● Communicates information relevant to the topics and questions, with some 
extended sequences of speech 
● Occasionally uses language creatively to express some individual thoughts, 
ideas and opinions, some of which are justified 
● Occasional variety in use of vocabulary, including some examples of 
uncommon language with some variation of expression, fulfils most purposes 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, inaccuracies are minimal and 
have no impact on clarity of communication 
7–9 ● Communicates detailed information relevant to the topics and questions, 
usually with extended sequences of speech 
● Frequently uses language creatively to express and justify a variety of 
individual thoughts, ideas and opinions 
● Uses a variety of vocabulary, including frequent use of uncommon language, 
to regularly vary expression for different purposes 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible and predominantly accurate  
10–12 ● Communicates detailed information relevant to the topics and questions, 
consistently extended sequences of speech 
● Consistently uses language creatively to express and justify a wide variety of 
individual thoughts, ideas and opinions 
● Consistently uses a wide variety of vocabulary, including uncommon 
language, to consistently vary expression for different purposes 
● Pronunciation and intonation are consistently accurate and intelligible 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
34 
Additional guidance 
Uses language creatively: examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● manipulating language, including familiar, high-frequency and simple language, to 
respond to unfamiliar/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to maintain 
interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, to 
convince. 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view that go beyond 
the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
Straightforward ideas, thoughts and opinions are those that give the 
minimum/standard/predictable response. 
Intonation: the mark grid describes the frequency of inaccuracies and the impact that 
inaccuracies have on clarity. For Chinese, intonation encompasses both intonation and 
tones.  
Inaccuracies in intonation specifically in relation to tones: 
Inaccuracies in tones that have no impact on clarity of communication: 
● infrequent inaccuracies in the use of tones that do not distract the listener from the 
content of what is being said; there is no doubt as to what the candidate is saying. 
Inaccuracies in tones that affect clarity of communication: 
● inaccuracies in the use of tones change the meanings of words and make speech difficult 
to understand immediately (even if the meaning is eventually understood) 
● inaccuracies in the use of tones change the meanings of words and force listeners to strain 
to understand what is meant 
● frequent inaccuracies in the use of tones that hinder clarity as they distract the listener 
from the content of what is being said. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
35 
Conversation: interaction and spontaneity – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Occasionally able to respond spontaneously with some examples of natural 
interaction although often stilted 
● Occasionally able to initiate and develop responses independently but 
regular prompting needed 
● Occasionally able to sustain communication, using rephrasing/repair 
strategies if necessary to continue the flow; frequent hesitation 
4–6 ● Responds spontaneously to some questions, interacting naturally for parts 
of the conversation 
● Sometimes able to initiate and develop the conversation independently, 
some prompting needed 
● Sometimes able to sustain communication, using rephrasing/repair 
strategies if necessary to continue the flow; some hesitation 
7–9 ● Responds to most questions spontaneously, resulting in mostly natural 
interaction 
● Mostly able to initiate and develop the conversation independently 
● Able to sustain communication throughout most of the conversation, using 
rephrasing/repair strategies if necessary to continue the flow, occasional 
hesitation 
10–12 ● Responds spontaneously and with ease to questions, resulting in natural 
interaction 
● Consistently able to initiate and develop the conversation independently 
● Able to sustain communication throughout, using rephrasing/repair 
strategies if necessary to continue the flow 
Additional guidance 
Respond(s) spontaneously: gives a relevant, impromptu response based on what they 
have heard. 
Rephrasing/repair strategies are strategies that aid communication and allow the 
conversation to be sustained, for example rephrasing, circumlocution, adjusting the 
message, asking for clarification/repetition, repair strategies such as self-correction; these 
strategies enable students to deliver the message when exact vocabulary or expressions are 
not known. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
36 
Conversation: linguistic knowledge and accuracy – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Manipulates a limited variety of mainly straightforward grammatical 
structures, minimal use of complex structures 
● Some accurate grammatical structures, some successful references to past, 
present and future events, some ambiguity 
● Sequences of coherent speech although errors occur that often hinder clarity 
of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
4–6 ● Manipulates grammatical structures with occasional variation, complex 
structures used but repetitive 
● Generally accurate grammatical structures, generally successful references to 
past, present and future events 
● Generally coherent speech although errors occur that sometimes hinder 
clarity of communication 
7–9 ● Manipulates a variety of grammatical structures, some variety of complex 
structures 
● Predominantly accurate grammatical structures, mostly successful references 
to past, present and future events 
● Predominantly coherent speech; errors occur but they rarely hinder clarity of 
communication 
10–12 ● Manipulates a wide variety of grammatical structures, frequent use of 
complex structures 
● Consistently accurate grammatical structures, consistently successful 
references to past, present and future events 
● Fully coherent speech; any errors do not hinder the clarity of the 
communication 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● all grammar and structures included in the grammar list that are specific to 
Higher tier GCSE 
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
37 
 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free speech in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example misuse of measure words 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the listener from the content of what is being said. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make speech difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force listeners to strain to understand what is meant, 
for example incorrect timeframe 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the listener from the content of what is 
being said. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message  
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, for example incorrect word order 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
38 
Paper 3: Reading and understanding in Chinese 
Content 
Students are assessed on their understanding of written Chinese across a range of different 
types of texts. 
Students need to: 
● identify the overall message, key points, details and opinions in texts 
● deduce meaning from a variety of written texts 
● recognise the relationship between past, present and future events 
● understand texts, organise and present relevant details, and, where appropriate, draw 
inferences in context and recognise implicit meaning 
● recognise and respond to key information, important themes and ideas in more extended 
written text, including authentic sources, adapted and abridged as appropriate, by being 
able to extract information and answer questions. 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes (see Themes and 
topics). 
Texts for individual questions within the assessment use high-frequency language and vary 
in length, including both short- and longer written passages. Texts include authentic sources 
that introduce more complex language and unfamiliar materials. 
The range of text types include: 
● advertisements, emails, letters, articles and literary texts 
● a short passage to be translated from Chinese into English. 
Literary texts consist of short extracts from texts that may have been adapted and abridged 
from authentic sources to be appropriate to this level – from letters, short stories, novels or 
plays to contemporary and historical sources. Students are also expected to translate a short 
passage of written Chinese into English to demonstrate an ability to transfer meaning 
accurately into English. 
Scenarios in the texts are set either at home or, more frequently, in a Chinese-speaking 
country, allowing students to develop appropriate cultural awareness and understanding. 
To prepare students adequately for this assessment, teachers should present and exploit a 
range of vocabulary relevant to each theme listed, building on the Key Stage 3 Programme 
of Study, where appropriate. 
Students should be presented with Chinese language in a range of styles and in a variety of 
different contexts, as appropriate to their age and level of understanding.* Students should 
also be presented with different fonts and formats, for example short, printed messages, 
articles and email messages. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
39 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2019. 
● The assessment time is: 
o Foundation tier – 50 minutes in length 
o Higher tier – 1 hour 5 minutes in length. 
● The assessment is out of 50 marks. 
● The assessment consists of 10 questions. 
● Students must answer all questions from each of the two sections. 
● Students are required to respond to questions based on passages of text from a range of 
sources. Each question is set in a context drawn from the themes. 
● The assessment will be available in traditional and simplified characters. All questions and 
texts are printed twice, once with texts using traditional/full characters and once with 
texts in simplified characters. Students select the most appropriate version, but not both. 
● Section A has nine questions set in English. Question types comprise both multiple-
response and short-answer open response questions. The instructions to students are in 
English. 
● Section B contains one translation passage from Chinese into English. The instructions to 
students are in English. 
● Four of the questions are common to both tiers. 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and mark scheme for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel  
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) Sample 
Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
40 
Paper 4: Writing in Chinese 
Content 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate effectively through writing in Chinese. 
Students need to:  
● communicate effectively in writing for a variety of purposes across a range of specified 
contexts  
● write short texts, using simple sentences and familiar language accurately to convey 
meaning and exchange information 
● produce clear and coherent text of extended length to present facts and express ideas and 
opinions appropriately for different purposes and in different settings 
● make accurate use of a variety of vocabulary and grammatical structures, including some 
more complex forms, to describe and narrate with reference to past, present and future 
events 
● manipulate the language, using and adapting a variety of structures and vocabulary with 
increasing accuracy and fluency for new purposes, including using appropriate style and 
register 
● make independent, creative and more complex use of the language, as appropriate, to 
note down key points, express and justify individual thoughts and points of view, in order 
to interest, inform or convince 
● translate sentences and short texts from English into the assessed language to convey key 
messages accurately and to apply grammatical knowledge of language and structures in 
context. 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2019. 
● The assessment is out of 60 marks. 
● Each question is set in a context drawn from the themes and topics. The assessment tasks 
feature general content that is familiar and accessible to all students. 
● Students are required to produce responses of varying lengths and types to express facts, 
ideas and opinions in Chinese. 
● Students can complete the assessment using either traditional or simplified characters. All 
questions are printed twice, once for students opting to write using traditional/full 
characters and once for students opting to write using simplified characters. 
● The length of each response required and complexity of language increases across the 
paper. Recommended character counts are specified for each question. Students will not 
be penalised for writing more or fewer characters than recommended in the character 
count or for going beyond the mandatory bullets. 
● One question is a translation of a short passage from English into Chinese. 
● All assessments are marked against assessment criteria, please see Marking guidance for 
Paper 4: Writing in Chinese. 
● The instructions to students are all in English. 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
41 
 Foundation tier 
o The assessment time is 1 hour and 20 minutes in length. 
o The paper consists of three open questions and one translation from English 
into Chinese. 
o Students must answer all questions. 
o Question 1 assesses students on their ability to write to describe and to express 
opinions. 
o Question 2 has two options from which students have to select one. This question 
assesses students on their ability to note down key points and convey information. 
Students must use the formal register, please see the definition in Marking guidance for 
Paper 4: Writing in Chinese. 
o Question 3 has two options from which students have to select one. This question 
assesses students on their ability to convey information, narrate, express opinions, 
interest, and convince the reader about a certain point. Students must use the informal 
register, please see the definition in Marking guidance for Paper 4: Writing in Chinese. 
This question is common to the Higher tier. 
o Question 4 is the translation question. Students are required to translate five sentences 
from English to Chinese. The sentences are ordered by increasing level of difficulty. 
 
 Higher tier 
o The assessment time is 1 hour and 25 minutes in length. 
o The paper consists of two questions and one translation from English into Chinese. 
o Students must answer all questions. 
o Question 1 has two options from which students have to select one. This question 
assesses students on their ability to convey information, narrate, express opinions, 
interest, and convince the reader about a certain point. Students must use the informal 
register, please see the definition in Marking guidance for Paper 4: Writing in Chinese. 
This question is common to the Foundation tier. 
o Question 2 has two options from which students have to select one. This question 
assesses students on their ability to convey information, narrate, express and justify 
ideas and opinions, and interest or convince the reader. Students must use the formal 
register, please see the definition in Marking guidance for Paper 4: Writing in Chinese. 
o Question 3 is the translation question. Students are required to translate a short 
paragraph from English into Chinese. The individual sentences are ordered by 
increasing level of difficulty. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample question paper and accompanying marking guidance and assessment criteria can 
be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken 
Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Marking guidance and assessment criteria are also provided in this document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
42 
Marking guidance for Paper 4: Writing in Chinese 
This marking guidance is for the use of Pearson-appointed external examiners. The guidance 
has been included for teacher reference to aid understanding of how the assessment criteria 
will be applied. 
General guidance on using levels-based mark schemes 
Step 1 Decide on a band 
● The examiner will first of all consider the answer as a whole and then decide which descriptors 
most closely match the answer and place it in that band. The descriptors for each band 
indicate the different features that will be seen in the student’s answer for 
that band. 
● When assigning a band they will look at the overall quality of the answer and not focus 
disproportionately on small and specific parts of the answer where the student has not 
performed quite as well as the rest. If the answer covers different aspects of different 
bands of the mark scheme they will use a ‘best fit’ approach for defining the band and 
then use the variability of the response to help decide the mark within the band, for 
example if the response is predominantly band 5–8 with a small amount of band 9–12 
material, it would be placed in band 5–8 but be awarded a mark near the top of the band 
because of the band 9–12 content. 
Step 2 Decide on a mark 
● Once they have decided on a band they will then need to decide on a mark within the 
band. 
● They will decide on the mark to award based on the quality of the answer; they will award 
a mark towards the top or bottom of that band depending on how the student has 
evidenced each of the descriptor bullet points. 
● They will modify the mark based on how securely the trait descriptors are met at that band. 
● They will need to go back through the answer as they apply the mark scheme to clarify 
points and assure themselves that the band and the mark are appropriate. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
43 
Assessment criteria for the Foundation tier 
Question 1 – Foundation tier (12 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria given in two 
mark grids: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
The student is expected to produce 20-30 characters for this task. The number of characters 
is approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer characters than 
recommended in the character count. All work produced by the student must be marked. 
Question 1: communication and content mark grid – Foundation tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Some relevant, basic information without development 
● Uses language to inform, give short descriptions and express opinions with 
limited success 
● Uses limited selection of common, familiar vocabulary and expression with frequent 
repetition 
3–4 ● Mostly relevant information, minimal extra detail 
● Uses language to give short descriptions, simple information and opinions with 
variable success 
● Uses small selection of common, familiar vocabulary and expression with some 
repetition 
5–6 ● Relevant information with occasional extra detail 
● Uses language to give short descriptions, simple information and opinions with 
some success 
● Uses small selection of common, familiar vocabulary and expression with little 
repetition 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
44 
Question 1: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Foundation tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Produces simple, short sentences in isolation 
● Limited accurate application of a small selection of straightforward grammatical 
structures, limited success in referring to present events; frequently errors 
prevent meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Produces simple, short sentences with little linking 
● Inconsistently accurate application of a small selection of straightforward 
grammatical structures, inconsistently successful reference to present events; 
often errors occur that hinder clarity of communication and occasionally 
prevent meaning 
5–6 ● Produces simple sentences with some linking 
● Accurate application of a small selection of straightforward grammatical 
structures, refers successfully to present events as appropriate to the task; 
occasionally errors occur that hinder clarity of communication 
Additional guidance 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: the mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have 
on coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example missing measure words 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing 
● minor errors in characters such as a misformed stroke in a character, or errors of 
proportion/balance/alignment between the radicals within a character. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example incorrect timeframes, mismatch of subject and the possessive 
adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing 
● errors in forming a character such as characters with an extra or missing stroke. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, for example incorrect word order  
● using the wrong character with the same sound or major errors in forming a character, 
such as characters with an incorrect radical 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
45 
Question 2 – Foundation tier (16 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria given in two 
mark grids: 
● communication and content  
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
This question requires students to write in a formal style/register (see Additional guidance). 
The student is expected to produce 40–50 characters for this task. The number of characters 
is approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer characters than 
recommended in the character count. All work produced by the student must be marked. 
Question 2: communication and content mark grid – Foundation tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Limited information given likely to consist of single words and phrases 
● Limited ability to use language to present simple facts, inform and note down key 
points; expression is frequently constrained and communication often breaks 
down 
● Repetitive use of a limited selection of common words and phrases 
● Knowledge of register and style is rarely evident because of restricted use of 
vocabulary and expression 
3–4 ● Some brief information given, basic points made without development 
● Occasional success in using language to present simple facts, information and to 
note down key points but expression is sometimes constrained and 
communication occasionally breaks down 
● Limited use of common, familiar vocabulary and expression with frequent 
repetition  
● Occasional appropriate use of register and style 
5–6 ● Some relevant information given appropriate to the task, basic points made with 
little development 
● Uses language with some success, to present simple facts, information and to 
note down key points, expression is occasionally constrained 
● Uses a small range of, common, familiar vocabulary and expression with some 
repetition 
● Mostly appropriate use of register and style, mostly sustained 
7–8 ● Relevant information given appropriate to the task, basic points made with some 
development 
● Uses language mostly with success, to present simple facts, information and to 
note down key points using simple ideas 
● Uses common, familiar vocabulary and expression with little repetition 
● Appropriate use of register and style sustained 
Additional guidance 
Register and style definition: formal register and style – this includes language that 
students would use with adults, for example teachers, employers, customers, officials, in a 
formal context. It includes avoidance of slang, over-familiar language, exaggeration, 
endearments, writing in a conversational style, inappropriate abbreviations used in social 
media chat. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
46 
Question 2: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Foundation tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Repetitive use of minimal selection of straightforward grammatical structures 
● Produces individual words/set phrases 
● Limited accuracy in grammatical structures used, limited success in referring to 
present and future events; regular errors prevent meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Use of a restricted range of straightforward grammatical structures, frequent 
repetition 
● Produces simple, short sentences, which are not linked 
● Occasional accuracy in grammatical structures used, occasional success in 
referring to present and future events; sometimes errors prevent meaning being 
conveyed 
5–6 ● Uses straightforward grammatical structures, some repetition 
● Produces simple, short sentences; minimal linking 
● Some accurate use of straightforward grammatical structures, some success in 
referring to present and future events to meet the requirements of the task; 
occasionally errors prevent meaning being conveyed 
7–8 ● Uses straightforward grammatical structures, occasional repetition 
● Produces predominantly simple sentences occasionally linked together 
● Mostly accurate use of straightforward grammatical structures, mostly successful 
references to present and future events to meet the requirements of the task; 
occasionally errors hinder clarity of communication 
Additional guidance 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: the mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have 
on coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example missing measure words 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing 
● minor errors in characters such as a misformed stroke in a character, or errors of 
proportion/balance/alignment between the radicals within a character. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example incorrect timeframes, mismatch of subject and the possessive 
adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing 
● errors in forming a character such as characters with an extra or missing stroke. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
47 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, for example incorrect word order  
● using the wrong character with the same sound or major errors in forming a character, 
such as characters with an incorrect radical 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
48 
Question 3 – Foundation tier (20 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria given in two 
mark grids: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
This question contains four bullet points that form part of the task. Failure to cover all four 
bullet points will impact on the marks that can be awarded against the requirements of the 
two mark grids for this question. There is no requirement for even coverage of the bullet 
points in any band. However, in order to access marks in the top band, students must refer 
to all bullet points and meet the other assessment criteria in the top band. 
This question requires students to write in an informal style (see Additional guidance). 
The student is expected to produce 80–110 characters for this task. The number of 
characters is approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer 
characters than recommended in the character count. All work produced by the student must 
be marked. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
49 
Question 3: communication and content mark grid – Foundation tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Communicates brief information relevant to the task with little development 
● Limited adaptation of language to narrate, inform and interest; straightforward 
personal opinions are given with limited justification 
● Expresses straightforward thoughts and ideas; uses common, familiar language 
with repetition 
● Variable use of appropriate register and style 
4–6 ● Communicates information relevant to the task, with development of the 
occasional key point and idea 
● Some effective adaptation of language to narrate and inform; attempts are 
made to interest and give convincing personal opinions which are occasionally 
successful 
● Expresses mainly straightforward thoughts and ideas with the occasional 
individual thought/idea; some different examples of common, 
familiar language 
● Appropriate use of register and style is evident but with inconsistencies 
7–9 ● Communicates information relevant to the task, with development of some key 
points and ideas 
● Mostly effective adaptation of language to narrate and inform, some effective 
language to interest and give convincing personal opinions 
● Some examples of creative language use to express individual thoughts and 
ideas; a variety of mainly common, familiar language with the occasional 
example of uncommon language 
● Appropriate use of register and style is evident but with occasional 
inconsistency 
10–12 ● Communicates information relevant to the task with expansion of key points 
and ideas 
● Effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest and give convincing 
personal opinions 
● Frequent examples of creative language use to express individual thoughts and 
ideas; a variety of vocabulary and expression, some examples of uncommon 
language 
● Appropriate use of register and style throughout with minimal inconsistency 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
50 
Additional guidance 
Creative language use – examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● using language, including familiar, high-frequency and simple language, to respond to 
unfamiliar/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to 
maintain interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, 
to convince. 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view which go 
beyond the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
Register and style definition: informal register and style – this includes language that 
students would use when addressing friends and people of a similar age. 
Adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest and give convincing opinions: 
adapts language to achieve different purposes in the language; students may adapt language 
more effectively for one purpose than another, for example they may use language 
effectively to narrate but less effectively to interest or give a convincing opinion. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
51 
Question 3: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Foundation tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Uses straightforward grammatical structures, some repetition 
● Produces brief, simple sentences, limited linking of sentences 
● Variable accuracy with language and structures, variable success when referring 
to past, present and future events, regular ambiguity; often errors prevent 
meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Uses mostly straightforward grammatical structures, occasional repetition 
● Produces occasionally extended sentences linked with familiar, straightforward 
conjunctions 
● Some accurate language and structures, including some successful references to 
past, present and future events, some ambiguity; often errors occur that hinder 
clarity of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
5–6 ● Different examples of straightforward grammatical structures are evident 
● Produces some extended sentences that are linked with familiar, straightforward 
conjunctions 
● Frequently accurate language and structures, including mostly successful 
references to past, present and future events, occasional ambiguity; sometimes 
errors occur that hinder clarity of communication 
7–8 ● Some variation of grammatical structures, occasional complex structure 
● Produces frequently extended sentences, well linked together 
● Generally accurate language and structures, including successful references to 
past, present and future events; occasionally errors occur that hinder clarity of 
communication 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language. 
Straightforward grammatical structures is considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
52 
 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example missing measure words 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing 
● minor errors in characters such as a misformed stroke in a character, or errors of 
proportion/balance/alignment between the radicals within a character. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example incorrect timeframes, mismatch of subject and the possessive 
adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing 
● errors in forming a character such as characters with an extra or missing stroke. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, for example incorrect word order  
● using the wrong character with the same sound or major errors in forming a character, 
such as characters with an incorrect radical 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
53 
Question 4 – Foundation tier (12 marks) 
Translation mark grids and example responses 
Mark grid for sentences (a), (b) and (c), which are worth 2 marks each. The mark 
grid will be applied to each individual sentence. 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1 ● Meaning partially communicated with errors that hinder clarity or prevent meaning 
being conveyed 
2 ● Meaning fully communicated with occasional errors that do not hinder clarity 
 
Mark grid for sentences (d) and (e), which are worth 3 marks each. The mark grid 
will be applied to each individual sentence. 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1 ● Some words are communicated but the overall meaning of the sentence is not 
communicated 
2 ● The meaning of the sentence is partially communicated 
● Linguistic structures and vocabulary are mostly accurate with some errors that 
hinder clarity or prevent meaning being conveyed 
3 ● The meaning of the sentence is fully communicated 
● Linguistic structures and vocabulary are accurate with only occasional errors that 
do not hinder clarity 
Additional guidance 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example missing measure words 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing 
● minor errors in characters such as a misformed stroke in a character, or errors of 
proportion/balance/alignment between the radicals within a character. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example incorrect timeframes, mismatch of subject and the possessive 
adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing 
● errors in forming a character such as characters with an extra or missing stroke. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
54 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, for example incorrect word order  
● using the wrong character with the same sound or major errors in forming a character, 
such as characters with an incorrect radical 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
55 
Assessment criteria for the Higher tier 
Question 1 – Higher tier (20 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria given in two 
mark grids: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
This question contains four bullet points that form part of the task. Failure to cover all four 
bullet points will impact on the marks that can be awarded against the requirements of the 
two mark grids for this question. There is no requirement for even coverage of the bullet 
points in any band. However, in order to access marks in the top band, students must refer 
to all bullet points and meet the other assessment criteria in the top band. 
This question requires students to write in an informal style (see Additional guidance). 
The student is expected to produce 80–110 characters for this task. The number of 
characters is approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer 
characters than recommended in the character count. All work produced by the student must 
be marked. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
56 
Question 1: communication and content mark grid – Higher tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Communicates brief information relevant to the task with little development 
● Limited adaptation of language to narrate, inform and interest; straightforward 
personal opinions are given with limited justification 
● Expresses straightforward thoughts and ideas; uses common, familiar language 
with repetition 
● Variable use of appropriate register and style 
4–6 ● Communicates information relevant to the task, with development of the 
occasional key point and idea 
● Some effective adaptation of language to narrate and inform; attempts are made 
to interest and give convincing personal opinions which are 
occasionally successful 
● Expresses mainly straightforward thoughts and ideas with the occasional 
individual thought/idea; some different examples of common, familiar language 
● Appropriate use of register and style is evident but with inconsistencies 
7–9 ● Communicates information relevant to the task, with development of some key 
points and ideas 
● Mostly effective adaptation of language to narrate and inform, some effective 
language to interest and give convincing personal opinions 
● Some examples of creative language use to express individual thoughts and 
ideas; a variety of mainly common, familiar language with the occasional 
example of uncommon language 
● Appropriate use of register and style is evident but with occasional inconsistency 
10–12 ● Communicates information relevant to the task with expansion of key points and 
ideas 
● Effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest and give convincing 
personal opinions 
● Frequent examples of creative language use to express individual thoughts and 
ideas; a variety of vocabulary and expression, some examples of uncommon 
language 
● Appropriate use of register and style throughout, with minimal inconsistency 
 
Additional guidance 
Creative language use: examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● using language, including familiar, high frequency and simple language, to respond to 
unfamiliar/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to 
maintain interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, 
to convince. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
57 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view that go beyond 
the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
Register and style definition: informal register and style – this includes language that 
students would use when addressing friends and people of a similar age. 
Adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest and give convincing opinions: 
adapts language to achieve different purposes in the language; students may adapt language 
more effectively for one purpose than another, for example they may use language 
effectively to narrate but less effectively to interest or give a convincing opinion. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
58 
Question 1: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Higher tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Uses straightforward grammatical structures, some repetition 
● Produces brief, simple sentences, limited linking of sentences 
● Variable accuracy with language and structures, variable success when referring 
to past, present and future events, regular ambiguity; often errors prevent 
meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Uses mostly straightforward grammatical structures, occasional repetition 
● Produces occasionally extended sentences linked with familiar, straightforward 
conjunctions 
● Some accurate language and structures, including some successful references to 
past, present and future events, some ambiguity; often errors occur that hinder 
clarity of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
5–6 ● Different examples of straightforward grammatical structures are evident 
● Produces some extended sentences that are linked with familiar, straightforward 
conjunctions 
● Frequently accurate language and structures, including mostly successful 
references to past, present and future events, occasional ambiguity; sometimes 
errors occur that hinder clarity of communication 
7–8 ● Some variation of grammatical structures, occasional complex structure 
● Produces frequently extended sentences, well linked together 
● Generally accurate language and structures, including successful references to 
past, present and future events; occasionally errors occur that hinder clarity of 
communication 
 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● all grammar and structures included in the grammar list that are specific to 
Higher tier GCSE 
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language. 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
59 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example missing measure words 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing 
● minor errors in characters such as a misformed stroke in a character, or errors of 
proportion/balance/alignment between the radicals within a character. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example incorrect timeframes, mismatch of subject and the possessive 
adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing 
● errors in forming a character such as characters with an extra or missing stroke. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, for example incorrect word order  
● using the wrong character with the same sound or major errors in forming a character, 
such as characters with an incorrect radical 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
60 
Question 2 – Higher tier (28 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria contained in 
two mark grids: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
This question contains four bullet points that form part of the task. Failure to cover all four 
bullet points will impact on the marks that can be awarded against the requirements of the 
two mark grids for this question (see below). There is no requirement for even coverage of 
the bullet points in any band. However, in order to access marks in the top band, students 
must refer to all bullet points and meet the other assessment criteria in the top band. 
This question requires students to write in a formal register/style (see Additional guidance). 
The student is expected to produce 130–180 characters for this task. The number of 
characters is approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer 
characters than recommended in the character count. All work produced by the student must 
be marked. 
Question 2: communication and content mark grid – Higher tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–4 ● Communicates occasionally detailed information relevant to the task with 
occasionally effective development of key points and ideas 
● Some effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest/convince 
● Occasional examples of creative use of language to express individual thoughts, 
ideas and points of view, occasional justification; variety of mainly common, 
familiar language, occasional examples of uncommon language 
● Appropriate use of register and style with the occasional inconsistency 
5–8 ● Communicates some detailed information relevant to the task, frequently 
effective development of key points and ideas 
● Frequently effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest/convince 
● Examples of creative use of language to express some individual thoughts, ideas 
and points of view, some justified; some variation of vocabulary and expression 
with some examples of uncommon language 
● Appropriate use of register and style with few inconsistencies 
9–12 ● Communicates detailed information relevant to the task, with mostly effective 
development of key points and ideas 
● Mostly effective adaptation of language, to narrate, inform, interest/convince 
● Creative use of language to express a range of individual thoughts, ideas and 
points of view, most of which are justified; variety of vocabulary and expression, 
frequent examples of uncommon language 
● Predominantly appropriate use of register and style 
13–16 ● Communicates detailed information relevant to the task, with consistently 
effective development of key points and ideas 
● Consistently effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, 
interest/convince 
● Creative use of language to express and fully justify a wide range of individual 
thoughts, ideas and points of view; wide variety of vocabulary and expression, 
many examples of uncommon language 
● Consistent use of appropriate register and style throughout 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
61 
Additional guidance 
Creative use of language: examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● using language, including familiar, high frequency and simple language, to respond to 
unfamiliar/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to 
maintain interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, 
to convince. 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view that go beyond 
the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
Adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest/convince: adapts language to 
achieve different purposes in the language; students may adapt language more effectively 
for one purpose than another, for example they may use language effectively to narrate but 
less effectively to interest/convince. 
Register and style definition: formal register and style – this includes language that 
students would use with adults, for example teachers, employers, customers, officials, in a 
formal context. It includes avoidance of slang, over-familiar language, exaggeration, 
endearments, writing in a conversational style, inappropriate abbreviations used in social 
media chat. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
62 
Question 2: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Higher tier 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Uses a variety of mainly straightforward grammatical structures, occasional 
examples of repetitive complex language 
● Occasional sequences of fluent writing, occasionally extended, well-linked 
sentences 
● Straightforward grammatical structures are largely accurate with occasional 
accurate use of complex language, some successful references to past, present 
and future events but some ambiguity; errors occur that sometimes hinder clarity 
of communication 
4–6 ● Some variation of grammatical structures, including some repetitive instances of 
complex language 
● Prolonged sequences of fluent writing, some extended, well-linked sentences 
● Generally accurate language and structures, frequently successful references to 
past, present and future events, occasional ambiguity; errors occur that 
occasionally hinder clarity of communication 
7–9 ● Uses a variety of grammatical structures including some different examples of 
complex language 
● Predominantly fluent response; frequent extended sentences, mostly 
well linked 
● Mostly accurate language and structures, mostly successful references to past, 
present and future events; errors occur but they rarely hinder clarity of 
communication 
10–12 ● Uses a wide variety of grammatical structures, including complex language 
● Fluent response throughout with extended, well-linked sentences 
● Consistently accurate language and structures, consistently successful references 
to past, present and future events; any errors do not hinder the clarity of the 
communication 
 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● all grammar and structures included in the grammar list that are specific to Higher tier 
GCSE 
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language. 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
63 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example missing measure words 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing 
● minor errors in characters such as a misformed stroke in a character, or errors of 
proportion/balance/alignment between the radicals within a character. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example incorrect timeframes, mismatch of subject and the possessive 
adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing 
● errors in forming a character such as characters with an extra or missing stroke. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, for example incorrect word order  
● using the wrong character with the same sound or major errors in forming a character, 
such as characters with an incorrect radical 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
64 
Question 3 – Higher tier (12 marks) 
Translation mark grid and example response 
Translation mark grid assesses both communication and content and linguistic knowledge 
and accuracy. When awarding marks, the student’s response across the whole paragraph 
should be considered. 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Meaning of some individual words or phrases is conveyed; frequent 
omissions/incorrectly communicated words and phrases/mother-tongue 
interference 
● Some straightforward structures are accurate but regular errors prevent meaning 
of individual phrases/sentences being conveyed 
4–6 ● The meaning of the passage is partially communicated, some words and phrases 
are omitted/incorrectly communicated 
● Language and structures are accurate in some phrases and sentences but some 
errors prevent meaning being conveyed 
7–9 ● The meaning of the passage is mostly communicated, occasional words are 
omitted/incorrectly communicated 
● Mostly accurate language and structures; errors occur that occasionally hinder 
clarity and in rare instances prevent meaning being conveyed 
10–12 ● The meaning of the passage is fully communicated 
● Consistently accurate language and structures, any errors do not hinder clarity 
Additional guidance 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example missing measure words 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content and which result in 
coherent writing 
● minor errors in characters such as a misformed stroke in a character, or errors of 
proportion/balance/alignment between the radicals within a character. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example incorrect timeframes, mismatch of subject and the possessive 
adjective 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing 
● errors in forming a character such as characters with an extra or missing stroke. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, for example incorrect word order  
● using the wrong character with the same sound or major errors in forming a character, 
such as characters with an incorrect radical 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
65 
Assessment Objectives 
 
Students must: % in GCSE 
AO1 Listening – understand and respond to different types of spoken 
language 
25 
AO2 Speaking – communicate and interact effectively in speech 25 
AO3 Reading – understand and respond to different types of written 
language 
25 
AO4 Writing – communicate in writing 25 
Total 100% 
 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
 
Paper 
Assessment Objectives Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives AO1 % AO2 % AO3 % AO4 % 
Paper 1: Listening and 
understanding in Chinese 
25 0 0 0 25% 
Paper 2: Speaking in Chinese 0 25 0 0 25% 
Paper 3: Reading and 
understanding in Chinese 
0 0 25 0 25% 
Paper 4: Writing in Chinese 0 0 0 25 25% 
Total for GCSE 25% 25% 25% 25% 100% 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
66 
3 Administration and general information 
Entries 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for this qualification can be found in 
our UK Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations officers and is 
available on our website: qualifications.pearson.com 
Discount code and performance tables 
Students taking the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken 
Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) must take all assessments in either the Foundation tier or the 
Higher tier only. 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more than one GCSE, or other Level 2 
qualifications with the same discount code, will have only the grade for their 'first entry' 
counted for the purpose of the school and college performance tables (please see 
Appendix 6: Codes). For further information about what constitutes 'first entry' and full 
details of how this policy is applied, please refer to the DfE website: 
www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-education 
Students should be advised that if they take two GCSEs with the same discount code, 
schools and colleges they wish to progress to are likely to take the view that this 
achievement is equivalent to only one GCSE. The same view may be taken if students take 
two GCSEs or other Level 2 qualifications that have different discount codes but have 
significant overlap of content. Students or their advisers who have any doubts about their 
subject combinations should check with the institution they wish to progress to before 
embarking on their programmes. 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, 
special consideration and malpractice 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality policy requires all students to 
have equal opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our qualifications 
to be awarded in a way that is fair to every student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the Equality Act 2010) are not, 
when they are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in comparison to 
students who do not share that characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification and that 
this achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their peers. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be available in English only. 
For speaking and writing assessments, all student work must be in Chinese. For the speaking 
assessment, students have a choice between speaking in Mandarin or Cantonese. For 
listening and reading, all student work must be in English. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
67 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with special 
educational needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to: 
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the assessment. 
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an individual 
student with a disability, without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding bodies comply with the duty under the 
Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students will 
then know what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for assessment. 
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable adjustments 
where a person with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in undertaking an 
assessment. The awarding organisation is required to take reasonable steps to overcome 
that disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be unique to that individual and 
therefore might not be in the list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of factors, 
including: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding 
organisation, or affects timeframes or the security or integrity of the assessment. This is 
because the adjustment is not ‘reasonable’. 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student's mark or grade to 
reflect temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the 
examination/assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a material 
effect on a candidate’s ability to take an assessment or demonstrate their level of attainment 
in an assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to apply for access arrangements 
and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special 
consideration, please refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
68 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that compromises or seeks to 
compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in examinations must be reported to Pearson using a JCQ Form M1 
(available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to Investigations Team, Pearson, 190 High Holborn, 
London, WC1V 7BH. Please provide as much information and supporting documentation as 
possible. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice constitutes staff or centre malpractice. 
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and maladministration of 
our qualifications. As with candidate malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is any act that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the 
integrity of the qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported 
immediately, before any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson on a 
JCQ Form M2(a) (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form, 
supporting documentation and as much information as possible can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to Investigations Team, Pearson, 
190 High Holborn, London, WC1V 7BH. Note that the final decision regarding 
appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the document 
General and Vocational Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments Policies and Procedures, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice. 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to comply with the requirements of 
Ofqual's General Conditions of Recognition. 
The raw marks for papers 1, 3 and 4 in this qualification will be scaled by Pearson to 
represent the relative weighting of 25% for each paper. 
Foundation and Higher tier 
Paper  Weighting  Raw marks Scaling factor Scaling mark 
1 25% 50 1.400 70 
2 25% 70 1.000 70 
3 25% 50 1.400 70 
4 25% 60 1.167 70 
 
This GCSE qualification will be graded and certificated on a nine-grade scale from 9 to 1 
using the total subject mark where 9 is the highest grade. Individual papers are not graded. 
For Foundation tier, grades 1–5 are available and for Higher tier, grades 4–9 are available, 
however if the mark achieved is a smaller number of marks below the 4/3 grade boundary, 
then a grade 3 may be awarded. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
69 
The first certification opportunity for this qualification will be 2019. 
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum judged by Pearson to be of 
sufficient standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U result. 
Student recruitment and progression 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this qualification. 
Progression 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken 
Cantonese) builds on the programme of study at Key Stages 2 and 3, focusing on the 
development of all four language skills, listening, speaking, reading and writing. Grammar 
and the mastering of linguistic features are key elements of this specification as is the 
inclusion of authentic written and spoken sources. 
Students will be expected to be able to talk about themselves as well as matters that go 
beyond their immediate experience. They should be able to express and justify their own 
opinions in speech and writing, building on the fluency and spontaneity developed at Key 
Stage 3. 
The skill of translation will be developed from those skills initiated from Key Stage 3. The 
broader range of topics promotes a clear progression in grammar and vocabulary from Key 
Stage 3 and will increase linguistic and cognitive demand. The grammar and vocabulary lists 
illustrate the level required for this qualification. 
This qualification offers a suitable progression route to GCE A Level in Chinese. In addition, 
the study of one language at GCSE can facilitate and help promote the learning of other 
languages. The qualification may also add to an individual’s employability profile. 
Students will be able to apply their knowledge, skills and understanding to authentic, real-life 
contexts. They will develop transferable skills that support higher education study and the 
transition to employment, together with an understanding and appreciation of Chinese-
speaking countries and their cultures. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
70 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
71 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Candidate speaking examination record form (CS2) 73 
Appendix 2: Grammar list 74 
Appendix 3: Vocabulary list 82 
Appendix 4: The context for the development of this qualification 132 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 134 
Appendix 6: Codes 135 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
72 
 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
73 
Appendix 1: Candidate speaking examination record form (CS2) 
A separate form must be submitted for Foundation tier and Higher tier candidates. Please indicate the tier below. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese 
(spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) 
1CN0: 2MF/2MH/2CF/2CH*      (*Please delete as appropriate) 
Centre name:  Centre number:  
 
Candidate name and number Declaration and permissions signature 
and date* 
Role play Picture-
based 
discussion 
Conversation 
(1)                  (2) 
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
Teacher name Declaration and permissions signature 
and date* 
        
            
 
*I declare that the above examinations have been carried out in line with Pearson and JCQ documentation for the conduct of the examinations and agree to 
this work being used to support teachers and examiners. 
Please photocopy and continue on a separate sheet as necessary. Please do not write in shaded boxes – these areas are for Pearson Examiner use 
only. A ‘Word’ version of this form is available on our website to facilitate administration in centres. 
 

 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
74 
Appendix 2: Grammar list 
GCSE students will be expected to have acquired knowledge and understanding of Chinese 
grammar during their course. In the examination they will be required to apply their 
knowledge and understanding, drawing from the following lists. The examples in brackets are 
indicative, not exclusive.  
Traditional Chinese grammar list (Foundation tier) 
Nouns:  
Noun suffixes: 子，家，員 
Measure words: 
The following measure words: 個，歲，年，隻，天， 本，口 
With 每 to mean “every” 
Adjectives/stative verbs: 
As predicate: positive and negative 
With modifiers: 很，非常 
Modification of nouns with or without 的 
With 了 to imply limits have been passed 
With 了 to imply a new situation 
Stative verbs as adverbs (e.g. 好吃，難學) 
Exclamations and interjections: 
The following exclamations and interjections: 太… 了，真… 
Comparatives: 
Use of 比 
Use of  比較+ adjective 
Use of 最 
Use of 跟/和一樣 to state similarity 
Adverbs: 
The following adverbs:  非常，常常，一定，也，還，就 
Pronouns: 
All personal pronouns, singular and plural 
Personal pronouns with 的 
Demonstrative pronouns 這，那 
大家 
Verbs: 
The verb 是 (to be), positive and negative 
The verb 有 (to have), positive and negative 
Simple sentences with verb and object, positive and negative 
Verb-object type verbs (唱歌，跳舞etc.) 
Verbs of motion, methods of transport, purpose in coming and going 
Modal verbs: 會，想，要，應該，可以 
Future intention: 打算 
Attitude: 喜歡，愛 
Actions in progress: 在，正在 
Requests: 請 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
75 
Verbs (cont): 
Completed actions: 了 
Experiential suffix: 過 
Complements of direction, degree and manner 
Prepositions/co-verbs: 
The following prepositions and co-verbs: 從，到，在，用，坐 
Interrogatives: 
Questions using 嗎 
Choice type questions 
Questions using 還是 
Questions using the following interrogatives:  什麼，誰，哪兒，為什麼， 怎麼，幾，哪個，什麼時
候，怎麼，怎麼樣，多少，多大，幾歲 
Tag questions using 呢，吧 
Location: 
Giving location using 在，是 
Positional phrases using 的 (e.g. 牆上的畫) 
Conjunctions: 
Joining nouns to nouns: … 和… 
Saying “with”: 和，跟 
Subjects in parallel: 都 
雖然… 但是… 
因為… 所以… 
也… 也… 
又… 又…  
先… 然後/再… 
如果/要是… 就… 
一邊… 一邊… 
…的時候 
Number, quality, time and date: 
All numbers up to 1 million 
Ordinal numbers using 第 
Stating quantities 
Giving the time and date 
Currencies and prices 
Giving the length of time 
Word order when using time expressions 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
76 
Traditional Chinese grammar list (Higher tier) 
All grammar and structures listed for Foundation tier, as well as: 
Nouns:  
Noun suffixes: 兒，者 
Measure words: 
The following measure words: 條，家，次，些，杯，張 
Reduplication of measure words 
Adjectives/stative verbs: 
Adjectives with 得多/極了/不得了 
Adjective/stative verb + verb as adjective (e.g. 好吃/好聽/好看/難看) 
Comparatives: 
Comparative sentences with quantities 
Adverbs: 
The following adverbs: 經常，從來，從來不 
Pronouns: 
The following pronoun: 自己 
Verbs:  
Modal Verbs: 得，必須，一定，能 
Negative of 必須: 不用，不必 
Future intention: 準備 
Imminent action: 了 
Use of 得 to describe how an action is carried out 
Use of 給 
Reduplication of verbs 
Imperatives (positive and negative) 
Resultative verb complements (看見，看不見) 
Reported speech: 聽說…，媽媽說… 
Topic/comment type sentence 
是 plus stative verb for emphasis 
Interrogatives: 
Questions using the following interrogatives: 多遠，多長時間，多久 
Indirect questions 
Interrogatives used to express inclusiveness/exclusiveness 
Interrogatives used indefinitely 
Location: 
Use of 離 to state proximity or remoteness between two locations 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
77 
Conjunctions: 
“Or” in statements using 或，或者 
一… 就… 
不但… 而且… 
除了… 以外… 
越… 越…  
而且… 
不過… 
那麼… 
因此… 
為了… 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
78 
Simplified Chinese grammar list (Foundation tier) 
Nouns:  
Noun suffixes: 子，家，员 
Measure words: 
The following measure words: 个，岁，年，只，天， 本，口 
With 每 to mean “every” 
Adjectives/stative verbs: 
As predicate: positive and negative 
With modifiers: 很，非常 
Modification of nouns with or without 的 
With 了 to imply limits have been passed 
With 了 to imply a new situation 
Stative verbs as adverbs (e.g. 好吃，难学) 
Exclamations and interjections: 
The following exclamations and interjections: 太… 了，真… 
Comparatives: 
Use of 比 
Use of  比较 + adjective 
Use of 最 
Use of 跟/和一样 to state similarity 
Adverbs: 
The following adverbs:  非常，常常，一定，也，还，就 
Pronouns: 
All personal pronouns, singular and plural 
Personal pronouns with 的 
Demonstrative pronouns 这，那 
大家 
Verbs: 
The verb 是 (to be), positive and negative 
The verb 有 (to have), positive and negative 
Simple sentences with verb and object, positive and negative 
Verb-object type verbs (唱歌，跳舞etc.) 
Verbs of motion, methods of transport, purpose in coming and going 
Modal verbs: 会，想，要，应该，可以 
Future intention: 打算 
Attitude: 喜欢，爱 
Actions in progress: 在，正在 
Requests: 请 
Completed actions: 了 
Experiential suffix: 过 
Complements of direction, degree and manner 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
79 
Prepositions/co-verbs: 
The following prepositions and co-verbs: 从，到，在，用，坐 
Interrogatives: 
Questions using 吗 
Choice type questions 
Questions using 还是 
Questions using the following interrogatives:  什么，谁，哪儿，为什么， 怎么，几，哪个，什么时
候，怎么，怎么样，多少，多大，几岁 
Tag questions using 呢，吧 
Location: 
Giving location using 在，是 
Positional phrases using 的 (e.g. 墙上的画) 
Conjunctions: 
Joining nouns to nouns: … 和… 
Saying “with”: 和，跟 
Subjects in parallel: 都 
虽然… 但是… 
因为… 所以… 
也… 也… 
又… 又…  
先… 然后/再… 
如果/要是… 就… 
一边… 一边… 
…的时候 
Number, quality, time and date: 
All numbers up to 1 million 
Ordinal numbers using 第 
Stating quantities 
Giving the time and date 
Currencies and prices 
Giving the length of time 
Word order when using time expressions 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
80 
Simplified Chinese grammar list (Higher tier) 
All grammar and structures listed for Foundation tier, as well as: 
Nouns:  
Noun suffixes: 儿，者 
Measure words: 
The following measure words: 条，家，次，些，杯，张  
Reduplication of measure words 
Adjectives/stative verbs: 
Adjectives with 得多/极了/不得了 
Adjective/stative verb + verb as adjective (e.g. 好吃/好听/好看/难看) 
Comparatives: 
Comparative sentences with quantities 
Adverbs: 
The following adverbs: 经常，从来，从来不 
Pronouns: 
The following pronoun: 自己 
Verbs:  
Modal Verbs: 得，必须，一定，能 
Negative of 必须: 不用，不必 
Future intention: 准备 
Imminent action: 了 
Use of 得 to describe how an action is carried out 
Use of 给 
Reduplication of verbs 
Imperatives (positive and negative) 
Resultative verb complements (看见，看不见) 
Reported speech: 听说…，妈妈说… 
Topic/comment type sentence 
是 plus stative verb for emphasis 
Interrogatives: 
Questions using the following interrogatives: 多远，多长时间，多久 
Indirect questions 
Interrogatives used to express inclusiveness/exclusiveness 
Interrogatives used indefinitely 
Location: 
Use of 离 to state proximity or remoteness between two locations 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
81 
Conjunctions: 
“Or” in statements using 或，或者  
一… 就… 
不但… 而且… 
除了… 以外… 
越… 越…  
而且… 
不过… 
那么… 
因此… 
为了… 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
82 
Appendix 3: Vocabulary list 
The following vocabulary list is intended to assist teachers in planning their work. It provides 
the core generic vocabulary that all students will need to acquire. It is an essential 
vocabulary list that students should refer to and build on when preparing for the duration of 
their study for the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken 
Mandarin/spoken Cantonese). 
However, students entered for the Foundation tier are required to understand and respond to 
common or familiar words and/or forms of words that are not on the vocabulary list. 
Similarly, students entered for the Higher tier are required to understand and respond to 
common or familiar words and/or forms of words that are not on the vocabulary list and 
which are less common or familiar than those used in relation to Foundation tier 
assessments. 
Word lists 
Section 1: High-frequency language 
Common verbs 
Common adjectives 
Common adverbs 
Prepositions 
Colours 
Numbers 
Ordinal numbers 
Quantities and measures 
Some useful connecting words 
Time expressions 
Times of day 
Days of the week 
Months and seasons of the year 
Question words 
Other useful expressions 
Other high-frequency words 
Countries 
Continents 
Nationalities 
Administrative regions of China 
Areas/mountains/seas 
Useful acronyms 
Social conventions 
Language used in dialogue and messages 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
83 
Section 2: Topic-specific language 
Although words are listed under specific topic headings, the words are not exclusive to those 
particular headings. Many words also relate to other themes but may be listed in only one 
theme. Many common verbs are given in the verb list, with a few others included under a 
specific topic. 
Each topic has been highlighted in bold. 
All topics must be studied in the context of both the student’s home country and 
that of countries and communities where Chinese is spoken. 
 
Theme 1: Identity and culture 
Who am I?: relationships; when I was younger; what my friends and family are like; what 
makes a good friend; interests; socialising with friends and family; role models 
Daily life: customs and everyday life; food and drink; shopping; social media and 
technology (use of, advantages and disadvantages) 
Cultural life: celebrations and festivals; reading; music; sport; film and television 
 
Theme 2: Local area, holiday and travel 
Holidays: preferences, experiences and destinations 
Travel and tourist transactions: travel and accommodation; asking for help and dealing 
with problems; directions; eating out; shopping 
Town, region and country: weather; places to see; things to do 
 
Theme 3: School 
What school is like: school types; school day; subjects; rules and pressures; 
celebrating success 
School activities: school trips; events and exchanges 
 
Theme 4: Future aspirations, study and work 
Using languages beyond the classroom: forming relationships; travel; employment 
Ambitions: further study; volunteering; training 
Work: jobs; careers and professions 
 
Theme 5: International and global dimension 
Bringing the world together: sports events; music events; campaigns and good causes 
Environmental issues: being ‘green’; access to natural resources 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
84 
 Traditional Chinese vocabulary list 
Section 1: High-frequency language 
Common verbs  
should 應該 
to arrive,to get to 到 
to ask 問 
to be 是 
to be able to, can 能 
to be interested in 對……有興趣 
to be quiet 安靜 
to begin 開始 
to buy 買 
to call,to be named 叫 
to change 換（錢/車/衣服 etc.） 
to close, to switch off 關（燈/電視/門 etc.） 
to come 來 
to convince 說服 
to do, to be/become (occupation) 做 
to draw/paint (picture) 畫 
to drink 喝 
to eat 吃 
to enter 進 
to find, to look for 找 
to forget 忘 
to get angry 生氣 
to give 給 
to give (present), to deliver, to say goodbye to 
someone 送 
to go 去 
to go out 出 
to go to bed, to sleep 睡覺 
to have 有 
to help 幫助 
to hold, to conduct, to run 舉辦 
to hope 希望 
to increase, to add 增加 
to invite, to ask, please 請 
to jump 跳 
to justify 解釋 
to know 知道 
to know (be familiar with) 認識 
to know how to, can 會 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
85 
 
Common verbs (cont)  
to laugh, smile 笑 
to learn, to study 學習 
to let, to allow, to make 讓 
to like 喜歡 
to listen/hear 聽 
to live 住 
to love 愛 
to meet 見/見面 
to play 玩 
to play (ball game), to make (phone call), to beat 打 
to play (football), to kick 踢 
to prepare 準備 
to put, to set free 放 
to remember, to write down 記 
to return 回 
to ride (a bicycle/horse) 騎 
to say, to speak, to talk 說 
to see, to read, to watch, to look at 看 
to seem 好像 
to sell 賣 
to send (a letter) 寄（信） 
to send （an email） 發（電子郵件） 
to sing 唱 
to sit 坐 
to spend (time/money); flower 花 
to stop 停 
to switch on, to turn on, to open 開（燈/電視/門 etc.） 
to take part 參加 
to teach 教 
to tell 告訴 
to think, to feel 覺得 
to try 試 
to understand 懂 
to use 用 
to wait for 等 
to want 想 
to want, be going to 要 
to wash 洗 
to wear, to put on 穿 
to wish 祝 
to write 寫 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
86 
 
Common adjectives  
advanced 先進 
bad 壞 
beautiful 漂亮 
big 大 
bored, boring 無聊/沒意思 
busy 忙 
clean 乾淨 
cold 冷 
comfortable 舒服 
correct, right 對 
dirty 髒 
easy 容易 
fast, quick 快 
fat 胖，肥 
full up, eaten to one’s satisfaction 飽 
fun, funny, interesting 有趣 
good 好 
happy 快樂 
hard, difficult 難 
hardworking 努力 
harmful 有害 
healthy, health 健康 
high, tall 高 
hot 熱 
hungry 餓 
interesting 有意思 
interesting, amusing, cute 好玩 
long 長 
lovely, loveable 可愛 
most 最 
near 近 
new 新 
old 老/舊 
pleased, happy 高興/開心 
rich 有錢 
same 一樣 
short 短 
slow 慢 
small 小 
thin 瘦 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
87 
 
Common adjectives (cont)  
thirsty 渴 
tired 累 
useful 有用 
wrong 錯 
Common adverbs  
again 再 
almost 差不多 
already 已經 
around, about, approximately 大約/差不多 
to be in the process of 正在 
both, all 都 
especially 特別 
extremely 非常 
here 這裡/這兒 
immediately 馬上 
(for a) long time 很久 
more 更 
nearby 附近 
not 不 
not (have) 沒 
often 常常 
perhaps, possibly 可能 
sometimes 有時候 
there 那裡/那兒 
too 也 
too (adjectives) 太……了 
very 很 
Colours  
black 黑 
blue 藍 
colour 顔色 
green 綠 
orange 橙 
red 紅 
white 白 
yellow 黃 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
88 
 
Numbers  
1 – 10 一，二，三，四，五，六，
七，八，九，十 
11 – 99 十一， 二十， 二十一，三
十，……九十九 
hundred 百 
thousand 千 
10 thousand 萬 
(for quantity) two + Measure Word + noun 兩 
zero 零 
Quantities and measures 
 
measure word for animals 隻 
measure word for books 本 
measure word for knives 把 
measure word for long pieces 
(hair, branch, trousers etc.) 條 
measure word for table, picture, paper etc. 張 
a bottle of 瓶 
a bowl of 碗 
a cup of 杯 
a packet of, package 包 
a pair of 雙 
a piece of (garment) 件 
few 少 
many, how (+adjectives) 多 
several 幾個 
the most common measure word 個 
Time expressions  
afternoon 下午 
date 號/日 
early 早 
evening 晚上 
everyday 每天，天天 
from 從 
half 半 
hour 小時/鐘頭 
in the future, future 將來 
in the past, past 過去 
last week 上星期 
last year 去年 
late 晚 
midday 中午 
minute 分, 分鐘 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
89 
 
Time expressions (cont) 
 
month 月 
morning 早上/上午 
next week 下星期 
next year 明年 
now 現在 
o’clock 點 
this year 今年 
today 今天 
tomorrow 明天 
week 星期 
weekend 週末 
yesterday 昨天 
Days of the week  
Monday 星期一 
Tuesday 星期二 
Wednesday 星期三 
Thursday 星期四 
Friday 星期五 
Saturday 星期六 
Sunday 星期日，星期天 
Months and seasons of the year  
January 一月 
February 二月 
March 三月 
April 四月 
May 五月 
June 六月 
July 七月 
August 八月 
September 九月 
October 十月 
November 十一月 
December 十二月 
autumn 秋 
season 季節 
spring 春 
summer 夏 
winter 冬 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
90 
 
Question words 
 
(question marker) used after a question sentence 
e.g. 'Have you had your dinner?' 嗎 
(question marker) often used at the end of a 
sentence where there is a statement followed by a 
question 
e.g. 'I am very busy, what about you?' 
呢 
used as an expression at the end of a statement 
e.g. 'that's fine' 吧 
how many 多少 
what 什麼 
where 哪裡/哪兒 
which 哪（個、本） 
who 誰 
why 為什麼 
Other high-frequency words  
he, him 他 
I, me 我 
Miss 小姐 
Mr，sir 先生 
Mrs 太太 
number 號碼 
she, her 她 
some 些/一些 
that 那 
thing 東西 
this 這 
time 時間 
way, method, solution 辦法 
we, us, you, they, them 我們, 你們, 他們, 她們 
you 你 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
91 
 
Countries, continents, nationalities, languages 
Foundation tier 
 
Africa 非洲 
America 美洲 
American 美國人 
Asia 亞洲 
British 英國人 
China 中國 
Chinese 中國人 
Chinese language 中文 
country 國家 
English language 英語/英文 
Europe 歐洲 
foreign language 外語 
France 法國 
French 法國人 
French language 法文 
language 語言 
nationality 國籍 
people, person 人 
Standard Chinese language 漢語/普通話 
United Kingdom 英國 
United States 美國 
Higher tier  
Canada 加拿大 
Germany 德國 
Italy 意大利 
Malaysia 馬來西亞 
Singapore 新加坡 
Spain 西班牙 
Social conventions 
 
excuse me 請問 
goodbye 再見 
good evening 晚上好 
good night 晚安 
hello 你好 
hello, everyone 大家好 
it doesn’t matter 沒關係 
see you tomorrow 明天見 
sorry 對不起 
thank you 謝謝 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
92 
 
Other useful expressions  
bored, comment about something that looks or 
sounds stupid 無聊 
it’s bad; how terrible! 糟糕! 
not bad; that’s right 不錯 
Prepositions  
after…… ......以後 
before…… ......以前 
behind 後（邊） 
down 下 
during…… ......的時候 
in 裡 （邊） 
in, at, on 在 
in front of 前 （邊） 
middle 中間 
outside 外 （邊） 
up 上 
Language used in dialogues and messages 
I will put you through. 請等等 
I’ll be right back. 馬上回來 
I’m listening. 請說 
Wait a moment. 等一下 
wrong number. 打錯了 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
93 
 
Section 2 – Topic-specific vocabulary 
Identity and culture - daily life, food and drink, including  
eating out 
Foundation tier  
advantage 優點/好處 
beef 牛肉 
bread 麵包 
breakfast 早飯/早餐 
cake 蛋糕 
celebration(s)/to celebrate 慶祝 
cheap 便宜 
chicken 雞 
chopsticks 筷子 
coffee 咖啡 
convenient  方便 
credit card 信用卡 
culture 文化 
customs/traditions 傳統/習俗 
delicious 好吃/美味 
duck 鴨 
dumpling 餃子 
egg 蛋  
evening meal, dinner, supper 晚飯/晚餐 
fast food restaurant 快餐店 
film 電影 
fish 魚 
food and drink 食物和飲料 
fruit 水果 
fruit juice 果汁 
identity 身份 
interests/hobbies 興趣/愛好 
lunch 午飯/午餐 
meat 肉 
menu 菜單 
milk 牛奶 
money 錢 
moon cake (related to Mid-Autumn festival) 月餅 
mutton 羊肉 
noodle 麵(條) 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
94 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
pork 豬肉 
restaurant 餐廳/飯館 
rice (cooked/boiled) 米飯 
rice dumpling (related to Dragon Boat Festival) 粽子 
role models 偶像 
roast 烤 
shopping 買東西/購物 
soft drinks, fizzy drinks 汽水 
soup 湯 
sport 運動 
tea 茶 
to cook, prepare a meal 做飯 
to order (from a menu) 點菜 
to pay 付錢 
vegetable 青菜 
wallet, purse 錢包 
water 水 
wine 酒 
yuan 元/塊 
Higher tier  
chips 薯條 
choice 選擇 
confectionary 糖果 
cultural life 文化生活 
daily life 日常生活 
delicious 好味道 
dessert 甜點 
disadvantage 缺點/壞處 
fried 炒 
fried rice/noodles 炒飯, 炒麵 
knife and fork 刀叉 
salad 沙拉 
seafood 海鮮 
self-service (buffet) 自助 (自助餐) 
snack 點心, 小吃 
sweet 甜 
salty 鹹 
spicy 辣 
take away restaurant 外賣店 
vegetarian 素食 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
95 
 
Identity and culture - what my friends and family are like 
Words relating to dress and style 
Foundation tier  
shoe 鞋/鞋子 
size (large, medium, small) 號/號碼 (大號, 中號, 小號) 
skirt 裙子 
sweater/jumper 毛衣 
to try on (for size) 試穿/試試 
trainers 運動鞋 
trousers 褲子 
watch 手錶 
Higher tier  
fashion 時尚 
hat 帽子 
shirt 襯衣/襯衫 
 
 
  
Identity and culture - what my friends and family are like 
Words on relations, relationships, personal and physical 
characteristics 
Foundation tier 
age 年齡 
bed 床 
birthday 生日 
bird 鳥 
birth, to be born 出生 
boy 男孩 
cat 貓 
chair 椅子 
child 孩子/兒童 
clock 鐘 
clothes 衣服 
date of birth 出生日期 
dog 狗 
door 門 
elder brother 哥哥 
elder sister 姐姐 
elderly people 老年人 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
96 
 
Foundation tier (cont) 
 
eye 眼睛 
family, home 家 
family (member) 家人 
father 爸爸 
first name 名字 
friend 朋友 
fridge 冰箱 
full name 姓名 
girl 女孩 
glasses 眼鏡 
grandfather 爺爺 
grandmother 奶奶 
hair 頭髮 
house 房子/房屋 
house work 家務 
marry 結婚 
mother 媽媽 
pet 寵物 
relationship 關係 
self, oneself 自己 
sofa 沙發 
table 桌子 
telephone 電話 
television 電視機 
window 窗 
year 年 
……years old ……歲 
younger brother 弟弟 
younger sister 妹妹 
young people 年轻人 
Higher tier  
friendly 友好 
kitchen 廚房 
lamp 燈 
to look after 照顧 
neighbour 鄰居 
polite 有禮貌 
 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
97 
 
Identity and culture – cultural life 
Foundation tier 
Chinese New Year/Spring Festival 中國新年/春節 
Christmas 聖誕節 
competition/matches 比賽 
concert 音樂會 
cycling 騎自行車(單車) 
dance 舞 
Dragon Dance 舞龙 
(to) do sports 做運動 
electronic game 電子遊戲 
festival 節日 
free time 有空 
ice skating 滑冰 
Lion Dance 舞獅 
New Year 新年 
performance 表演/演出 
play a ball game (tennis, basketball… etc.) 打球 
(play) badminton (打)羽毛球 
(play) basketball (打)籃球 
(play) football (踢)足球 
(play) table tennis (打)乒乓球 
(play) tennis (打)網球 
programme 節目 
reading 看書/閱讀 
running, jogging 跑步 
skiing 滑雪 
song 歌 
The Mid-Autumn Festival 中秋節 
to dance 跳舞 
to listen to music 聽音樂 
to sing, singing 唱歌 
swimming 游泳 
watch movies 看電影 
watch news 看新聞 
watch television 看電視 
Higher tier  
athlete, sportsman 運動員 
champion 冠軍 
dragon boat 龍舟 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
98 
 
Higher tier (cont)  
Easter 復活節 
firecracker (related to the Chinese New Year) 鞭炮 
(to) go for a walk/stroll 散步 
socialising 社交 
summer camp 夏令營 
team 隊 
team member, player 隊員 
The Dragon Boat Festival 端午節 
  
Identity and culture – using social media 
Foundation tier 
blog 博客 
computer 電腦 
e-mail 電子郵件 
e-pal 網友 
social media 社交媒體 
surf the internet 上網 
technology 科技 
to chat (online, on MSN etc.)  聊天 
Higher tier  
chat room 聊天室 
desktop computer 台式電腦 
laptop computer 筆記本電腦 
text message 短信 
to text 發短信 
to download 下載 
virus 病毒 
URL/web address 網址 
web page 網頁 
website 網站 
  
Local area, holiday and travel 
Foundation tier 
accommodation 住的地方 
activity 活動 
air-conditioning 空調 
airport 飛機場 
bank 銀行 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
99 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
Beijing 北京 
bicycle 自行車/單車 
boat/ship/ferry 船 
bridge 橋 
bus 公共汽車 
by (car/train/bus/boat etc.) 坐 (車/火車……) 
calligraphy 書法 
car 汽車 
car park 停車場 
cathedral/church 教堂 
cinema 電影院 
city 城市 
Chinese brush 毛筆 
Chinese painting 國畫 
countryside 農村 
court (sports – e.g. football, tennis... etc.) 球場 (足球場, 網球場……) 
destination 目的地 
exhibition 展覽會 
experience 經驗/經歷 
factory 工廠 
floor (1st, 2nd…) (一，二，……)層/樓 
flower 花 
garden 花園 
gift, present 禮物 
grass 草 
Guangzhou 廣州 
guest 客人 
hill/mountain 山 
holiday 假期 
Hong Kong 香港 
hospital 醫院 
hotel 酒店 
kite 風箏 
lake 湖 
library 圖書館 
local area 當地 
London 倫敦 
luggage 行李 
map 地圖 
museum 博物館 
outdoor activities 戶外活動 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
100 
Foundation tier (cont)  
panda 熊猫 
park 公園 
passport 護照 
place 地方 
plane 飛機 
police station 警察局 
post office 郵局 
postcard 明信片 
pound sterling 英鎊/鎊 
preference 更喜歡 
problem 問題 
railway station 火車站 
region 地區 
return journey (ticket) 回程/雙程（票） 
river 河 
road, line/route, bus number 路 
scenery 風景 
sea 海 
seaside 海邊 
Shanghai 上海 
shop 商店 
shopping centre 購物中心 
single journey 單程（票） 
sports ground 運動場 
square 廣場 
stadium 體育館 
stamp 郵票 
station/stop (public transport) 車站 
supermarket 超級市場 
swimming pool 游泳池 
Taiwan 臺灣 
The Great Wall 長城 
things to do 可做的事 
Tiananmen Square 天安門廣場 
ticket 票 
to book, to reserve 訂（房，票） 
to drive 開車 
to get off, to alight 下車 
to get on, to board (train, bus etc.) 上車 
to rent 租 
tourism 旅遊 
tourist 遊客 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
101 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
to visit (a place, a museum, etc.) 參觀 
to welcome 歡迎 
town centre 市中心 
train 火車 
transport 交通 
travel 旅行 
tree 樹 
underground station 地鐵站 
underground train, tube, metro 地鐵 
waiter/waitress/attendant 服務員 
zoo 動物園 
Higher tier  
accommodation 住宿 
arrive 到達 
asking for help 找人幫忙/尋求幫助 
coach 旅遊車 
dealing with problems 解決問題 
eating out 出去吃飯 
fare 車費 
scenic spots, places of interest 名勝 
service desk 服務台 
set off, depart 出發 
souvenir 紀念品 
stay (number of nights) 住 
stay, stop over 停留 
Taipei 臺北 
tall building/block/apartments 高樓 
ticket office 售票處 
timetable (transport) 時刻表 
  
Phrases associated with weather 
Foundation tier 
autumn 秋天 
cloud 雲 
cloudy 多雲 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
102 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
degree (temperature) 度 
fog 霧 
foggy 大霧 
moon 月亮 
rain 雨 
snow 雪 
spring 春天 
sun 太陽 
summer 夏天 
to rain 下雨 
to snow 下雪 
weather 天氣 
wind 風 
windy 刮風/大風 
winter 冬天 
Higher tier  
lowest temperature 最低氣溫 
highest temperature 最高氣溫 
temperature 氣溫 
weather forecast 天氣預報 
Asking for directions 
 
behind 後邊 
direction 方向 
far 遠 
go straight on 一直走 
in front of 在……前邊 
near (in distance)/close by 近 
next to 在……旁邊 
on foot 走路 
on the left 左邊 
on the right 右邊 
opposite 對面 
the next 下一個 
to cross (road, bridge, river etc.) 過 
to turn (left, right) 轉  
towards 向 
east 東 
north 北 
south 南 
west 西 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
103 
 
Dealing with problems  
Foundation tier  
to change (to another one) 換 
damaged/broken 壞了 
disappear/lost something 不見了 
manager 經理 
mistake 不對/錯 
noisy 吵 
police/policeman 警察 
service 服務 
Higher tier 
 
ill/sick/unwell 生病/不舒服  
noise 噪音 
pleased/satisfactory 滿意 
safe 安全 
School 
 
Foundation tier 
 
book 書 
classroom 教室 
dictionary 字典 
examination 考試 
exchange 交換 
foreign languages 外語 
geography 地理 
go to school (as a student) 上學 
have a lesson 上課 
head teacher 校長 
history 歷史 
homework 作業 
maths 數學 
music  音樂 
P.E. (physical education) 體育 
pen 筆 
pressure 壓力 
primary school 小學 
results, marks, achievement 成績 
rule 規定 
school 學校 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
104 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
school term 學期 
school uniform 校服 
schoolmate, classmate 同學 
science 科學 
secondary school 中學 
student 學生 
subject 科目 
summer holiday 暑假 
teacher 老師 
university 大學 
Higher tier   
Biology 生物 
break 休息 
celebrating success 慶祝成功 
Chemistry 化學 
essay 文章 
GCE equivalent 高考 
GCSE equivalent 中學會考 
graduate 畢業 
mark, grade 分數 
physics 物理 
school exchange 校際交換 
school events/school activites 學校活動 
student studying abroad 留學生 
timetable 時間表 
to pay attention 集中/用心 
plan, intention 打算 
plan, to plan 計劃 
  
Future aspirations, study and work 
Foundation tier 
actor/actress 演員 
advert 廣告 
ambition/ideal 理想 
aspiration 心願 
business/trade 做生意 
career 職業 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
105 
 
beyond the classroom 課外 
building relationships 建立關係 
cook/chef 厨師 
confidence 信心 
experienced 有經驗 
further study 進一步學習 
organisation 組織/機構 
organiser 組織者 
pocket money 零花錢/零用錢 
Foundation tier (cont)  
company/office 公司 
doctor 醫生 
driver 司機 
engineer 工程師 
employment 僱傭 
famous 有名  
interview 訪問/採訪 
(job) interview 面試 
introduction, to introduce 介紹 
job, work 工作 
journalist 記者 
magazine 雜誌 
news 新聞 
newspaper 報紙 
nurse 護士 
part time 兼職 
profession 職業 
salary 工資 
sales assistant 售貨員 
singer 歌星 
study 學習 
to apply, application 申請 
to earn money 賺錢 
to recruit, to employ 招請/聘請 
training 訓練/培訓 
travel agency 旅行社 
volunteer 志願者/義工 
volunteering 志願服務/義工服務 
worker 工人 
Higher tier  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
106 
 
Higher tier (cont)  
to reduce, to cut back 減少 
success, successful 成功 
work experience 工作經驗 
  
International and global dimension – bringing the world together, 
environmental issues 
Foundation tier 
  
animals 勳物 
audience 觀眾 
being ‘green’ 綠色環保的 
campaign 運動 
carry on  繼續 
charity 慈善 
donate 捐 
good causes 公益 
electricity 電 
environment  環境 
environmental issues 環境問題 
(music) festival (音樂)節 
gas 煤氣 
global, world wide 全球 
important 重要 
international 國際 
international activity 國際活動 
music event 音樂活動 
natural resources 自然資源 
Olympic Games 奧運會 
protection, to protect 保護 
recycling 回收 
rubbish 垃圾 
to save (water) 節約（水） 
sports event 運動會 
wasteful, to waste 浪費 
world 世界 
World Cup (football) 世界盃/杯(足球) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
107 
 
Higher tier 
climate 氣候 
global warming 全球變暖 
pollution, to pollute, to contaminate 污染 
poverty 貧窮 
security 安全 
solar power 太陽能 
to save (energy) 節約(能源) 
to sort/separate (eg rubbish) 分類(垃圾) 
volcano 火山 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
108 
Simplified Chinese vocabulary list 
Section 1: High-frequency language 
Common verbs 
should 应该 
to arrive, to get to 到 
to ask 问 
to be 是 
to be able to, can 能 
to be interested in 对……有兴趣 
to be quiet 安静 
to begin 开始 
to buy 买 
to call,to be named 叫 
to change 换（钱/车/衣服 etc.） 
to close, to switch off 关（灯/电视/门 etc.） 
to come 来 
to convince 说服 
to do, to be/become (an occupation) 做 
to draw/paint (picture) 画 
to drink 喝 
to eat 吃 
to enter 进 
to find, to look for 找 
to forget 忘 
to get angry 生气 
to give 给 
to give (present), to deliver, to say goodbye to 
someone 送 
to go 去 
to go out 出 
to go to bed, to sleep 睡觉 
to have 有 
to help 帮助 
to hold, to conduct, to run 举办 
to hope 希望 
to increase, to add 增加 
to invite, to ask, please 请 
to jump 跳 
to justify 解释 
to know 知道 
to know (be familiar with) 认识 
to know how to, can 会 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
109 
 
Common verbs (cont)  
to laugh, smile 笑 
to learn, to study 学习 
to let, to allow, to make 让 
to like 喜欢 
to listen/hear 听 
to live 住 
to love 爱 
to meet 见/见面 
to play 玩 
to play (ball game), to make (phone call), to beat 打 
to play (football), kick 踢 
to prepare 准备 
to put, to set free 放 
to remember, to write down 记 
to return 回 
to ride (a bicycle/horse) 骑  
to say, to speak, to talk 说 
to see, to read, to watch, to look at 看 
to seem 好像 
to sell 卖 
to send (a letter) 寄（信） 
to send (an email) 发（电子邮件） 
to sing 唱 
to sit 坐 
to spend (time/money); flower 花 
to stop 停 
to switch on, to turn on, to open 开（灯/电视/门 etc.） 
to take part 参加 
to teach 教 
to tell 告诉 
to think, to feel 觉得 
to try 试   
to understand 懂  
to use 用 
to wait for 等 
to want 想 
to want, to be going to 要 
to wash 洗 
to wear, to put on 穿 
to wish 祝 
to write 写 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
110 
 
Common adjectives 
 
advanced 先进 
bad 坏 
beautiful 漂亮 
big 大 
bored, boring 无聊/没意思 
busy 忙 
clean 干净 
cold 冷 
comfortable 舒服 
correct, right 对 
dirty 脏 
easy 容易 
fast, quick 快 
fat 胖，肥 
full up, eaten to one’s satisfaction 饱 
fun, funny, interesting 有趣 
good 好 
happy 快乐 
hard, difficult 难 
hardworking 努力 
harmful 有害 
healthy, health 健康 
high, tall 高 
hot 热 
hungry 饿 
interesting 有意思 
interesting, amusing, cute 好玩 
long 长 
lovely, loveable 可爱 
most 最 
near 近  
new 新 
old 老/旧 
pleased, happy 高兴/开心 
rich 有钱 
same 一样 
short 短 
slow 慢 
small 小 
thin 瘦 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
111 
 
Common adjectives (cont) 
 
thirsty 渴 
tired 累 
useful 有用 
wrong 错 
Common adverbs 
 
again 再 
almost 差不多 
already 已经 
around, about, approximately  大约/差不多 
to be in the process of 正在 
both, all 都 
especially 特别 
extremely 非常 
here 这里/这儿 
immediately 马上 
(for a) long time 很久 
more 更 
nearby 附近 
not 不 
not (have) 没 
often 常常 
perhaps, possibly 可能 
sometimes 有时候 
there 那里/那儿 
too 也 
too (adjectives) 太......了 
very 很 
Colours 
 
black 黑 
blue 蓝 
colour 颜色 
green 绿 
orange 橙 
red 红 
white 白 
yellow 黄 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
112 
 
Numbers 
 
1 – 10 一, 二, 三, 四, 五, 六,  
七, 八, 九, 十 
11 – 99 十一,  二十,  二十一, 三
十, ......九十九 
hundred 百 
thousand 千 
10 thousand 万 
(for quantity) two + Measure Word + noun 两 
zero 零 
Quantities and measures 
 
measure word for animals 只 
measure word for books 本 
measure word for knives 把 
measure word for long pieces 
(hair, branch, trousers etc.) 条 
measure word for table, picture, paper etc. 张 
a bottle of 瓶 
a bowl of 碗 
a cup of 杯 
a packet of, package 包 
a pair of 双 
a piece of (garment) 件 
few 少 
many, how (+adjectives) 多 
several 几个 
the most common measure word 个 
Time expressions 
 
afternoon 下午 
date 号/日 
early 早 
evening 晚上 
everyday 每天, 天天 
from 从 
half 半 
hour 小时/钟头 
in the future, future 将来 
in the past, past 过去 
last week 上星期 
last year 去年 
late 晚  
midday  中午 
minute 分, 分钟 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
113 
 
Time expressions (cont)  
month 月 
morning 早上，上午 
next week 下星期 
next year 明年 
now 现在 
o’clock 点 
this year 今年 
today 今天 
tomorrow 明天 
week 星期 
weekend 周末 
yesterday 昨天 
Days of the week 
 
Monday 星期一 
Tuesday 星期二 
Wednesday 星期三 
Thursday 星期四 
Friday 星期五 
Saturday 星期六 
Sunday 星期日，星期天 
Months and seasons of the year 
 
January 一月 
February 二月 
March 三月 
April 四月 
May 五月 
June 六月 
July 七月 
August 八月 
September 九月 
October 十月 
November 十一月 
December 十二月 
autumn 秋 
season 季节 
spring 春 
summer 夏 
winter 冬 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
114 
 
Question words 
 
(question marker) used after a question sentence 
e.g. 'Have you had your dinner?'  吗 
(question marker) is also used like an expression 
plus question at the end of the sentence  
e.g. 'I am very busy, what about you?' 
呢 
used like an expression at the end of a statement 
e.g. 'that's fine' 
吧 
how many 多少 
what 什么 
where 哪里/哪儿 
which 哪（个，本） 
who 谁 
why 为什么 
Other high-frequency words 
 
he, him 他 
I, me 我 
Miss 小姐 
Mr,sir 先生 
Mrs 太太 
number 号码 
she, her 她 
some 些/一些 
that 那 
thing 东西 
this 这 
time 时间 
way, method, solution 办法 
we, us, you, they, them 我们，你们，他们，她们 
you 你 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
115 
 
Countries, continents, nationalities, languages  
Foundation tier 
 
Africa 非洲 
America 美洲 
American 美国人 
Asia 亚洲 
British 英国人 
China 中国 
Chinese 中国人 
Chinese language 中文 
country 国家 
English language 英语/英文 
Europe 欧洲 
foreign language 外语 
France 法国 
French 法国人 
French language 法文 
language 语言 
nationality 国籍 
people, person 人 
Standard Chinese language 汉语/普通话 
United Kingdom 英国 
United States 美国 
Higher tier 
 
Canada 加拿大 
Germany 德国 
Italy 意大利 
Malaysia 马来西亚 
Singapore 新加坡 
Spain 西班牙 
Social conventions 
 
excuse me 请问 
goodbye 再见 
good evening 晚上好 
good night 晚安 
hello 你好 
hello, everyone 大家好 
it doesn’t matter 没关系 
see you tomorrow 明天见 
sorry 对不起 
thank you 谢谢 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
116 
 
Other useful expressions 
 
bored, comment about something that looks or 
sounds stupid 无聊 
it’s bad; how terrible! 糟糕! 
not bad; that’s right 不错 
Prepositions 
 
after…… ……以后 
before…… ……以前 
behind 后（边） 
down 下 
during…… ……的时候 
in 里（边） 
in, at, on 在 
in front of 前（边） 
middle 中间 
outside 外（边） 
up 上 
Language used in dialogues and messages 
I will put you through. 请等等 
I’ll be right back. 马上回来 
I’m listening. 请说 
Wait a moment. 等一下 
wrong number. 打错了 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
117 
 
Section 2 – Topic-specific vocabulary 
Identity and culture - daily life, food and drink, including  
eating out 
Foundation tier 
advantage 优点/好处 
beef 牛肉 
bread 面包 
breakfast 早饭/早餐 
cake 蛋糕 
celebration(s)/to celebrate 庆祝 
cheap 便宜 
chicken 鸡 
chopsticks 筷子 
coffee 咖啡 
convenient 方便 
credit card 信用卡 
culture 文化 
customs/traditions 传统/习俗 
delicious 好吃/美味 
duck 鸭 
dumpling 饺子 
egg 蛋  
evening meal, dinner, supper 晚饭/晚餐 
fast food restaurant 快餐店 
film 电影 
fish 鱼 
food and drink 食物和饮料 
fruit 水果 
fruit juice 果汁 
identity 身份 
interests/hobbies 兴趣/爱好 
lunch 午饭/午餐 
meat 肉 
menu 菜单 
milk 牛奶 
money 钱 
moon cake (related to Mid-Autumn Festival) 月饼 
mutton 羊肉 
noodle 面（条） 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
118 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
pork 猪肉 
restaurant 餐厅/饭馆 
rice (cooked/boiled) 米饭 
rice dumpling (related to Dragon Boat Festival) 粽子 
role models 偶像 
roast 烤 
shopping 买东西/购物 
soft drinks, fizzy drinks 汽水 
soup 汤 
sport 运动 
tea 茶 
to cook, prepare a meal 做饭 
to order (from a menu) 点菜 
to pay 付钱 
vegetable 青菜 
wallet, purse 钱包 
water 水 
wine 酒 
yuan 元/块 
Higher tier 
 
chips 薯条 
choice 选择 
confectionery 糖果 
cultural life 文化生活 
daily life 日常生活 
delicious 好味道 
dessert 甜点 
disadvantage 缺点/坏处 
fried 炒 
fried rice/noodles 炒饭，炒面 
knife and fork 刀叉 
salad 沙拉 
seafood 海鲜 
self-service (buffet) 自助（自助餐） 
snack 点心，小吃 
sweet 甜 
salty 咸 
spicy 辣 
take away restaurant 外卖店 
vegetarian 素食 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
119 
 
Identity and culture - what my friends and family are like 
Words relating to dress and style 
Foundation tier 
shoe 鞋/鞋子 
size (large, medium, small) 
号/号码（大号，中号，小
号） 
skirt 裙子 
sweater/jumper 毛衣 
to try on (for size) 试穿/试试 
trainers 运动鞋 
trousers 裤子 
watch 手表 
Higher tier 
 
fashion 时尚 
hat 帽子 
shirt 衬衣/衬衫 
Identity and culture - what my friends and family are like 
Words on relations, relationships, personal and physical 
characteristics 
Foundation tier 
age 年龄 
bed 床 
birthday 生日 
boy 男孩 
bird 鸟 
birth, to be born 出生 
cat 猫 
chair 椅子 
child 孩子/儿童 
clock 钟 
clothes 衣服 
date of birth 出生日期 
dog 狗 
door 门 
elder brother 哥哥 
elder sister 姐姐 
elderly people 老年人 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
120 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
eye 眼睛 
family, home 家 
family (member) 家人 
father 爸爸 
first name 名字 
friend 朋友 
fridge 冰箱 
full name 姓名 
girl 女孩 
glasses 眼镜 
grandfather 爷爷 
grandmother 奶奶 
hair 头发 
house 房子/房屋 
house work 家务 
marry 结婚 
mother 妈妈 
pet 宠物 
relationship 关系 
self, oneself 自己 
sofa 沙发 
table 桌子 
telephone 电话 
television 电视机 
window 窗 
year 年 
……years old ……岁 
younger brother 弟弟 
younger sister 妹妹 
young people 年轻人 
Higher tier 
 
friendly 友好 
kitchen 厨房 
lamp 灯 
to look after 照顾 
neighbour 邻居 
polite 有礼貌 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
121 
 
Identity and culture - cultural life 
 
Foundation tier 
 
Chinese New Year / Spring festival 中国新年/春节 
Christmas 圣诞节 
competition / matches 比赛 
concert 音乐会 
cycling 骑自行车（单车） 
dance 舞 
Dragon Dance 舞龙 
(to) do sports 做运动 
electronic game 电子游戏 
festival 节日 
free time 有空 
ice skating 滑冰 
Lion Dance 舞狮 
New Year 新年 
performance 表演/演出 
play a ball game (tennis, basketball… etc.) 打球 
(play) badminton (打)羽毛球 
(play) basketball (打)篮球 
(play) football (踢)足球 
(play) table tennis (打)乒乓球 
(play) tennis (打)网球 
programme 节目 
reading 看书/阅读 
running, jogging 跑步 
skiing 滑雪 
song 歌 
The Mid-Autumn Festival 中秋节 
to dance 跳舞 
to listen to music 听音乐 
to sing, singing 唱歌 
swimming 游泳 
watch movies 看电影 
watch news 看新闻 
watch television 看电视 
Higher tier 
 
athlete, sportsman 运动员 
champion  冠军 
dragon boat 龙舟 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
122 
 
Higher tier (cont)  
Easter 复活节 
firecracker (related to the Chinese New Year) 鞭炮 
(to) go for a walk/stroll 散步 
socialising 社交 
summer camp 夏令营 
team 队 
team member, player 队员 
The Dragon boat festival 端午节 
  
Identity and culture – using social media 
Foundation tier 
blog 博客 
computer 电脑 
e-mail 电子邮件 
e-pal 网友 
social media 社交媒体 
surf the internet 上网 
technology 科技 
to chat (online, on MSN etc.)  聊天 
Higher tier   
chat room 聊天室 
desktop computer 台式电脑 
laptop computer 笔记本电脑 
text message 短信 
to text 发短信 
to download 下载 
virus 病毒 
URL/web address 网址 
web page 网页 
website 网站 
Local area, holiday and travel  
Foundation tier  
accommodation 住的地方 
activity 活动 
air-conditioning 空调 
airport 飞机场 
bank 银行 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
123 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
Beijing 北京 
bicycle 自行车/单车 
boat/ship/ferry 船 
bridge 桥 
bus 公共汽車 
by (car/train/bus/boat etc.) 坐（车/火车……） 
calligraphy 书法 
car 汽车 
car park 停车场 
cathedral/church 教堂 
cinema 电影院 
city 城市 
Chinese brush 毛笔 
Chinese painting 国画 
countryside 农村 
court (sports – e.g. football, tennis... etc.) 球场（足球场，网球场……） 
destination 目的地 
exhibition 展览会 
experience 经验/经历 
factory 工厂 
floor (1st, 2nd…) (一，二，……)层/楼 
flower 花 
garden 花园 
gift, present 礼物 
grass 草 
Guangzhou 广州 
guest 客人 
hill/mountain 山 
holiday 假期 
Hong Kong 香港 
hospital 医院 
hotel 酒店 
kite 风筝 
lake 湖 
library 图书馆 
local area 当地 
London 伦敦 
luggage 行李 
map 地图 
museum 博物馆 
outdoor activities 户外活动 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
124 
Foundation tier (cont)  
panda 熊猫 
park 公园 
passport 护照 
place 地方 
plane 飞机 
police station 警察局 
post office 邮局 
postcard 明信片 
pound sterling 英镑/镑 
preference 更喜欢 
problem  问题 
railway station 火车站 
region 地区 
return journey (ticket) 回程/双程（票） 
river 河 
road, line/route, bus number 路 
scenery 风景 
sea 海 
seaside 海边 
Shanghai 上海 
shop 商店 
shopping centre 购物中心 
single journey 单程（票） 
sports ground 运动场 
square 广场 
stadium 体育馆 
stamp 邮票 
station/stop (public transport) 车站 
supermarket 超级市场 
swimming pool 游泳池 
Taiwan 台湾 
The Great Wall 长城 
things to do 可做的事 
Tiananmen Square 天安门广场 
ticket 票 
to book, to reserve 订（房，票） 
to drive 开车 
to get off, to alight 下车 
to get on, to board (train, bus etc.) 上车 
to rent 租 
tourism 旅游 
tourist 游客 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
125 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
to visit (a place, a museum, etc.) 参观 
to welcome 欢迎 
town centre 市中心 
train 火车 
transport 交通 
travel 旅行 
tree 树 
underground station 地铁站 
underground train, tube, metro 地铁 
waiter/waitress/attendant 服务员 
zoo 动物园 
Higher tier  
 
accommodation 住宿 
arrive 到达 
asking for help 找人帮忙/寻求帮助 
coach 旅游车 
dealing with problems 解決问题 
eating out 出去吃饭 
fare 车费 
scenic spots, places of interest 名胜 
service desk 服务台 
set off, depart 出发 
souvenir 纪念品 
stay (number of nights) 住 
stay, stop over  停留 
Taipei 台北 
tall building/block/apartments 高楼 
ticket office 售票处 
timetable (transport) 时刻表 
  
Phrases associated with weather 
 
Foundation tier 
 
autumn 秋天 
cloud 云 
cloudy 多云 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
126 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
degree (temperature) 度 
fog 雾 
foggy 大雾 
moon 月亮 
rain 雨 
snow 雪 
spring 春天 
sun 太阳 
summer 夏天 
to rain 下雨 
to snow 下雪 
weather 天气 
wind 风 
windy 刮风/大风 
winter 冬天 
Higher tier  
lowest temperature 最低气温 
highest temperature 最高气温 
temperature 气温 
weather forecast 天气预报 
Asking for directions  
behind 后边 
direction 方向 
far 远 
go straight on 一直走 
in front of… 在……前边 
near (in distance)/close by 近 
next to… 在……旁边 
on foot 走路 
on the left 左边 
on the right 右边 
opposite 对面 
the next 下一个 
to cross (road, bridge, river etc.) 过 
to turn (left, right) 转 
towards 向 
east 东 
north 北 
south 南 
west 西 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
127 
 
Dealing with problems  
Foundation tier  
to change (to another one) 换 
damaged/broken 坏了 
disappear/lost something 不见了 
manager 经理 
mistake 不对/错 
noisy 吵 
police/policeman 警察 
service 服务 
Higher tier  
ill/sick/unwell 生病/不舒服  
noise 噪音 
pleased/satisfactory 满意 
safe 安全 
School  
Foundation tier  
book 书 
classroom 教室 
dictionary 字典 
examination 考试 
exchange 交换 
foreign languages 外语 
geography 地理 
go to school (as a student) 上学 
have a lesson 上课 
head teacher 校长 
history 历史 
homework 作业 
maths 数学 
music  音乐 
P.E.(physical education) 体育 
pen 笔 
pressure 压力 
primary school 小学 
results, marks, achievement 成绩 
rule 规定 
school 学校 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
128 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
school term 学期 
school uniform 校服  
schoolmate, classmate 同学 
science 科学 
secondary school 中学 
student 学生 
subject 科目 
summer holiday 暑假 
teacher  老师 
university 大学 
Higher tier  
Biology 生物 
break 休息 
celebrating success 庆祝成功 
Chemistry 化学 
essay 文章 
GCE equivalent 高考 
GCSE equivalent 中学会考 
graduate 毕业 
mark, grade 分数 
physics 物理 
school exchange 校际交换 
school events/school activities 学校活动 
student studying abroad 留学生 
timetable 时间表 
to pay attention 集中/用心 
plan, intention 打算 
plan, to plan 
计划 
 
  
Future aspirations, study and work 
 
Foundation tier 
 
 
actor/actress 演员 
advert 广告 
ambition/ideal 理想 
aspiration 心愿 
business/trade 做生意 
career 职业 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
129 
 
beyond the classroom 课外 
building relationships 建立关系 
cook/chef 厨师 
confidence 信心 
experienced 有经验 
further study 进一步学习 
organisation 组织/机构 
organiser 组织者 
pocket money 零花钱/零用钱 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
company/office 公司 
doctor 医生 
driver 司机 
engineer 工程师 
employment 雇佣 
famous 有名 
interview 访问/采访 
(job) interview 面试 
introduction, to introduce 介绍 
job, work 工作 
journalist 记者 
magazine 杂志 
news 新闻 
newspaper 报纸 
nurse 护士 
part time 兼职  
profession 职业 
salary 工资 
sales assistant 售货员 
singer 歌星 
study 学习 
to apply, application 申请 
to earn money 赚钱 
to recruit, to employ 招请/聘请 
training 训练/培训 
travel agency 旅行社 
volunteer 志愿者/义工 
volunteering  志愿服务/义工服务 
worker 工人 
Higher tier 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
130 
 
Higher tier (cont)  
to reduce, to cut back 减少 
success, successful 成功 
work experience 工作经验 
  
International and global dimension – bringing the world 
together, environmental issues 
Foundation tier 
animals 动物 
audience 观众 
being ‘green’ 绿色环保的 
campaign 运动 
carry on  继续 
charity 慈善 
donate 捐 
good causes 公益 
electricity 电 
environment  环境 
environmental issues 环境问题 
(music) festival （音乐）节 
gas 煤气 
global, world wide 全球 
important 重要 
international 国际 
international activity 国际活动 
music event  音乐活动 
natural resources 自然资源 
Olympic Games 奥运会 
protection, to protect 保护 
recycling 回收 
rubbish 垃圾 
to save (water) 节约（水） 
sports event 运动会 
wasteful, to waste 浪费 
world 世界 
World Cup (football) 世界杯（足球） 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
131 
 
Higher tier 
climate 气候 
global warming 全球变暖 
pollution, to pollute, to contaminate 污染 
poverty 贫穷 
security 安全 
solar power 太阳能 
to save (energy)   节约（能源） 
to sort/separate (eg rubbish) 分类（垃圾） 
volcano 火山 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
132 
Appendix 4: The context for the 
development of this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] and our 
ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
● reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with those 
taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
● consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including subject 
associations, academics and advisors, teachers and students to ensure this qualification is 
suitable for a UK context 
● reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in their 
documents GCSE (9 to 1) Subject Level Guidance and GCSE Subject Level Conditions and 
Requirements for Modern Foreign Languages, published in April 2016. 
 
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification Principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
● demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning and 
measuring higher-order skills 
● rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and valid 
assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in end users of the knowledge, skills 
and competencies of certified students 
● inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students develop at 
different rates and have different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
● empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills, see Appendix 5.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
133 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
May 2014 
“The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important change to the 
education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications will assist them in 
helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an ‘Expert 
Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or because of 
our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the world as diverse as 
Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification development 
process that has included: 
● extensive international comparability of subject content against the highest-performing 
jurisdictions in the world 
● benchmarking assessments against UK and overseas providers to ensure that they are at 
the right level of demand 
● establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-specific 
expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
● subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future oriented. The 
design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, meaning learner outcomes 
have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a learner’s 
success in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident that we have 
supported the development of qualifications that are outstanding for their coherence, 
thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as representing world-class best 
practice.”    
  
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Lee Sing Kong  
Director, National Institute of Education, 
Singapore 
  
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
  
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
 
All titles correct as at May 2014 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
134 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently flagged the 
need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable them to respond with 
confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines skills, or 
competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that can be learned and 
that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform an activity or task and can be 
built upon and extended through learning.’
[1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected and 
evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this process, we 
identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the most evidence-based and 
robust skills framework. We adapted the framework slightly to include the Program for 
International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT Literacy and Collaborative Problem Solving 
(CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves:[2] 
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve general 
cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and communicate. [3]  
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, oral communication, written communication, assertive 
communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, service 
orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared understanding, 
taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team organisation. 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work stress, 
adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, and physical 
adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual teams, 
work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and able to acquire 
new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher education, 
as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the teaching and learning of 
this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning materials, developed with 
stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
 
[1]  OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012) 
[2]  Koenig J A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop (National 
Academies Press, 2011) 
[3]  PISA – The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy (2011) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Chinese (spoken Mandarin/spoken Cantonese) – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
135 
Appendix 6: Codes 
 
Type of code Use of code Code 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for performance 
tables is assigned a discount code 
indicating the subject area to which it 
belongs. 
Discount codes are published by the DfE. 
Please see the GOV.UK 
website* 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an 
Ofqual Regulated Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) code. 
The RQF code is known as a Qualification 
Number (QN). This is the code that 
features in the DfE Section 96 and on the 
LARA as being eligible for 16–18 and 19+ 
funding, and is to be used for all 
qualification funding purposes. The QN will 
appear on students’ final certification 
documentation. 
The QN for this 
qualification is: 
603/1048/0 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to 
enter students for a qualification. Centres 
will need to use the entry codes only when 
claiming students’ qualifications. 
GCSE – 1CN0 
 
Paper codes These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be 
entered for individual papers, except for 
Paper 2, for which entries must be made 
for either Mandarin or Cantonese. 
Paper 1: 1CN0/01 
Paper 2: 1CN0/02M 
             1CN0/02C 
Paper 3: 1CN0/03 
Paper 4: 1CN0/04 
 
*www.gov.uk/government/publications/2018-performance-tables-discount-codes 
 
 
290922 9781446956410_GCSE2017_L12_CHINESE_ISSUE5.DOC.1–142/0 

 
 
About Pearson 
We are the world’s leading learning company operating in countries all around the world. We 
provide content, assessment and digital services to schools, colleges and universities, as well 
as professional and vocational education to learners to help increase their skills and lifelong 
employability prospects. We believe that wherever learning flourishes so do people.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This specification is Issue 5. We will inform centres of any changes to this issue. The latest 
issue can be found on the Pearson website: qualifications.pearson.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References to third party materials made in this specification are made in good faith. Pearson 
does not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may 
be subject to change, or any opinions expressed therein. (Materials may include textbooks, 
journals, magazines and other publications and websites.) 
 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
 
ISBN 978 1 446 95641 0 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2022 
 
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office:  80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121