 
 
Pearson Edexcel  
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in 
French (2024) 
Specification 
First teaching September 2024 
First certification from 2026 
Issue 2 

 
   
 
About Pearson 
We are the world’s leading learning company operating in countries all around the world. 
We provide content, assessment and digital services to learners, educational institutions, 
employers, governments and other partners globally. We are committed to helping equip 
learners with the skills they need to enhance their employability prospects and to 
succeed in the changing world of work. We believe that wherever learning flourishes so 
do people. 
 
References to third party materials made in this specification are made in good faith. Pearson 
does not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may be 
subject to change, or any opinions expressed therein. (Materials may include textbooks, 
journals, magazines and other publications and websites.) 
 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
Original image by AJtrace / www.shutterstock.com  
 
Publication code: GQ000023  
All the material in this publication is copyright  
© Pearson Education Limited 2025 
 
 
Summary of Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in 
French (2024) Specification Issue 2 changes 
 
Issue 2 changes  
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this 
current issue  
 
Page 
number  
Appendix 1: Vocabulary 
In response to changes made to the Department for Education’s subject 
content, a paragraph has been added to explain that a vocabulary item is 
no longer required to be listed as multiple entries for different parts of 
speech where the English meaning is the same. For example, droit is no 
longer required to be listed twice, once as an adjective and once as a 
noun; it can be listed once and used as either part of speech. 
 
Minor amendments have been made to the vocabulary list to reflect the 
way vocabulary items are now counted. Duplicate entries of words that 
exist as multiple parts of speech have been removed and replaced with 
new words. 
 
 
A small number of words have been moved from Higher tier to Foundation 
tier, or Higher tier translations of words have been moved to Foundation 
tier, to comply with changes made to the grammar requirements in the 
subject content and to maintain the correct number of vocabulary items at 
each tier. 
 
Instant moved from adjectives to nouns section. 
 
48 
 
 
 
 
 
 
70, 85-86, 
105, 107, 
116, 119, 
133 
 
 
60-63, 110, 
120 
 
 
 
 
79, 98 
Appendix 2: Grammar 
Amendments made to the grammar requirements to reflect changes to the 
Department for Education’s subject content. 
• Amendments to the requirements for pronouns, including 
expansion of the requirements for reflexive pronouns at Foundation 
tier. 
• Clarification of the requirements for past participle agreement. 
• Amendment to the requirements for the use of à/de before a noun 
or verb. 
• Clarification of how we will use derivational morphology rules in our 
papers. 
 
 
 
156, 158 
 
 
160-161 
167 
 
168 
Appendix 3: Names of people used in assessments 
Correction of error in the spelling of the name Axelle. 
 
172 
 
If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, contact us via our 
website at: https://qualifications.pearson.com/en/subjects/languages.html. 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
Contents 
1 Introduction 1 
Why choose Pearson Edexcel GCSE French? 1 
Qualification at a glance 2 
Our qualification approach 7 
2 Subject content and assessment information 13 
Subject aims 13 
Paper 1: Speaking in French 14 
Paper 2: Listening and understanding in French 25 
Paper 3: Reading and understanding in French 28 
Paper 4: Writing in French 31 
Assessment Objectives 35 
3 Administration and general information 36 
Entries 36 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special consideration and 
malpractice 36 
Student recruitment and progression 40 
4 Appendices 43 
Appendix 1: Vocabulary 45 
Reading assessments 46 
Speaking and writing assessments 46 
Organisation of the vocabulary 47 
Basic vocabulary 49 
Cultural and geographical words 56 
Short phrases 57 
Articles and pronouns 60 
Conjunctions 64 
Prepositions 66 
Adverbs 69 
 
 
Adjectives 75 
Nouns 89 
Verbs 122 
Irregular inflected verb forms: Higher and Foundation 137 
Irregular inflected verb forms: Higher ONLY 145 
Appendix 2: Grammar 154 
Nouns, pronouns and determiners 154 
Verbs 157 
Verbs: Tenses 159 
Adjectives 165 
Adverbs 166 
Prepositions 167 
Derivational morphology 168 
Sound-symbol correspondences (SSCs) 170 
Appendix 3: Names of people used in assessments 172 
Appendix 4: Transferable skills 174 
The need for transferable skills 174 
Appendix 5: Codes 176 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
1 
1 Introduction 
Why choose Pearson Edexcel GCSE French?  
We have listened to feedback from all parts of the language community, including 
hundreds of teachers and students. We know that when you are teaching a language, 
you want your students’ eyes to be opened to other cultures and for them to learn how 
to communicate about subjects that interest them. Like you, we are passionate about 
growing a love of languages. Our GCSE French qualification is focused on the important 
ways that languages foster communication, broaden perspectives, introduce new 
cultures and develop students into global citizens. 
More than words - our qualification promotes culture, communication and 
connection. From the design of our speaking tasks, where communication is privileged, 
through to the use of images to provide cultural context, we want students to 
understand that words are a springboard to discovering much more. 
Language learning for today’s world - we have carefully selected our vocabulary and 
assessment content to reflect and represent diverse student experiences, so that all 
students feel included and will be able to speak and write about the things that interest 
them most.  
Compassionate assessments in a clear and familiar structure – our assessments 
are accessible and transparent, rooted in testing what students know and ensuring they 
can attempt the whole assessment confidently, with no surprises. We are committed to 
maintaining a sense of continuity with the separate assessment of the four skills, and a 
consistent assessment structure.   
Preparing for the future – we know how much you value additional assessment 
material, and we are committed to providing additional content, including secure mock 
material. We will provide digital solutions to ease the administrative burden, and 
opportunities to be involved in innovative pilots for onscreen assessment pathways.  
Reliable and extensive support from switch to delivery – our Switch Consultants 
will provide one to one support to make switching to our new qualification pain free. 
Once you are with us, our dedicated Subject Advisor is here to help with any of your 
queries and we will provide regular training opportunities for all our teachers.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
2 
Qualification at a glance 
The qualification consists of: 
• three externally-examined papers assessing separately listening, reading and writing 
• one speaking assessment set by Pearson and conducted by a teacher.  
All assessments are marked by Pearson. 
All papers will sample the vocabulary and grammatical structures included in Appendix 1: 
Vocabulary and Appendix 2: Grammar. The focus for the content of questions and tasks 
will be drawn from the listed thematic contexts (see Thematic contexts section on  
pages 7–9).  
Each paper is available at Foundation or Higher tier. Students must be entered for a 
single tier across all papers.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
3 
Paper 1: Speaking in French (*Paper code: 1FR1/1F and 1H)  
Internally conducted and externally assessed:  
Foundation tier: 7-9 minutes plus 15 minutes’ preparation time; 50 marks 
Higher tier: 10-12 minutes plus 15 minutes’ preparation time; 50 marks 
25% of the qualification 
Students are assessed on their ability to speak using clear and comprehensible 
language for a range of audiences and purposes, in different contexts, which are 
relevant to their current and future needs and interests. There are three consecutive 
tasks: 
Task 1: Read aloud (12 marks) 
Read aloud a short text and undertake a short, unprepared interaction relating to the 
text. In the read aloud task itself students will be assessed on their pronunciation and in 
the short interaction that follows students will be assessed on their communication. The 
task card will be allocated by Pearson. 
Task 2: Role play (10 marks) 
Undertake a transactional role play, in a setting taken from the defined list on  
pages 16–17. The task card will be allocated by Pearson. 
Task 3: Picture task (12 marks) with conversation (16 marks) 
Students select their thematic context for Task 3 in advance of the assessment. 
Students select one option from a choice of two of the six thematic contexts. The two 
options will be randomly generated by Pearson. The task card will be allocated by 
Pearson. 
Describe a picture stimulus, related to the selected thematic context. Students have a 
choice of two pictures on the stimulus card. Answer two compulsory questions related 
to the subject matter of the picture, then move on to a short unprepared conversation 
developed from the same thematic context.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
4 
Paper 2: Listening and understanding in French  
(*Paper code: 1FR1/2F and 2H)  
Written examination:  
Foundation tier: 45 minutes, including 5 minutes’ reading time, 50 marks  
Higher tier: 60 minutes, including 5 minutes’ reading time, 50 marks  
25% of the qualification 
Students are assessed on their understanding of standard spoken French by one or 
more speakers, across a range of formal and informal contexts, and in familiar and 
unfamiliar settings.  
Section A: Listening (40 marks) 
Students respond to multiple-choice, multiple-response and short-answer open 
response questions.  
All questions are set in English and students produce all responses in English. 
Section B: Dictation (10 marks) 
Students are assessed on their ability to transcribe spoken French into written French. 
They will be rewarded for their accuracy of spelling based on their knowledge and 
understanding of the sound symbol correspondences (SSCs) listed in the specification in 
Appendix 2: Grammar.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
5 
Paper 3: Reading and understanding in French  
(*Paper code: 1FR1/3F and 3H)  
Written examination:  
Foundation tier: 45 minutes, 50 marks 
Higher tier: 60 minutes, 50 marks 
25% of the qualification 
Students are assessed on their understanding of written French across a range of 
formal and informal contexts, and in familiar and unfamiliar settings.  
Section A: Reading and Understanding (40 marks) 
Students respond to multiple-choice, multiple-response and short-answer open 
response questions based on these texts. 
All questions are set in English and students produce all responses in English. 
Section B: Translation into English (10 marks) 
Students translate a passage from French into English, with instructions in English.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
6 
Paper 4: Writing in French (*Paper code: 1FR1/4F and 4H)  
Written examination:  
Foundation tier: 1 hour 15 minutes; 50 marks. 
Higher tier: 1 hour 20 minutes; 50 marks. 
25% of the qualification 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate effectively through writing in 
French for different purposes and audiences. Students are required to produce 
responses of varying lengths and types to express ideas and opinions in French. The 
instructions to students are in English.  
Foundation Tier 
• Question 1: picture-based task (8 marks) 
• Question 2: one of two open-response questions, set in formal context (14 marks)  
• Question 3: one of two open-response questions, set in informal context (18 marks) 
• Question 4: translation into French (10 marks) 
Higher Tier 
• Question 1: one of two open-response questions, set in informal context (18 marks) 
• Question 2: one of two open-response questions, set in formal context (22 marks) 
• Question 3: translation into French (10 marks) 
A recommended word count is specified for each open-response question.  
*See Appendix 5: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to this 
qualification. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
7 
Our qualification approach 
Language is more than words. 
Combining clear, concise and straightforward assessments with engaging, meaningful 
and relatable content, our new Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French is 
fit for the future, equipping students for life and careers in a global setting. 
Thematic contexts 
The vocabulary in this qualification enables students to communicate across a range of 
engaging and relatable thematic contexts, which are relevant to their current and future 
needs. 
We asked students and teachers about the subjects that were meaningful and 
interesting to them, and selected the following six broad thematic contexts to provide a 
focus for the teaching and learning of the vocabulary and grammar listed: 
• My personal world 
• Lifestyle and wellbeing 
• My neighbourhood 
• Media and technology 
• Studying and my future 
• Travel and tourism 
All the vocabulary listed in Appendix 1 could be used fluidly across these thematic 
contexts.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
8 
Within our thematic contexts, students could use the specified vocabulary and grammar 
(Appendices 1 and 2) to listen to, read, speak and write about the following subjects:  
 
family friends relationships equality 
physical wellbeing mental wellbeing food and drink sports 
places in town shopping transport  the natural world  
environmental 
issues 
social media and 
gaming  
future 
opportunities 
(e.g. work, travel)  
school 
music TV and film accommodation  tourist attractions 
 
This list of subjects is not exhaustive and is intended to support planning of teaching 
and learning. 
Teachers could explore these subjects throughout the course and across different 
thematic contexts. For example, ‘transport’ could be considered when exploring the 
thematic context of ‘Travel and Tourism’ or ‘My Neighbourhood’; ‘food and drink’ could 
be considered when exploring ‘My personal world’, ‘Lifestyle and wellbeing’ or ‘Travel and 
tourism’.  
Teachers could also choose to organise their teaching of the vocabulary content into 
alternative thematic contexts or no thematic contexts at all to meet their students’ 
interests flexibly. Providing the full vocabulary and grammar content in Appendices 1 and 
2 is taught at each tier, your students will be able to access all our assessments. 
Thematic contexts in assessments 
Our use of thematic contexts in assessments provides:  
• meaningful and engaging content and scenarios for the question papers 
• reassurance to students on the focus of the texts they will encounter in their 
assessments   
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
9 
• coverage of a range of vocabulary in assessments to ensure variety within each 
paper, across each paper in an exam series, and over time.  
Paper 1, Speaking in French 
• Each of the six read aloud cards, per tier, will reflect one of the thematic contexts. 
• Each of the six role play cards, per tier, will reflect one of the transactional settings. 
• Each of the eighteen picture cards will reflect one of the thematic contexts. 
• Students will choose the thematic context for their picture task in advance of the 
assessment, from a choice of two, randomly generated by Pearson. The short 
conversation following the picture description will begin within the same pre-
selected thematic context. 
• Students are free to use vocabulary from anywhere across the specified vocabulary 
list in their spoken responses. 
• Students may also use vocabulary from outside the vocabulary list in their spoken 
responses. 
Paper 2, Listening and Understanding in French 
• The contexts of the listening texts will be taken from any of the thematic contexts. 
• Content of the listening texts will sample vocabulary across the qualification content. 
Paper 3, Reading and Understanding in French 
• The contexts of the reading texts will be taken from any of the thematic contexts. 
• Content of the reading texts will sample vocabulary across the qualification content. 
Paper 4, Writing in French 
• Every exam series each of the writing tasks, per tier, will reflect one of the thematic 
contexts.  
• Students are free to use vocabulary from anywhere across the specified vocabulary 
list in their written responses. 
• Students may also use vocabulary from outside the vocabulary list in their written 
responses. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
10 
Cultural Content and Inclusivity 
Built on a foundation of inclusivity, accessibility and transparency we have created a 
student-centred qualification that caters to the needs of all students, regardless of their 
background, ability or reason for studying a language.   
Use of cultural settings  
Language study gives opportunities to broaden students’ cultural awareness and 
introduces them to new experiences. However, sometimes presumptions about shared 
cultural capital can prevent students from accessing the content. 
Paper 1, Speaking assessments will: 
• use relatable contexts that are likely to be within the range of students’ own 
experiences 
• use a finite range of settings for role plays (see Paper 1 Speaking in French, Content), 
so that all students can be equally prepared for these scenarios. 
Paper 2, Listening assessments will:  
• use settings that are both familiar and unfamiliar, for wider cultural engagement 
• provide any necessary information to support students’ understanding of culturally 
unfamiliar settings in English, in rubrics. 
Paper 3, Reading assessments will: 
• use settings that are both familiar and unfamiliar, for wider cultural engagement 
• include contextualising images to support students’ understanding of culturally 
unfamiliar settings 
• provide glossing for the names of towns, cities or countries that are not part of the 
vocabulary list. 
Paper 4, Writing assessments will: 
• set open-response questions in contexts that are realistic and familiar 
• set tasks that draw on students’ own thoughts and experiences to answer set bullet 
points   
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
11 
• avoid tasks that place a burden on student imagination to create responses 
• avoid tasks that rely on student knowledge of international travel or settings. 
Use of names in assessments 
Learning about the lives of people from across the target language speaking world is a 
way of bringing languages to life. However, sometimes the names of people can be 
unfamiliar and confusing for students in assessments.  
Our assessments will: 
• include only names from a defined list (see Appendix 3)  
• allow students to become familiar with target language names in advance  
• provide culturally relevant content. 
Our assessments will not:  
• include unfamiliar and potentially confusing names 
• require students to learn names 
• assess students on their knowledge of names. 
Use of gendered language 
Learning a new language allows students to talk about themselves and their lives, as well 
as learning about the lives and experiences of others. However, for trans and non-
binary students, the use of gendered language can present specific challenges.  
Our assessments will: 
• include the vocabulary for ‘trans’ and ‘non-binary’ on our vocabulary list (see 
Appendix 1: Vocabulary) 
• recognise students’ use of non-binary or gender-neutral pronouns when describing 
themselves or others in the speaking and writing papers 
• recognise students’ use of new adjectival endings according to their preferred way of 
identifying, or the use of gender-neutral pronouns with feminine or masculine 
agreement 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
12 
• recognise students’ use of gender-neutral nouns, whether indicated by adding 
punctuation, asterisks or using alternative spellings 
• equally credit students’ use of masculine, feminine or non-binary adjective 
agreements where used correctly and consistently 
• equally credit students’ use of non-binary pronouns where used correctly and 
consistently  
• be marked anonymously, without any examiner awareness of students’ gender.  
Support  
If you would like to find out more about an LGBTQ+ inclusive MFL curriculum, Stonewall 
provides further support in their ‘Creating an LGBTQ+ Inclusive Secondary Curriculum’ 
resource. You can also find more support, along with specific examples of gender 
neutral language use in French, German and Spanish in our ‘Gender, diversity and 
inclusion in languages qualifications’ video.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
13 
2 Subject content and assessment 
information 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French allows students to develop their 
ability to communicate in French in both speech and writing. They will study language 
within a variety of thematic contexts relevant to their age and interests and will develop a 
greater awareness of the culture of French-speaking communities and countries.  
Students will need to develop and use their knowledge and understanding of French 
vocabulary and grammar progressively through their course of study. A list of words that 
students are expected to use and understand is included in Appendix 1: Vocabulary list. 
This list of words is comprehensive and makes no assumptions about vocabulary 
previously taught. Grammar requirements are contained in the grammar list in 
Appendix 2: Grammar list. 
Subject aims 
The aims of this qualification are to:   
• provide a coherent, satisfying and worthwhile course of study. 
• develop confidence in, and a positive attitude towards, French and to recognise the 
importance of languages. 
• provide a strong linguistic and cultural foundation for students who go on to study 
languages at a higher level post-16. 
• develop students’ ability and ambition to communicate independently in speech and 
writing with speakers of the language for authentic purposes. 
• develop students’ ability to communicate independently about subjects that are 
meaningful and interesting to them 
• build students’ confidence and broaden their horizons, enabling them to step beyond 
familiar cultural boundaries, develop new ways of seeing the world, and better 
understand relationships between the foreign language and the English language.  
• enable students to become familiar with aspects of the contexts and cultures of the 
countries and communities where the language is spoken.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
14 
Paper 1: Speaking in French 
Content 
Speaking tasks will feature content that is relatable and accessible to all students. 
Students will be assessed on their ability to: 
• speak using clear and comprehensible language, for a range of audiences and 
purposes, and in formal and informal contexts, which are relevant to their current 
and future needs and interests. 
Students will need to: 
• use clear and comprehensible pronunciation when speaking French, demonstrating 
an understanding of sound symbol correspondences 
• recall and use language in different situations and be able to move between French 
and English    
• convey and elicit information by asking and answering questions 
• use language to describe a visual stimulus, including specific required details 
• give opinions 
• develop conversation and discussion 
• produce extended sequences of speech 
• use a range of vocabulary and grammatical structures (from the prescribed lists) 
accurately, including some more complex forms appropriate to the level of study, 
with reference to past, present and future events. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
15 
Assessment information 
Task 1 – Read aloud (12 marks) 
Students will: 
• read aloud a short passage (8 marks) and  
• answer two straightforward questions (4 marks) to elicit brief opinions based on 
the overall content of the passage, in a short interaction.  
The read aloud task assesses clear and comprehensible pronunciation 
integrated with an understanding of sound symbol correspondences.   
The short interaction that follows assesses communication only. 
Each assessment series, Pearson will provide six read aloud stimulus cards. Each card 
will take its focus from one of the six thematic contexts listed in the specification and will 
only use words selected from the full vocabulary list for each tier.  
When responding to the two questions after the read aloud, students can draw upon 
any relevant vocabulary from the full vocabulary list, or beyond the list. The questions 
will be in the present tense at both tiers and will elicit likes / dislikes / opinions. 
Assessment information: 
For each read aloud, there is a student card and a teacher card: 
Student card 
The student card includes: 
• instructions and a scenario in English,  
• followed by a short text in French, which the student will read aloud: 
o Foundation tier: 35–40 words in 5 sentences  
o Higher tier: 50–55 words in 4 sentences  
The two straightforward questions for the short interaction do not appear on the 
student card, as they must be unprepared.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
16 
Teacher card 
The teacher card includes: 
• instructions on how to conduct the task,  
• a copy of the text to be read by the student, and  
• two straightforward questions, which form the short unprepared interaction to 
follow the read aloud of the text.   
Task 2 – Role play (10 marks) 
In the role play, students will be required to give and receive information, 
answering and asking questions. The students’ interactions could include any of the 
following:  
• make transactions (buying tickets, ordering food etc)   
• make plans, appointments or reservations   
• explain or give reasons   
• describe 
• express likes / dislikes / preferences / opinions   
• ask for advice   
• make a complaint or report a problem   
• ask / talk about activities. 
Role plays will be transactional in nature and will always be in one of the following 
settings:  
• Café / restaurant  
• Shop / market / shopping centre  
• Hotel  
• Train station  
• Tourist information office  
• Cinema / theatre / concert hall  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
17 
• Campsite 
• Leisure centre  
• Doctor's surgery / hospital 
• In town 
The role play assesses communication only and has been designed so that 
students can respond to the prompts using vocabulary drawn from the vocabulary list. 
Each assessment series, Pearson will provide six role play stimulus cards, which will use 
six different settings from the above list.  
The role plays are all set in a formal context. Students are not required to use the formal 
register.  
Assessment information: 
• For each role play, there is a student card and teacher card: 
Student card 
The student card includes the role play setting taken from the list above, and 
instructions and prompts in English.  
Foundation tier:  
• The student card includes five bullet points, eliciting five utterances.  
• Students need to ask one question. 
• Students are required to speak only in the present tense or a familiar conditional 
tense where it is more natural to do so, e.g. ‘je voudrais.’ 
Higher tier: 
• The student cards include five bullet points, eliciting five utterances.  
• Students need to ask two questions.  
• Students are required to speak in the present tense or a familiar conditional tense 
where it is more natural to do so, e.g. ‘je voudrais.’ 
• Students respond to one question asked using a future timeframe. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
18 
Teacher card  
The teacher cards contain instructions on how to conduct the role play and the exact 
questions to ask.  
Each role play opens with an introduction from the teacher who then asks the first 
question. 
Task 3 – Picture task (28 marks) 
Students will be required to: 
• describe one picture from a choice of two (8 marks) 
• answer two unprepared questions related to the selected picture (4 marks) 
• participate in a conversation extending from the broader thematic context  
(16 marks). 
Picture description (12 marks): 
On the picture task card there will be two colour pictures and students will choose one 
of the colour pictures. They will be required to produce an extended description, 
focussing on the following compulsory details of the picture: 
• people 
• location 
• activity. 
The teacher is provided with prompts to encourage students to address the compulsory 
bullet points. Students are not limited to describing these details and may develop their 
description as far as they are able in the recommended time.  
The picture description has been designed so that students can respond to the stimulus 
using vocabulary drawn from the full vocabulary list.  
Once the student has concluded the description, the teacher will ask two compulsory 
questions relating to the subject matter of the picture. Both questions will be 
about the student’s own experiences / likes / dislikes / opinions.  At Higher tier, the 
second question will be in a past tense. The questions do not appear on the student 
card as they must be unprepared.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
19 
Broader conversation (16 marks): 
The teacher should continue a broader conversation extending from the thematic 
context selected for this task. A compulsory starting subject for the conversation is 
given on the teacher card, along with example questions in the present, past and future 
tenses.  
During the conversation, the teacher should ask a range of questions appropriate to the 
thematic context and the interests and experiences of the student, which enables 
students to: 
• produce extended sequences of speech 
• develop the conversation    
• give and justify own thoughts and opinions 
• refer to past, present and future events 
• demonstrate the full range of their ability. 
Teacher-examiners should endeavour to sustain a free-flowing conversation, in which 
they respond to what the candidate is saying. In the broader conversation, students can 
draw upon any relevant vocabulary from the full vocabulary list, or beyond the list.  
Teacher-examiners should be mindful of the time recommendation for the conversation 
element of this task and encourage candidates to produce sufficient responses to fill the 
recommended time. 
Assessment information 
The description and conversation elements of the picture task assess 
communication and clarity (in response to the picture stimulus or teacher 
questions), and linguistic and grammatical accuracy.  
The two unprepared questions following the picture description assess 
communication only. 
Each assessment series, Pearson will provide eighteen different sets of picture task 
stimulus cards for each tier, with each card relating to one of the six thematic contexts. 
There will be two pictures on each stimulus card.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
20 
Two weeks in advance of the speaking assessment, students will select the thematic 
context for the picture task and conversation. They will select one thematic context from 
a choice of two, randomly generated by Pearson. This will inform the stimulus card they 
receive for the picture task, and the read aloud and role play task cards will be randomly 
allocated accordingly by Pearson. 
For each picture task set, there is a student card and teacher card: 
Student card  
The student card includes: 
• two colour pictures from which students must choose one to describe. 
• three compulsory bullet points in English to guide the description: the people, 
the location, the activity.  
• guidance on the task. 
Teacher card 
The teacher card includes: 
• instructions on how to conduct this task.  
• copies of the pictures with bullet point prompts as on the student card. 
• intervention prompts to encourage the student to develop their picture description.  
• two compulsory follow-on questions per picture, related to the subject matter of the 
picture 
o Foundation tier: the questions will both be in the present tense;  
o Higher tier: question 1 will be in present tense and question 2 will be in the past 
tense. 
• guidance for the broader conversation, including a mandated starting subject for the 
conversation, and three suggested questions in different tenses / timeframes. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
21 
General assessment information 
First assessment: May/June 2026.  
• Students complete the three tasks as detailed and in the order set out above.  
• Assessment rubrics and information for students will be in English. The tasks must 
be completed in French. 
• Prior to the assessment, Pearson will provide instructions on the process for 
allocating stimulus cards. The allocation of cards for the read aloud, role play and 
picture task will be generated by the student’s choice of thematic context for the 
picture task. The thematic context will be selected from a choice of two randomly 
generated by Pearson and offered to the student two weeks before the assessment.  
The allocation of cards is designed to ensure that the assessment experienced by 
each student samples a range of vocabulary from the specified vocabulary list in 
Appendix 1: Vocabulary.  
• Assessments are conducted by centres within a five-week assessment period in April 
and May in any single year. Dates for the assessment period will be confirmed in the 
UK Information Manual at the start of each academic year. The assessment period 
will not always be continuous or be the same period each year, for example it will 
need to accommodate the Easter break which changes each year. 
• The assessment materials provided by Pearson for all tasks may be accessed by the 
teacher no more than three working days before the assessment period. This is to 
enable the teacher to prepare for the assessment. The assessment materials in the 
pack must not be removed from the centre premises and should be securely stored 
in order to maintain confidentiality throughout the assessment period.  
• Assessments are conducted by teachers. Complete, unedited recordings of all 
assessments must be submitted to Pearson via the online Learner Work Transfer 
(LWT) portal for external marking. 
• Assessment timings are different for Foundation and Higher tiers to reflect the 
increased demand of the tasks. Students will be assessed on the quality of the 
responses they can produce within the maximum allocated time of 9 minutes for 
foundation and 12 minutes for higher. Teachers are expected to give students the 
opportunity to respond fully to all tasks. 
• All assessments are marked against assessment criteria, which can be found in the 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) 
document.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
22 
• Centres must have procedures in place to verify and confirm the identity of all 
students at the time of the assessment. Pearson will provide the format for this 
verification, which will be submitted digitally to Pearson. 
Foundation tier assessment time and marks 
The total assessment for the three tasks is 7 to 9 minutes plus 15 minutes’ 
preparation time. 
The assessment is worth 50 marks. 
The assessment consists of three tasks which must be conducted in the following order: 
• Task 1 – one read aloud with short interaction to follow, recommended to last 
between 1.5 to 2 minutes for 12 marks  
• Task 2 – one role play, recommended to last 1 to 1.5 minutes for 10 marks 
• Task 3 – one picture task, recommended to last 4.5 to 5.5 minutes in total   
o the picture description with the two compulsory questions is recommended to 
last 1.5 to 2 minutes for 12 marks, and  
o the broader conversation is recommended to last 3 to 3.5 minutes for 16 
marks.  
o The total number of marks for Task 3 is 28 marks. 
Higher tier assessment time and marks 
The total assessment for the three tasks is 10 to 12 minutes plus 15 minutes’ 
preparation time. 
The assessment is worth 50 marks. 
The assessment consists of three tasks which must be conducted in the following order: 
• Task 1 – one read aloud with short interaction to follow, recommended to last 
between 2 and 2.5 minutes for 12 marks  
• Task 2 – one role play, recommended to last 1 to 1.5 minutes for 10 marks 
• Task 3 – one picture task, recommended to last 7 to 8 minutes in total 
o the picture description with the two compulsory questions is recommended to 
last 2 to 2.5 minutes for 12 marks, 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
23 
o the broader conversation is recommended to last 5 to 5.5 minutes for 16 
marks.  
o The total number of marks for Task 3 is 28 marks. 
Preparation time 
Students are allocated 15 minutes’ preparation time, under supervised conditions, 
immediately prior to the assessment.  
The purpose of the 15 minutes preparation time is to consider the text for the read 
aloud and the allocated stimuli for the role play and picture task.  
The final 1 minute of the preparation time should take place in the 
examination room, where students will be given the opportunity to practise 
the read aloud task out loud. It is not compulsory for the student to read the full task 
out loud during this minute. Students may use this time to practise selected words / 
phrases / sentences or the entire text out loud or undertake any other appropriate 
preparation. The 1-minute preparation will not be assessed but must form part of the 
continuous recording of the assessment submitted to Pearson. The purpose of 
recording the preparation time is to ensure that no guidance or correction is provided 
to the student during this time.  
During the 15 minute preparation time, students are permitted to make notes on an A4 
sheet of paper. In addition, they can directly annotate the text for the read aloud in 
order to aid pronunciation during the task. 
During the assessment, students can refer to notes and annotations. The notes should 
be for reference only. Stimulus material for each task should be handed to the teacher 
at the end of the task (i.e. directly after the read aloud passage, but before the short 
interaction; directly after the roleplay; at the end of the picture description). At the end 
of the examination, students must also return their notes to the teacher.  
Any notes made during the preparation time must be kept securely by the centre until 
the end of October in the year the assessment is completed, after which time they 
should be securely destroyed.  
Students cannot have access to a dictionary, or any other resource, during the 
preparation time. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
24 
Sample assessment materials  
A sample paper and mark scheme for this can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
25 
Paper 2: Listening and understanding in French  
Content 
Students are assessed on their understanding of standard spoken French in formal and 
informal contexts, and familiar and unfamiliar settings.  
Students need to: 
• identify and respond to key points, details and opinions 
• recognise the relationship between past, present and future events 
• undertake a short dictation in the target language, applying the principles by which 
spelling represents sounds in standard or widely used forms of French. 
This paper draws on the specified vocabulary (Appendix 1) and grammar (Appendix 2) and 
the focus of the passages will be taken from the thematic contexts listed in the 
specification (see Thematic Contexts).  
Recordings have been created to reflect the following authentic listening scenarios: 
• newsflashes, newsclips, weather forecasts, public announcements, advertisements, 
monologues, conversations, podcasts, extracts of talks or presentations and short 
reports. 
Students are presented with short and medium-length recorded scenarios involving one 
or more speakers.  
Recordings will be spoken using standard French at no faster than a moderate pace. 
To avoid students confusing unfamiliar names of people with necessary vocabulary, we 
will only use names from the prescribed list in Appendix 3.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
26 
Assessment information 
• First assessment is in May/June 2026.  
• The assessment is out of 50 marks. 
Section A: Listening Comprehension (40 marks) 
All questions in this section are set in English, using the following question types: 
multiple choice, multiple response and short open response questions.  
Students write their responses in English.   
Section B: Dictation (10 marks) 
The instructions for this task are given in English. Students will listen to a passage of 
spoken French and write their responses in French. 
• Students are allocated five minutes to read through the paper before the first extract 
of the recording starts. This gives students an opportunity to familiarise themselves 
with the length and the layout of the paper and to read the questions before hearing 
the first extract.  
• Each extract is played three times, with appropriate pauses between individual 
sentences, after each extract, and before the next question or part question. This will 
allow students sufficient time to process information, write down their responses 
and read the next question or part question.  
• Students must answer all questions.  
• In Section A, there are four crossover questions between the Foundation Tier and 
the Higher Tier papers. 
• Recordings are released as audio files via our Secure Download Service (SDS) prior to 
the examination.  
• Dictionaries may not be used in the examination. 
Foundation tier  
• The duration of the assessment is 45 minutes, including 5 minutes of reading 
time. 
• The total word count of texts used in the paper ranges between 450 and 500 words.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
27 
• The question paper targets grades 1-5 and contains twelve questions in total. 
Higher tier  
• The duration of the assessment is 60 minutes, including 5 minutes of reading 
time. 
• The total word count of texts used in the paper ranges between 700 and 850 words. 
• The question papers targets grades 4 –9 and contains ten questions in total. 
Sample assessment materials  
A sample paper and mark scheme for this can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
28 
Paper 3: Reading and understanding in French 
Content 
Students are assessed on their understanding of written French across a range of 
genres and in both formal and informal contexts.  
Students need to:  
• identify and respond to key points, details and opinions  
• recognise the relationship between past, present and future events  
• infer meanings of two single words per tier (1 mark per word) that are not listed in 
Appendix 1: Vocabulary 
• demonstrate an ability to transfer meaning accurately into English by translating 
from written French into English. 
This paper draws on the specified vocabulary (Appendix 1) and grammar (Appendix 2) and 
the focus of the passages will be taken from the thematic contexts listed in the 
specification (see Thematic Contexts).  
Texts have been created to reflect the following authentic reading scenarios:  
• blogs, internet forums, advertisements, tourist brochures, newspaper or magazine 
articles, emails, extracts from a diary or school project.  
Texts for individual questions within the assessment vary in length, including both short 
and longer written passages.  
Scenarios in the texts are set either at home or, more frequently, in a French-speaking 
country, allowing students to develop appropriate cultural awareness and 
understanding. When specific cultural features are mentioned, we will include an image 
to ensure all students can have equal understanding of the cultural feature. 
To avoid students confusing unfamiliar names of people with necessary vocabulary, we 
will only use names from the prescribed list in Appendix 3. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
29 
Assessment information 
First assessment: May/June 2026.  
The assessment is out of 50 marks. 
Section A: Reading comprehension (40 marks) 
All questions in this section are set in English, using the following question types: 
multiple choice, multiple response and short open response questions.  
Students write their responses in English for any open response questions. 
Section B: Translation (10 marks) 
The instructions for this task are given in English. Students will translate from French 
into English. 
• Students must answer all questions from each of the two sections. 
• In Section A, there are three crossover questions between the Foundation Tier and 
the Higher Tier papers. 
• Dictionaries may not be used in the examination. 
Foundation tier  
• The assessment time is 45 minutes. 
• Section A, Reading Comprehension has nine questions set in English.  
• Section B, Translation contains five sentences to translate from French into English.  
• The question paper targets grades 1-5. 
Higher tier  
• The assessment time is 60 minutes. 
• Section A, Reading Comprehension has eight questions set in English 
• Section B, Translation of one passage from French into English. 
• The question paper targets grades 4-9. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
30 
Sample assessment materials  
A sample paper and mark scheme for this can be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 
1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
31 
Paper 4: Writing in French  
Content 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate effectively and with accuracy 
through writing in French for a variety of purposes, in both formal and informal 
contexts, and for a range of audiences.  
Students need to:  
• write short texts, using language accurately to describe in response to simple and 
familiar stimuli 
• produce clear and coherent texts of extended length to express ideas and opinions 
appropriately for different purposes and in different situations.  
• make accurate use of a variety of vocabulary and grammatical structures (from the 
prescribed lists), including some more complex forms, to describe, narrate and 
explain with reference to past, present and future events 
• move confidently between reading instructions in English and writing in French 
• translate sentences and short texts from English into French to convey key messages 
accurately and to apply grammatical knowledge of language in context. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
32 
Assessment information 
First assessment: May/June 2026.  
The assessment is out of 50 marks. 
Foundation tier assessment: 
The assessment time is 1 hour and 15 minutes.  
The paper consists of four questions: 
• three open-response questions 
• one translation from English into French.  
Students must answer all four questions. Questions 2 and 3 provide a choice of two 
options.  
• Question 1 (8 marks) Picture-based task: 
o Students are asked to write four short sentences to describe a photo. 
o Assesses students on their ability to describe.  
• Question 2 (14 marks) Open-response, formal context: 
o Two options from which students must select one.  
o Assesses students on their ability to give an opinion, present facts and use 
present and future timeframes. 
o Recommended word count: 40-50 words 
• Question 3 (18 marks) Open-response, informal context:  
o Two options from which students must select one.  
o Assesses students on their ability to express and justify opinions, narrate, and 
express future plans, using a combination of present, past and future 
timeframes.  
o Recommended word count: 80-90 words 
o This question is common to the Higher tier Question 1.  
• Question 4 (10 marks) Translation: 
o Students are required to translate five sentences from English to French. 
o The sentences are ordered by increasing level of difficulty. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
33 
Higher tier assessment: 
• The assessment time is 1 hour and 20 minutes.  
• The paper consists of three questions: 
• two open-response questions 
• one translation from English into French. 
Students must answer all three questions. Questions 1 and 2 provide a choice of two 
options. 
• Question 1 (18 marks) Open-response, informal context: 
o Two options from which students must select one.  
o Assesses students on their ability to express and justify opinions, narrate and 
express future plans, using a combination of present, past and future 
timeframes. 
o Recommended word count: 80-90 words. 
o This question is common to the Foundation tier Question 3. 
• Question 2 (22 marks) Open-response, formal context: 
o Two options from which students must select one.  
o Assesses students on their ability to express pros and cons, explain and narrate, 
using a combination of present, past and future timeframes. 
o Recommended word count: 130-150 words. 
• Question 3 (10 marks) Translation: 
o Students are required to translate a short paragraph from English into 
French.  
o The individual sentences are ordered by increasing level of difficulty. 
Each question is linked to one of the thematic contexts listed in the specification. 
Students can draw upon any relevant vocabulary from the full vocabulary list to 
complete their task.   
• The assessment tasks feature general content that is familiar and accessible to a 
wide range of students, allowing students flexibility in their response.  
• Students are required to produce responses of varying lengths and purposes in 
French, in response to prompts in both informal and formal contexts. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
34 
• Recommended word counts are specified for each question, with the exception of 
Question 1 on the Foundation paper, which requires four short sentences, and the 
translation tasks. Students are rewarded for any relevant content and will not be 
penalised for writing more or fewer words than recommended. The length of each 
response required increases across the paper. 
• Students are expected to address each bullet point in the open questions and 
develop their responses. The complexity of language elicited increases across the 
paper, with varied use of timeframes and language expected. 
• Students will be assessed on both Communication and content, and Linguistic 
knowledge and accuracy in the open-response questions and translation, but only 
Communication and content in Question 1 of the Foundation tier paper. 
• All assessments are marked against assessment criteria, set out in the Pearson 
Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) 
document.  
• The instructions to students are all in English.  
• The use of dictionaries is not permitted. 
Sample assessment materials  
A sample paper and mark scheme for this can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
35 
Assessment Objectives 
 
Students must: % in GCSE 
AO1 Understand and respond to spoken language in speaking and 
in writing 
35% 
AO2 Understand and respond to written language in speaking and 
in writing 
45% 
AO3 Demonstrate knowledge and accurate application of the 
grammar and vocabulary prescribed in the specification 
20% 
Total 100% 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
Component AO1 % AO2 % AO3 % Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives 
1: Speaking 15% 2% 8% 25% 
2: Listening and understanding 20% 0% 5% 25% 
3: Reading and understanding 0% 25% 0% 25% 
4: Writing 0% 18% 7% 25% 
Total for GCSE 35% 45% 20% 100% 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
36 
3 Administration and general 
information 
Entries 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for this qualification can be found 
in our UK Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations officers and is 
available on our website: qualifications.pearson.com 
Discount code and performance tables 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more than one GCSE, or other 
Level 2 qualifications with the same discount code, will have only the grade for their 'first 
entry' counted for the purpose of the school and college performance tables (please see 
Appendix 5: Codes). For further information about what constitutes 'first entry' and full 
details of how this policy is applied, please refer to the DfE website: 
www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-education 
Students should be advised that if they take two GCSEs with the same discount code, 
the schools and colleges to which they wish to progress are likely to take the view that 
this achievement is equivalent to only one GCSE. The same view may be taken if 
students take two GCSEs or other Level 2 qualifications that have different discount 
codes but which have significant overlap of content. Before embarking on their 
programmes, students or their advisers who have any doubts about their subject 
combinations should check with the institution to which they wish to progress.  
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special 
consideration and malpractice 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality policy requires all students to 
have equal opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our 
qualifications to be awarded in a way that is fair to every student. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
37 
We are committed to making sure that: 
• students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the Equality Act 2010) are not, 
when they are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in comparison to 
students who do not share that characteristic 
• all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification and 
that this achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their peers. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be available in English. All student work must be in 
English except where students are specifically required to speak or write in French as 
part of the speaking and writing assessments.  
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with 
special educational needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to:  
• access the assessment 
• show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the assessment.  
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an 
individual student with a disability, without affecting the integrity of the assessment. 
Access arrangements are the principal way in which awarding bodies comply with the 
duty under the Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students 
will then know what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for 
assessment.  
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable 
adjustments where a person with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in 
undertaking an assessment. The awarding organisation is required to take reasonable 
steps to overcome that disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be unique to that individual and 
therefore might not be in the list of available access arrangements. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
38 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of 
factors, including: 
• the needs of the student with the disability 
• the effectiveness of the adjustment 
• the cost of the adjustment; and 
• the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other 
students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding 
organisation, or affects timeframes or the security or integrity of the assessment. This is 
because the adjustment is not ‘reasonable’. 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student's mark or grade to 
reflect temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the examination/ 
assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a material effect on a 
student’s ability to take an assessment or demonstrate their level of attainment in an 
assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to apply for access 
arrangements and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and 
special consideration, please refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk. 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
39 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that compromises or seeks to 
compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in non-examined assessments discovered before the candidate 
has signed the declaration of authentication form does not need to be reported to 
Pearson. 
Candidate malpractice found in non-examined assessments after the declaration of 
authenticity has been signed, and in examinations must be reported to Pearson on a 
JCQ Form M1 (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form should be 
emailed to candidatemalpractice@pearson.com. Please provide as much information 
and supporting documentation as possible. Note that the final decision regarding 
appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report candidate malpractice constitutes staff or centre malpractice.  
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and 
maladministration of our qualifications. As with candidate malpractice, staff and centre 
malpractice is any act that compromises or seeks to compromise the process of 
assessment or undermines the integrity of the qualifications or the validity of 
results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported 
immediately, before any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson on a  
JCQ Form M2(a) (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form, 
supporting documentation and as much information as possible should be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate 
sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the 
document General and Vocational Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations 
and Assessments Policies and Procedures, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-
office/malpractice. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
40 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to comply with the 
requirements of Ofqual's General Conditions of Recognition. 
This GCSE qualification will be graded and certificated on a nine-grade scale from  
9 to 1 using the total subject mark where 9 is the highest grade. Individual papers are 
not graded. For Foundation tier, grades 1–5 are available and for Higher tier, grades 4–9 
are available, however if the mark achieved is a smaller number of marks below the 4/3 
grade boundary, then a grade 3 may be awarded.  
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum judged by Pearson to be of 
sufficient standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U result. 
The first certification opportunity for this qualification will be 2026. 
Student recruitment and progression 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that: 
• they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard 
• they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression 
• equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this qualification. Because no 
vocabulary is specified for KS2 or KS3, the Vocabulary List proposed for GCSE must be 
comprehensive and should make no assumptions about vocabulary previously taught. 
Progression 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French offers a suitable progression 
route as just as at Key Stages 2 and 3, these qualifications focus on the development of 
all four language skills, listening, speaking, reading and writing. Grammar and the 
mastering of linguistic features are key elements as is continually improving the 
accuracy of pronunciation. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
41 
The grammar and vocabulary lists illustrate the level required for this qualification. The 
broader range of thematic contexts promotes a clear progression in grammar and 
vocabulary from Key Stage 3 and will increase linguistic and cognitive demand.  
Students will understand and respond to spoken and written language from a variety of 
authentic sources and will be able to write at varying length, for different purposes and 
audiences, using the variety of grammatical structures that they have learnt. 
This qualification offers a suitable progression route to GCE AS and GCE A Level in 
French language. The integration of productive and receptive skills across the 
assessment objectives, replicates the approach that is used in the A level qualifications. 
At A level there is an additional assessment objective that focusses on cultural 
knowledge. In our GCSE we actively reference cultural aspects as relevant to the age 
group, allowing progression on to this aspect of the A level qualification. 
In addition, the study of one language at GCSE can facilitate and help promote the 
learning of other languages. The qualification may also add to an individual’s 
employability profile. Students will be able to apply their knowledge, skills and 
understanding to authentic, real-life contexts. They will develop transferable skills that 
support higher education study and the transition to employment, together with an 
understanding and appreciation of French speaking countries and their cultures.  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
42 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
43 
4 Appendices 
Appendix 1: Vocabulary 45 
Appendix 2: Grammar 154 
Appendix 3: Names of people used in assessments 172 
Appendix 4: Transferable skills 174 
Appendix 5: Codes 176 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
44 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
45 
Appendix 1: Vocabulary  
The following vocabulary list is the full vocabulary content that will be assessed by this 
qualification, in both receptive and productive tasks.  
We have created a vocabulary list in collaboration with teachers and students which 
allows them to engage with subjects that they have told us are meaningful and 
interesting, as well as providing a strong linguistic and cultural foundation. The 
vocabulary list includes many of the basic and familiar words which you will already 
cover across key stage 3, as well as adding new and up-to-date content to reflect the 
diversity of our students and their diverse range of interests such as social equality, 
gaming, social media and the environment.  
The vocabulary list comprises 1200 words to be used at both Foundation and Higher 
tier and an additional 500 words to be used at Higher tier only.  
Our considerations when selecting the 500 words for Higher tier included: 
• linguistic complexity (e.g. cybercriminalité, renseignement) 
• conceptual complexity (e.g. économie, s'identifier) 
• the grammatical requirements of the course at each tier (e.g. depuis is required for 
Higher tier-only grammatical constructions) 
• enrichment of Higher tier students' vocabulary, by providing synonyms or near-
synonyms of words in the Foundation tier list. Where we have done this, we have 
placed at Foundation tier the word most likely to be familiar to students from 
previous study (e.g. Foundation ami vs Higher copain/copine) or that is more similar 
to a common English term (e.g. Foundation délicieux vs Higher savoureux). 
There are also 20 additional cultural or geographical words and 30 short phrases.  
At least 85% of the vocabulary, at each tier, is expected to be taken from the top 2000 
most frequent words according to the corpus published by Routledge0F
1. 
 
 
 
1 Lonsdale, D. & Le Bras. Y. (2009). A frequency dictionary of French: Core vocabulary for learners. 
London: Routledge 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
46 
Reading assessments 
In our reading assessments, any vocabulary that is not listed below will be glossed and 
this will be no more than 2% of words in any text.  
Additionally, up to 2% of words in any text can be cognates1F
1 which are not included in 
the vocabulary list below.   
Speaking and writing assessments 
In our speaking and writing assessments, we have designed the tasks so that they elicit 
vocabulary from the list below and full marks can be gained if students respond with 
vocabulary taken exclusively from the vocabulary listed. However, teachers and students 
should not feel limited to this vocabulary list and if they wish to supplement the list with 
additional vocabulary during teaching and learning, the use of any additional vocabulary 
in productive tasks will be equally rewarded. 
  
 
 
 
1 Cognates are words in which the substantial majority of letters are the same in English and the assessed 
language; they have the same meaning in both languages and any difference in spelling should not 
impede understanding for students entered for GCSE MFL (French, German, Spanish) qualifications. 
Examples of cognates in French include ‘rugby’,’ électricité’ and ‘fantastique’.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
47 
Organisation of the vocabulary 
We have presented the vocabulary list in the way that will be the most useful and 
supportive to teachers to access the content and organise it for teaching needs.  
We also provide the list in an interactive, editable format on our website. 
We begin with a section on the basic vocabulary that you may expect to have already 
covered with students during KS3, if they have studied the language prior to this GCSE 
qualification. This section includes:  
• greetings 
• numbers 
• days of the week 
• months of the year 
• seasons 
• times of the day  
• colours. 
We then list the words we have selected for our allowance of: 
• cultural and geographical words and  
• short phrases.  
The remainder of our vocabulary is then organised by grammatical function:  
• articles and pronouns 
• conjunctions 
• prepositions 
• adverbs 
• adjectives 
• nouns 
• verbs.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
48 
This vocabulary is organised in alphabetical order by English. Note that the 
categorisation of words by part of speech is purely for organisational purposes; if a word 
exists in multiple parts of speech with the same meaning(s), we may use it in any of 
those parts of speech in our exam papers. For example, droit is listed as an adjective 
with the meanings ‘right’ and ‘straight’; we may therefore also use droit as a noun with 
the meaning ‘right’. 
Some words have multiple English meanings listed; in these cases, students are 
required to know all of these meanings. 
There are a small number of words for which more than one spelling is in common use, 
such as événement/évènement or words where a hyphen or circumflex accent has been 
dropped (week-end/weekend; chaîne/chaine) as part of spelling reforms. We have marked 
these words with a ^ in the vocabulary list. Although we have only used one spelling in 
the vocabulary list, we will accept both spelling options for these words in assessments. 
University of York MultiLingProfiler 
During the development of our Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French Sample 
Assessment Materials (SAMs), we have been grateful to University of York for providing us 
with access to their MultiLingProfiler tool2F
1 to assist us with ensuring all our texts comply 
with the requirements set out in this Appendix 1: Vocabulary and Appendix 2: Grammar. 
  
 
 
 
1 Finlayson, N., Marsden, E., & Anthony, L. (2022). MultilingProfiler (Version 3) [Computer software]. University of York. 
https://www.multilingprofiler.net/ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
49 
Basic vocabulary 
Foundation and Higher 
Basic vocabulary: Foundation and Higher 
English  French 
bye, goodbye 
good evening 
hello 
hi, bye 
madam, Mrs 
no, not 
ok(?) 
please 
sir, mister, Mr 
sorry 
thank you, thanks 
yeah 
yes  
----------------------------- 
zero 
one 
two 
three 
four 
au revoir 
bonsoir 
bonjour 
salut 
madame 
non 
d'accord(?) 
s'il te plaît^, s'il vous plaît^ 
monsieur 
désolé 
merci 
ouais 
oui  
----------------------------- 
zéro 
un 
deux 
trois 
quatre 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
50 
Basic vocabulary: Foundation and Higher 
English  French 
five 
six 
seven 
eight 
nine, new 
ten 
eleven 
twelve 
thirteen 
fourteen 
fifteen 
sixteen 
seventeen 
eighteen 
nineteen 
twenty 
thirty 
forty 
fifty 
sixty 
seventy 
eighty 
cinq 
six 
sept 
huit 
neuf 
dix 
onze 
douze 
treize 
quatorze 
quinze 
seize 
dix-sept 
dix-huit 
dix-neuf 
vingt 
trente 
quarante 
cinquante 
soixante  
soixante-dix 
quatre-vingts 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
51 
Basic vocabulary: Foundation and Higher 
English  French 
ninety 
a hundred 
a thousand 
a million 
first 
second 
second, year 11 (in France) 
third, year 10 (in France) 
fourth, year 9 (in France) 
last 
----------------------------- 
Monday(s) 
Tuesday(s) 
Wednesday(s) 
Thursday(s) 
Friday(s) 
Saturday(s) 
Sunday(s) 
January 
February 
March 
April 
quatre-vingt-dix 
cent 
mille 
million (m) 
premier 
deuxième 
seconde 
troisième 
quatrième 
dernier 
----------------------------- 
lundi (m) 
mardi (m) 
mercredi (m) 
jeudi (m) 
vendredi (m) 
samedi (m) 
dimanche (m) 
janvier (m) 
février (m) 
mars (m) 
avril (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
52 
Basic vocabulary: Foundation and Higher 
English  French 
May 
June 
July 
August 
September 
October 
November 
December 
season 
autumn 
spring 
summer 
winter 
week 
weekend 
month 
year 
year 
----------------------------- 
afternoon 
day 
day 
mai (m) 
juin (m)  
juillet (m) 
août (m) 
septembre (m) 
octobre (m) 
novembre (m) 
décembre (m) 
saison (f) 
automne (m) 
printemps (m) 
été (m) 
hiver (m) 
semaine (f) 
week-end (m)^ 
mois (m) 
année (f) 
an (m) 
----------------------------- 
après-midi (m) 
jour (m) 
journée (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
53 
Basic vocabulary: Foundation and Higher 
English  French 
end 
evening 
half past 
hour, o'clock, time 
midday, lunchtime  
midnight  
minute 
morning 
night 
start, beginning 
time 
----------------------------- 
black 
blue 
brown 
colour 
green 
grey 
orange 
pink 
red 
white 
fin (f) 
soir (m) 
et demie 
heure (f) 
midi (m) 
minuit (m) 
minute (f) 
matin (m) 
nuit (f) 
début (m) 
fois (f) 
----------------------------- 
noir 
bleu 
marron (m, f, mpl, fpl) 
couleur (f) 
vert 
gris 
orange 
rose 
rouge 
blanc (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
54 
Basic vocabulary: Foundation and Higher 
English  French 
white 
yellow 
blanche (f) 
jaune 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
55 
Higher ONLY 
Basic vocabulary: Higher ONLY 
English French 
see you soon 
yes (in response to a negative question) 
----------------------------- 
about a hundred 
about ten 
----------------------------- 
century 
evening, dinner party 
moment 
the next day, following day 
the night before, eve 
à bientôt 
si 
----------------------------- 
centaine (f) 
dizaine (f) 
----------------------------- 
siècle (m) 
soirée (f) 
moment (m) 
lendemain (m) 
veille (f) 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
56 
Cultural and geographical words 
Foundation and Higher 
Cultural and geographical: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
Algeria 
Canada 
England 
France 
Madagascar 
Martinique 
United Kingdom 
Africa 
America 
Asia 
Europe 
Bastille Day 
French-speaking world 
New Year's Day 
New Year's Eve 
overseas France 
Paris 
The Eiffel Tower 
The Tour de France 
World Music Day 
Algérie (f) 
Canada (m) 
Angleterre (f) 
France (f) 
Madagascar (m) 
Martinique (f) 
Royaume-Uni (m) 
Afrique (f) 
Amérique (f) 
Asie (f) 
Europe (f) 
14 juillet (m) 
francophonie (f) 
nouvel An (m) 
Saint-Sylvestre (f) 
France d’Outre-mer (f) 
Paris (m) 
tour Eiffel (f) 
Tour de France (m) 
Fête de la Musique (f) 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
57 
Short phrases 
Foundation and Higher 
Short phrases: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
as…as 
at the moment 
enjoy your meal! 
from time to time 
how are you? 
I agree with 
I am good/ well, it fits 
I don’t mind, I’m not bothered 
in the background 
in the foreground 
it is/it's (+ time) 
it is/it’s necessary + verb, must + verb 
it is/it's (nice) 
it rains | it's raining 
it snows | it's snowing 
it's (foggy) 
next to 
of course 
questioning device 
aussi…que 
en ce moment 
bon appétit ! 
de temps en temps 
(comment) ça va? 
je suis d'accord avec 
ça va bien 
ça m’est égal 
à l'arrière plan 
au premier plan 
il est (+ time) 
il faut + infinitive 
il fait (beau) 
il pleut 
il neige 
il y a du (brouillard) 
à côté de 
bien sûr 
est-ce que/est-ce qu'? 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
58 
Short phrases: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
there is, there are, ago | there was, there 
were, there used to be | there is going to 
be, there will be 
what’s wrong? 
you are welcome 
il y a | il y avait | il y aura 
 
 
qu’est-ce qui ne va pas? 
de rien 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
59 
Higher ONLY 
Short phrases: Higher only  
English French 
(to) be in the middle of + verb 
(to) have just + past participle 
…is missing 
it is/it's (difficult) + verb 
it is/it's better + verb 
it is/it's worth + verb 
on one hand 
on the other hand 
être en train de + infinitive 
venir de + infinitive 
il manque… 
il est (difficile) de + infinitive 
il vaut mieux + infinitive 
il vaut la peine de + infinitive 
d'un côté 
d’un autre côté 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
60 
Articles and pronouns 
Foundation and Higher 
Articles and pronouns: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
a, an 
a, an 
everyone, you, one, we (subj) 
everyone, all of them 
everyone, everybody 
everything, all 
he, it (subj) 
her, it (obj) 
him, it (obj) 
himself, herself, itself, oneself, ourselves, 
themselves (reflex) | each other (recip) 
how much(?), how many(?), how long 
(with time)(?) 
how(?) 
I (subj) 
indefinite article following a verb in 
negative or expression of quantity, 
partitive article following a verb in 
negative or expression of quantity 
me (obj) | to/for me (indirect obj) | 
myself (reflex) 
une (f) 
un (m) 
on 
tous 
tout le monde 
tout 
il (m) 
la, l' (f) 
le, l' (m) 
se, s' 
 
combien (?) 
 
comment (?) 
je 
de, d' 
 
 
 
me, m' 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
61 
Articles and pronouns: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
not anyone, no-one 
not anything, nothing 
plural indefinite article, some (of the) 
she, it (f) (subj) | (to) her, it (f) (emph) 
some (of the) (f) 
some (of the) (m) 
someone, somebody 
that, it 
the 
the 
the 
they (subj) | (to) them (f) (emph) 
they (subj) 
to/for him, to/for her, to/for it (indirect obj) 
| (to) him, (to) her, (to) it (m, f) (emph) 
(to) me (emph) 
(to) you (emph) 
we (subj) | ourselves (reflex) | each other 
(recip) | us (obj) | to/for us (indirect obj) 
| (to) us (emph) 
what(?), that 
what(?) 
when(?) 
(ne...) personne 
(ne...) rien 
des (pl) 
elle | (à) elle 
de la, de l' (f) 
du, de l' (m) 
quelqu’un 
ça, cela 
la, l' (f) 
le, l' (m) 
les (pl) 
elles (f) | (à) elles 
ils (m, mixed gender) 
lui (m, f) | (à) lui 
(à) moi 
(à) toi 
nous | (à) nous 
 
que (?), qu' (?) 
quoi (?) 
quand (?) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
62 
Articles and pronouns: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
where(?) 
who(?), that 
why(?) 
you (pl, sing formal) (subj) | you (sing 
formal) (obj) | to/for you (sing formal) 
(indirect obj) | to/for you (pl) (indirect obj) 
| yourselves (reflex) | yourself (formal) 
(reflex) | each other (recip) | (to) you (pl, 
sing formal) (emph) 
you (sing informal) (obj) | to/for you (sing 
informal) (indirect obj), yourself (sing 
informal) (reflex) 
you (subj) 
où (?) 
qui (?) 
pourquoi (?) 
vous | (à) vous 
 
 
 
te, t' 
 
 
tu 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
63 
Higher ONLY 
Articles and pronouns: Higher ONLY 
English French 
hers, his 
herself  
himself 
mine 
 
myself 
nobody (subj) 
nothing (subj) 
not anymore, no longer 
of it, about it (m, f) | of them, about them 
(m, f) 
of which, whose 
ourselves 
themselves 
themselves 
them (m, f) (obj) 
there 
to/for them (m, f) (indirect obj) 
(to) them (m, mixed gender) (emph) 
what, that 
yours 
yourselves 
le sien, la sienne, les siens, les siennes 
elle-même 
lui-même 
le mien, la mienne, les miens, les 
miennes 
moi-même 
personne ne 
rien ne 
ne…plus 
en 
 
dont 
nous-mêmes 
eux-mêmes (m, mixed gender) 
elles-mêmes (f) 
les 
y 
leur 
(à) eux 
que/qu' 
le tien, la tienne, les tiens, les tiennes 
vous-mêmes 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
64 
Conjunctions 
Foundation and Higher 
Conjunctions: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
and 
as, like, in terms of 
because 
because 
but 
if 
or 
therefore, so 
than, that 
et 
comme 
car 
parce que, parce qu’ 
mais 
si 
ou 
donc 
que, qu’ 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
65 
Higher ONLY 
Conjunctions: Higher ONLY 
English French 
although 
however 
otherwise 
since, because 
who, whom, which, what 
when, while 
yet, nonetheless 
quoique  
cependant 
sinon  
puisque 
que 
lorsque 
pourtant 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
66 
Prepositions 
Foundation and Higher 
Prepositions: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
against 
at the, to the, in the, on the (f) 
at the, to the, in the, on the (m) 
at the, to the, in the, on the (pl) 
at, to, in, on 
at (the house of), to (the house of), with 
before; before + verb 
behind, at the back 
between 
during, for 
for, in order to 
here (is/are/you go) 
in, inside 
in, by, to 
in front of 
near, nearby, close by 
of the, from (the) (f) 
of the, from (the) (m) 
of the, from (the) (pl) 
contre 
à la/à l' 
au/à l' 
aux 
à 
chez 
avant; avant de + infinitive 
derrière 
entre 
pendant 
pour 
voici 
dans 
en 
devant 
près (de) 
de la/de l' 
du/de l' 
des 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
67 
Prepositions: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
of, from 
on, upon 
there, there you are 
under 
with 
without 
de/d' 
sur 
voilà 
sous 
avec 
sans  
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
68 
Higher ONLY 
Prepositions: Higher ONLY 
English French 
according to 
after having + past participle 
amongst 
around 
as soon as 
by, for, per 
despite 
except 
for, since 
in order to 
thanks to 
towards 
towards 
until 
selon 
après avoir + past participle 
parmi 
autour 
dès  
par 
malgré 
sauf 
depuis 
afin de  
grâce à  
vers 
envers 
jusque 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
69 
Adverbs 
Foundation and Higher 
Adverbs: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
a long time 
a lot 
abroad 
absolutely 
after, afterwards 
again, still, yet 
already 
also, as well 
always 
badly 
before 
better 
certainly, surely 
clearly 
completely 
directly, straight away 
early 
easily 
enough, quite 
longtemps 
beaucoup 
à l'étranger 
absolument  
après 
encore 
déjà 
aussi 
toujours 
mal 
avant 
mieux 
certainement 
clairement 
complètement 
directement 
tôt 
facilement 
assez 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
70 
Adverbs: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
even 
exactly 
extremely 
far (from) 
few, little 
finally 
generally 
here 
however 
late 
late 
less (…than) 
more (...than), adj + -er (...than) 
near 
never, not ever 
normally, usually 
not, no 
now 
often 
online 
only 
on top, above 
même 
exactement 
extrêmement 
loin (de) 
peu 
finalement 
généralement 
ici 
par contre 
en retard 
tard 
moins (…que) 
plus (…que) 
proche 
(ne...) jamais 
normalement 
(ne...) pas 
maintenant 
souvent 
en ligne 
seulement 
dessus 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
71 
Adverbs: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
outside, outdoors 
over there 
perfectly 
probably 
quickly, fast 
quickly, fast 
really 
really 
recently 
simply 
so, then, well 
sometimes 
soon 
standing 
then 
there 
today 
together 
tomorrow 
too (much, many) 
totally 
underneath, below 
(en) dehors 
là-bas 
parfaitement 
probablement 
rapidement 
vite 
vraiment 
réellement 
récemment 
simplement 
alors 
quelquefois 
bientôt 
debout 
ensuite 
là 
aujourd'hui 
ensemble 
demain 
trop 
totalement 
dessous 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
72 
Adverbs: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
unfortunately 
very 
well, a lot   
yesterday 
malheureusement 
très 
bien 
hier 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
73 
Higher ONLY 
Adverbs: Higher ONLY 
English French 
about, approximately 
also, too, as well, equally 
apparently 
currently, at the moment 
differently 
either 
entirely, completely 
especially 
everywhere 
finally 
firstly 
from now on 
immediately 
in other words 
maybe, perhaps 
nearly 
neither… nor 
not yet 
obviously 
only 
only, nothing but  
environ 
également 
apparemment 
actuellement 
différemment 
soit 
entièrement 
surtout 
partout 
enfin 
d’abord 
désormais 
immédiatement 
c’est-à-dire 
peut-être 
presque  
ne…ni…ni 
ne…pas encore 
évidemment 
uniquement 
ne…que  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
74 
Adverbs: Higher ONLY 
English French 
otherwise, in a different way, differently 
particularly 
previously, before, formerly 
rather 
seriously 
so much 
so much, so many 
so, thus 
sometimes 
somewhere else, besides, by the way 
then, next 
usually 
yet 
autrement 
particulièrement 
auparavant 
plutôt 
sérieusement 
tellement  
tant 
ainsi 
parfois 
ailleurs  
puis 
d’habitude 
toutefois 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
75 
Adjectives 
This is the complete list of adjectives included in our vocabulary list, in their base form 
(usually masculine singular). Students should be able to agree in gender and number all 
of the adjectives in this list that follow one of the patterns laid out in the ‘Adjectives’ 
section of Appendix 2: Grammar. For any adjectives that do not follow one of those 
patterns, after the masculine singular form we have listed all the other forms students 
are expected to learn. 
Foundation and Higher 
Adjectives: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
a lot, many 
active 
all, the whole 
all, the whole, every 
allergic 
alone, only, lonely 
ancient, old, former 
bad 
bad 
beautiful, handsome, nice (weather); 
step- 
beautiful, handsome, nice (weather) 
beautiful, handsome, nice (weather); 
step- 
better, best 
big, large, lots of 
beaucoup 
actif 
tout (m) 
tous (mpl) 
allergique 
seul 
ancien 
mauvais 
mal 
beau (m)/bel ; beau- 
 
beaux (mpl) 
belle (f) ; belle- 
 
meilleur 
gros (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
76 
Adjectives: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
big, large, lots of 
bisexual 
blond 
boring 
born 
British 
brown 
busy 
Canadian 
central 
certain 
classic, classical 
clean, proper, own 
closed 
cold 
comfortable 
common 
crazy, wild 
crazy, wild 
cultural 
dangerous 
dead 
grosse (f) 
bisexuel 
blond 
ennuyeux 
né 
britannique 
châtain 
occupé 
canadien 
central 
certain 
classique 
propre 
fermé 
froid 
confortable 
commun 
fou (m) 
folle (f) 
culturel 
dangereux 
mort 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
77 
Adjectives: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
delicious 
different 
difficult 
direct 
disabled 
diverse, various 
double 
each, every 
easy 
electric 
empty 
English 
enormous, big 
equal 
essential 
European 
exact 
excellent 
exciting 
expensive, dear 
extraordinary 
extreme 
délicieux 
différent 
difficile 
direct 
handicapé 
divers 
double 
chaque 
facile 
électrique 
vide 
anglais 
énorme 
égal 
essentiel 
européen 
exact 
excellent 
passionnant 
cher 
extraordinaire 
extrême 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
78 
Adjectives: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
fair, just, only 
false 
false 
family 
famous 
fashionable, trendy 
fast, quick 
favourite 
final 
francophone 
free 
free, available 
French 
full, complete 
full, complete 
funny, fun 
gay 
general 
glad, pleased, happy 
global 
good 
good 
juste 
faux (m) 
fausse (f) 
familial 
célèbre 
tendance 
rapide 
préféré 
final 
francophone 
gratuit 
libre 
français 
complet (m) 
complète (f) 
amusant 
gay 
général 
content 
global 
bien 
bon (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
79 
Adjectives: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
good 
great 
great, big, tall; grand- 
happy, lucky, fortunate 
hard, difficult 
hardworking 
hardworking 
healthy 
heavy 
high, tall 
his, her, its, your 
his, her, its, your 
his, her, its, everyone's, ones, your 
historical 
hot 
ideal 
ill 
important 
impossible 
included 
independent 
interesting 
bonne (f) 
génial 
grand; grand- 
heureux 
dur 
travailleur (m) 
travailleuse (f) 
sain 
lourd 
haut 
son (m) 
sa (f) 
ses (pl) 
historique 
chaud 
idéal 
malade 
important 
impossible 
inclus 
indépendant 
intéressant 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
80 
Adjectives: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
international 
large, wide, big 
lesbian 
less (…than); less, fewer (than + num) 
light 
light, bright, clear 
local 
long 
long 
low 
low 
main, principal 
medical 
mental 
modern 
more (...than (+ num)), adj + -er (...than) 
my 
my 
my 
national 
natural 
necessary, essential 
international 
large 
lesbien 
moins (…que) 
léger 
clair 
local 
long (m) 
longue (f) 
bas (m) 
basse (f) 
principal 
médical 
mental 
moderne 
plus (…que) 
mon (m) 
ma (f) 
mes (pl) 
national 
naturel 
nécessaire 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
81 
Adjectives: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
negative 
new 
new 
new 
next 
next, following 
nice, kind 
nice, pleasant 
non-binary 
normal, usual 
old 
old 
open, opened 
ordinary 
original 
other, another 
our 
our 
patient 
perfect 
personal 
physical 
négatif 
nouveau/nouvel (m) 
nouveaux (mpl) 
nouvelle (f) 
prochain 
suivant 
sympa 
agréable 
non-binaire 
normal 
vieux (m) 
vieille (f) 
ouvert 
ordinaire 
original 
autre 
notre (m, f) 
nos (pl) 
patient 
parfait 
personnel 
physique 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
82 
Adjectives: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
poor 
popular 
positive  
possible 
practical, convenient 
private 
public 
public 
quiet 
real 
recent 
red, ginger 
regional 
regular 
religious 
responsible 
rich 
right, straight 
rubbish, bad 
rubbish, bad 
sad 
same 
pauvre 
populaire 
positif 
possible 
pratique 
privé 
public (m) 
publique (f) 
calme 
réel 
récent 
roux 
régional 
régulier 
religieux 
responsable 
riche 
droit 
nul (m) 
nulle (f) 
triste 
même 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
83 
Adjectives: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
school 
serious, important 
several, many 
short 
simple, plain 
sitting, seated 
slow 
small, little 
social 
some 
special 
sporty, sports 
straight 
strict 
strong, loud, good at 
sure, safe, certain 
surprising, amazing, incredible 
terrible 
their  
their  
these, those 
this, that, it 
scolaire 
sérieux 
plusieurs 
court 
simple 
assis 
lent 
petit 
social 
quelque 
spécial 
sportif 
hétéro(sexuel) 
strict 
fort 
sûr 
étonnant 
terrible 
leur (m, f) 
leurs (pl) 
ces (pl) 
ce, cet (m), c’ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
84 
Adjectives: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
this, that 
tiring, exhausting 
traditional 
transgender 
true, correct 
unhealthy 
unique, only (child) 
useful 
useless 
usual 
vegan 
vegetarian 
weak 
which(?), what(?) 
worse, worst 
young 
your 
your 
your 
your  
your  
cette (f) 
fatigant 
traditionnel 
transgenre 
vrai 
malsain 
unique 
utile 
inutile 
habituel 
végan 
végétarien 
faible 
quel (?) 
pire 
jeune 
votre (m, f) 
vos (pl) 
ton (m) 
ta (f) 
tes (pl) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
85 
Higher ONLY 
Adjectives: Higher ONLY 
English French 
annoying 
available 
brief 
brief 
capable 
civil 
climate 
complex, difficult 
conscious, aware 
contrary 
current, present 
daily 
dark 
deep, profound 
dry 
dry 
durable, sustainable 
efficient 
enough, sufficient 
entire, full, whole 
essential 
agaçant 
disponible 
bref (m) 
brève (f) 
capable 
civil 
climatique 
complexe 
conscient 
contraire 
actuel 
quotidien 
sombre 
profond 
sec (m) 
sèche (f) 
durable 
efficace 
suffisant 
entier 
indispensable 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
86 
Adjectives: Higher ONLY 
English French 
exceptional 
extra, additional 
fat, fatty, oily, greasy 
fat, fatty, oily, greasy 
foreign 
fresh, cool 
fresh, cool 
full 
global, world 
huge, enormous, vast 
human 
immediate 
loyal, faithful 
major, main 
medium, average size 
moral 
multicultural 
narrow 
no, not one, not any 
numerous, many 
obvious 
old 
exceptionnel 
supplémentaire 
gras (m) 
grasse (f) 
étranger 
frais (m) 
fraîche (f)^ 
plein 
mondial 
vaste 
humain 
immédiat 
fidèle 
majeur 
moyen 
moral 
multiculturel 
étroit 
ne…aucun 
nombreux 
évident 
âgé 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
87 
Adjectives: Higher ONLY 
English French 
older, oldest 
permanent 
previous, preceding 
professional 
proud 
prudent, careful, cautious 
rare 
ready 
renewable 
same 
same 
serious, important, grave 
severe, strict, harsh 
sour 
stressed 
sweet, sugary 
tasty 
tight 
twin 
twin 
twin 
unknown 
aîné^ 
permanent 
précédent 
professionnel 
fier 
prudent 
rare 
prêt 
renouvelable 
pareil (m) 
pareille (f) 
grave 
sévère 
aigre 
stressé 
sucré 
savoureux 
moulant 
jumeau (m) 
jumeaux (mpl) 
jumelle (f) 
inconnu 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
88 
Adjectives: Higher ONLY 
English French 
virtual 
wet, humid, moist 
worried, anxious 
worried, anxious 
worrying 
yearly 
virtuel 
humide 
inquiet (m) 
inquiète (f) 
inquiétant 
annuel 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
89 
Nouns 
Foundation and Higher 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
accident 
accommodation 
action 
activity 
actor 
address 
adult 
age 
aid, help 
air 
airport 
ambition 
animal, pet 
animals, pets 
answer, response, reply 
apartment, flat 
app 
appointment 
arm 
accident (m) 
logement (m) 
action (f) 
activité (f) 
acteur (m) 
adresse (f) 
adulte (m) 
âge (m) 
aide (f) 
air (m) 
aéroport (m) 
ambition (f) 
animal (m) 
animaux (mpl) 
réponse (f) 
appartement (m) 
appli(cation) (f) 
rendez-vous (m) 
bras (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
90 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
art 
artist 
attention 
attitude 
aunt 
back 
bag, sack 
baguette, French stick 
bakery 
bank 
bank note, ticket 
basketball 
beach 
bed 
bedroom 
being 
belly, stomach 
bike, bicycle, cycling 
birthday 
board, painting, picture 
boat 
body 
art (m) 
artiste (m, f) 
attention (f) 
attitude (f) 
tante (f) 
dos (m) 
sac (m) 
baguette (f) 
boulangerie (f) 
banque (f) 
billet (m) 
basket (m); 
plage (f) 
lit (m) 
chambre (f) 
être (m) 
ventre (m) 
vélo (m) 
anniversaire (m) 
tableau (m) 
bateau (m) 
corps (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
91 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
book, textbook 
boss 
boss 
bottom, back 
box, tin 
boy 
brand, mark 
bread 
break (time) 
breakfast 
bridge 
brother 
building 
building, block of flats 
bus 
cake 
camping, campsite 
capital city 
car 
card, map, credit card, menu 
career 
case 
livre (m) 
chef (m) 
cheffe (f) 
fond (m) 
boîte (f)^ 
garçon (m) 
marque (f) 
pain (m) 
pause (f) 
petit-déjeuner (m) 
pont (m) 
frère (m) 
bâtiment (m) 
immeuble (m) 
bus (m) 
gâteau (m) 
camping (m) 
capitale (f) 
voiture (f) 
carte (f) 
carrière (f) 
cas (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
92 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
castle 
cat 
catastrophe 
cause 
celebrity, star 
centre 
change 
change, currency 
channel, chain 
character 
checkout, till 
cheese 
child 
chips, fries 
chocolate 
choice 
cinema 
classroom, class 
clothes 
club 
coach (transport) 
coast 
château (m) 
chat (m) 
catastrophe (f) 
cause (f) 
célébrité (f) 
centre (m) 
changement (m) 
monnaie (f) 
chaîne (f)^ 
personnage (m) 
caisse (f) 
fromage (m) 
enfant (mf) 
frites (fpl) 
chocolat (m) 
choix (m) 
cinéma (m) 
classe (f) 
vêtements (mpl) 
club (m) 
car (m) 
côte (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
93 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
coffee, coffee house, café 
comedy 
comment, remark 
communication 
company, business 
concert, gig 
condition 
console 
contact 
conversation 
corner 
cost 
country 
countryside 
couple 
creation 
crime 
crisis 
cuisine, cooking, kitchen 
culture 
customer, client 
dance 
café (m) 
comédie (f) 
commentaire (m) 
communication (f) 
entreprise (f) 
concert (m) 
condition (f) 
console (f) 
contact (m) 
conversation (f) 
coin (m) 
coût (m) 
pays (m) 
campagne (f) 
couple (m) 
création (f) 
crime (m) 
crise (f) 
cuisine (f) 
culture (f) 
client (m) 
danse (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
94 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
danger 
date 
decision 
definition 
delay 
departure 
dessert 
destruction 
detail 
difference 
difficulty, issue, problem 
direction 
disability 
distance 
doctor 
dog 
door 
drama 
dream 
dress 
drug 
ear 
danger (m) 
date (f) 
décision (f) 
définition (f) 
retard (m) 
départ (m) 
dessert (m) 
destruction (f) 
détail (m) 
différence (f) 
difficulté (f) 
direction (f) 
handicap (m) 
distance (f) 
médecin (mf) 
chien (m) 
porte (f) 
tragédie (f) 
rêve (m) 
robe (f) 
drogue (f) 
oreille (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
95 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
earth, ground 
east 
edge, side 
education 
effect 
effort 
egg 
email 
emotion, feelings 
energy 
entrance, starter 
environment 
equality 
equipment 
error, mistake 
euro 
event 
exam, test 
example 
exchange 
exercise 
exercise book 
terre (f) 
est (m) 
bord (m) 
éducation (f) 
effet (m) 
effort (m) 
œuf (m) 
e-mail (m) 
émotion (f) 
énergie (f) 
entrée (f) 
environnement (m) 
égalité (f) 
équipement (m) 
erreur (f) 
euro (m) 
événement (m)^ 
examen (m) 
exemple (m) 
échange (m) 
exercice (m) 
cahier (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
96 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
exit, outing 
experience, experiment 
eyes 
face 
fact 
family 
fan, supporter 
farm 
fashion; fashionable, trendy 
fast food, fast food restaurant 
father, dad 
favour 
festival 
festival, party 
film, movie 
finger 
fire, traffic light 
fish 
floor, ground 
foot 
football 
forest 
sortie (f) 
expérience (f) 
yeux (mpl) 
visage (m) 
fait (m) 
famille (f) 
fan (m, f) 
ferme (f) 
mode (f); à la mode 
fastfood (m) 
père (m) 
faveur (f) 
festival (m) 
fête (f) 
film (m) 
doigt (m) 
feu (m) 
poisson (m) 
sol (m) 
pied (m) 
foot(ball) (m) 
forêt (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
97 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
friend 
front, face, side 
fruit 
future 
future 
game 
garden 
gender, sex 
genre, type, sort  
girl, daughter 
glasses 
goal, aim, purpose 
grace 
group, band 
hair 
half 
hand 
handball 
head 
health 
heart 
holidays 
ami (m) 
face (f) 
fruit (m) 
avenir (m) 
futur (m) 
jeu (m) 
jardin (m) 
sexe (m) 
genre (m) 
fille (f) 
lunettes (fpl) 
but (m) 
grâce (f) 
groupe (m) 
cheveux (mpl) 
moitié (f) 
main (f) 
handball (m) 
tête (f) 
santé (f) 
cœur (m) 
vacances (fpl) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
98 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
homework 
hope 
horror 
horse 
hospital 
hotel 
house, home 
hunger 
husband 
ice, ice-cream 
idea 
illness 
identity 
image, picture 
importance 
independence 
influence 
influencer 
instant 
instrument 
internet, web 
island 
devoirs (mpl) 
espoir (m) 
horreur (f) 
cheval (m) 
hôpital (m) 
hôtel (m) 
maison (f) 
faim (f) 
mari (m) 
glace (f) 
idée (f) 
maladie (f) 
identité (f) 
image (f) 
importance (f) 
indépendance (f) 
influence (f) 
influenceur (m) 
instant (m) 
instrument (m) 
Internet (m) 
île (f)^ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
99 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
job, position, post; post office 
journey, travel, trip 
jumper 
key 
kilometre 
lake 
language, tongue 
laptop 
leisure, leisure activity, hobby 
left 
leg 
lesson 
lesson, course 
letter 
level 
life 
link 
list 
love 
luck 
lunch 
majority 
poste (m); poste (f) 
voyage (m) 
pull (m) 
clé (f) 
kilomètre (m) 
lac (m) 
langue (f) 
ordinateur portable (m) 
loisir (m) 
gauche (f) 
jambe (f) 
leçon (f) 
cours (m) 
lettre (f) 
niveau (m) 
vie (f) 
lien (m) 
liste (f) 
amour (m) 
chance (f) 
déjeuner (m) 
majorité (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
100 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
man 
map, plan, project 
mark, grade, note 
market 
marriage, wedding 
match 
maths 
matter, business; belongings, things 
maximum 
meal 
means, way  
meat 
media 
medicine, pill 
member 
message 
metre 
milk 
minimum 
mobile phone 
model, role model 
money 
homme (m) 
plan (m) 
note (f) 
marché (m) 
mariage (m) 
match (m) 
maths (mpl) 
affaire (f); affaires (fpl) 
maximum (m) 
repas (m) 
moyen (m) 
viande (f) 
médias (mpl) 
médicament (m) 
membre (m) 
message (m) 
mètre (m)  
lait (m) 
minimum (m) 
portable (m) 
modèle (m) 
argent (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
101 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
mother, mum 
mountain 
mouth 
movement 
museum 
music 
name, surname 
nature 
necessity 
neighbour 
neighbourhood 
network 
news; information 
newspaper 
noise  
north 
nose 
number 
number 
offer 
office, desk 
office 
mère (f) 
montagne (f) 
bouche (f) 
mouvement (m) 
musée (m) 
musique (f) 
nom (m) 
nature (f) 
nécessité (f) 
voisin (m) 
quartier (m) 
réseau (m) 
informations (fpl); information (f) 
journal (m) 
bruit (m) 
nord (m) 
nez (m) 
nombre (m) 
numéro (m) 
offre (f) 
bureau (m) 
office (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
102 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
opinion 
opinion 
order 
organisation 
organisation, charity, club, association 
page 
paper 
parent 
park 
part 
partner 
passion 
passport 
password 
past 
pasta 
patisserie, cake shop, pastry, cake 
pen 
people 
people, person, nobody 
period 
personality 
opinion (f) 
avis (m) 
ordre (m) 
organisation (f) 
association (f) 
page (f) 
papier (m) 
parent (m) 
parc (m) 
partie (f) 
partenaire (mf) 
passion (f) 
passeport (m) 
mot de passe (m) 
passé (m) 
pâtes (fpl) 
pâtisserie (f) 
stylo (m) 
gens (mpl) 
personne (f) 
période (f) 
personnalité (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
103 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
pharmacy, chemist 
photo 
pitch (sports), ground 
place 
plan, project 
plane 
planet 
plastic 
player 
playground, court 
pleasure 
pocket 
point 
police, police station 
police officer 
police officer 
pollution 
population 
port, harbour 
possibility 
present 
present 
pharmacie (f) 
photo (f) 
terrain (m) 
endroit (m) 
projet (m) 
avion (m) 
planète (f) 
plastique (m) 
joueur (m) 
cour (f) 
plaisir (m) 
poche (f) 
point (m) 
police (f) 
policier (m) 
policière (f) 
pollution (f) 
population (f) 
port (m) 
possibilité (f) 
cadeau (m) 
présent (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
104 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
presentation 
president 
price 
prison 
problem, issue 
programme 
(TV) programme, broadcast 
progress 
promise 
protection 
province 
pupil, student 
quality 
quantity 
quarter; quarter past; quarter to 
question 
rabbit 
racism 
reading 
reality 
reason, right, correct 
recipe 
présentation (f) 
président (m) 
prix (m) 
prison (f) 
problème (m) 
programme (m) 
émission (f) 
progrès (m) 
promesse (f) 
protection (f) 
province (f) 
élève (m, f) 
qualité (f) 
quantité (f) 
quart (m) ; et quart ; moins le quart 
question (f) 
lapin (m) 
racisme (m) 
lecture (f) 
réalité (f) 
raison (f) 
recette (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
105 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
recycling 
region 
relationship 
religion 
research 
resource 
respect 
rest, remainder; leftovers 
restaurant 
result 
return 
return ticket 
rhythm 
rice 
right 
risk 
road, way, route 
role 
room 
room, space, square, place 
rule, ruler 
salary 
recyclage (m) 
région (f) 
relation (f) 
religion (f) 
recherche (f) 
ressource (f) 
respect (m) 
reste (m) ; restes (mpl) 
restaurant (m) 
résultat (m) 
retour (m) 
aller-retour (m) 
rythme (m) 
riz (m) 
droite (f) 
risque (m) 
route (f) 
rôle (m) 
salle (f) 
place (f) 
règle (f) 
salaire (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
106 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
sale 
school 
science 
sci-fi 
sea 
secondary school 
secret 
security, safety 
sense, meaning, direction 
series, soap opera 
service 
sexism 
shape; in shape, fit, healthy 
shirt 
shock, clash 
shoe 
shop, shopping 
shopping 
shopping centre 
show 
side 
silence 
vente (f) 
école (f) 
science (f) 
science-fiction (f) 
mer (f) 
collège (m) 
secret (m) 
sécurité (f) 
sens (m) 
série (f) 
service (m) 
sexisme (m) 
forme (f); en forme 
chemise (f) 
choc (m) 
chaussure (f) 
magasin (m) 
courses (fpl) 
centre commercial (m) 
spectacle (m) 
côté (m) 
silence (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
107 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
singer 
single ticket 
sister 
site 
situation 
sixth form, college 
size 
skateboard, skateboarding 
skirt 
sky 
snow 
society 
sock 
solution 
son 
song 
sort, kind, type 
south 
souvenir, memory 
space, room 
sport 
stadium 
chanteur (m) 
aller (m) 
sœur (f) 
site (m) 
situation (f) 
lycée (m) 
taille (f) 
skate(board) (m) 
jupe (f) 
ciel (m) 
neige (f) 
société (f) 
chaussette (f) 
solution (f) 
fils (m) 
chanson (f) 
sorte (f) 
sud (m) 
souvenir (m) 
espace (m) 
sport (m) 
stade (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
108 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
start of school year 
station 
step-brother, half-brother 
step-sister, half-sister 
(bus) stop, (tube) station 
story, history 
streaming 
street 
strike 
student (university) 
studies 
style 
subject 
subject, topic 
success 
sugar 
sun 
supermarket 
surprise 
swimming 
swimming pool 
symbol 
rentrée (f) 
gare (f) 
demi-frère (m) 
demi-sœur (f) 
station (f) 
histoire (f) 
streaming (m) 
rue (f) 
grève (f) 
étudiant (m) 
études (fpl) 
style (m) 
matière (f) 
sujet (m) 
succès (m) 
sucre (m) 
soleil (m) 
supermarché (m) 
surprise (f) 
natation (f) 
piscine (f) 
symbole (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
109 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
system 
table 
tablet 
taste 
tea 
teacher 
team 
technology 
teenager 
telephone 
television, TV 
tennis 
tent 
text 
theatre, drama 
theme, topic 
thing 
thing 
thirst 
throat 
tie 
time, weather, climate 
système (m) 
table (f) 
tablette (f) 
goût (m)^ 
thé (m) 
professeur, prof (mf) 
équipe (f) 
technologie (f) 
adolescent (m) 
téléphone (m) 
télé(vision) (f) 
tennis (m) 
tente (f) 
texte (m) 
théâtre (m) 
thème (m) 
chose (f) 
truc (m) 
soif (f) 
gorge (f) 
cravate (f) 
temps (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
110 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
title 
toilet(s) 
tour; tower 
tourist 
tourism 
town, city 
tradition 
traffic 
train 
trainers 
training, apprenticeship 
(public) transport, transportation 
treatment 
tree 
trend, tendency 
trousers 
truth 
type, kind, sort 
uncle 
underground, tube 
uniform 
university 
titre (m) 
toilettes (fpl) 
tour (m); tour (f) 
touriste (m) 
tourisme (m) 
ville (f) 
tradition (f) 
trafic (m) 
train (m) 
baskets (fpl) 
formation (f) 
transport(s) (m) 
traitement (m) 
arbre (m) 
tendance (f) 
pantalon (m) 
vérité (f) 
type (m) 
oncle (m) 
métro (m) 
uniforme (m) 
université (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
111 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
value 
vegetables 
version 
victim 
victory, winning 
video 
view 
village 
violence 
virus 
visit, excursion 
volume 
wall 
water 
way, manner 
west 
wheelchair 
wind 
window 
woman, wife 
wood, woods 
word 
valeur (f) 
légumes (mpl) 
version (f) 
victime (m, f) 
victoire (f) 
vidéo (f) 
vue (f) 
village (m) 
violence (f) 
virus (m) 
visite (f) 
volume (m) 
mur (m) 
eau (f) 
manière (f) 
ouest (m) 
fauteuil roulant (m) 
vent (m) 
fenêtre (f) 
femme (f) 
bois (m) 
mot (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
112 
Nouns: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
work 
world 
wrong, incorrect 
young person 
zone 
travail (m) 
monde (m) 
tort (m) 
jeune (m) 
zone (f) 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
113 
Higher ONLY 
Nouns: Higher ONLY 
English French 
accent 
access 
act, gesture 
advantage, pro 
advice 
agreement 
ally 
anger  
apprentice 
arrival 
article 
aspect 
athletics 
behaviour 
the best 
 
the best 
bill 
birth 
blanket 
blood 
accent (m) 
accès (m) 
acte (m) 
avantage (m) 
conseil (m) 
accord (m) 
allié (m) 
colère (f) 
apprenti (m) 
arrivée (f) 
article (m) 
aspect (m) 
athlétisme (m) 
comportement (m) 
(le) meilleur, (la) meilleure, (les) 
meilleur(e)s 
le mieux 
addition (f) 
naissance (f) 
couverture (f) 
sang (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
114 
Nouns: Higher ONLY 
English French 
border 
boss 
boss 
boss, headteacher 
bottle 
bullying, harassment 
care 
citizen 
(council) estate 
code 
community 
company 
competence, skill, ability 
competition 
conflict 
consequence 
consumption 
courage, bravery 
crowd 
cyber crime, online crime 
damage, (what a) pity 
data 
frontière (f) 
patron (m) 
patronne (f) 
directeur (m) 
bouteille (f) 
harcèlement (m) 
soin (m) 
citoyen (m) 
cité (f) 
code (m) 
communauté (f) 
compagnie (f) 
compétence (f) 
concours (m) 
conflit (m) 
conséquence (f) 
consommation (f) 
courage (m) 
foule (f) 
cybercriminalité (f) 
dommage (m) 
données (fpl) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
115 
Nouns: Higher ONLY 
English French 
device, apparatus 
disadvantage, con, inconvenience 
discrimination 
discussion 
dish, course 
documentary 
doubt 
drink 
economy 
emergency 
employee 
employment 
explanation 
excuse 
expression 
failure 
faith 
fear, fright 
feeling 
field 
fight 
film screening, session 
appareil (m) 
inconvénient (m) 
discrimination (f) 
discussion (f) 
plat (m) 
documentaire (m) 
doute (m) 
boisson (f) 
économie (f) 
urgence (f) 
employé (m) 
emploi (m) 
explication (f) 
excuse (f) 
expression (f) 
échec (m) 
foi (f) 
peur (f) 
sentiment (m) 
champ (m) 
lutte (f) 
séance (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
116 
Nouns: Higher ONLY 
English French 
flight, robbery 
flood 
floor 
flower 
food 
fork 
freedom 
friend, mate 
friend, mate 
friendship 
gap 
generation 
gift, talent, donation 
glass 
gold 
government 
gym 
happiness 
hat 
headphones, earbuds 
helmet 
help, aid, assistance (in an emergency) 
vol (m) 
inondation (f) 
étage (m) 
fleur (f) 
nourriture (f) 
fourchette (f) 
liberté (f) 
copain (m) 
copine (f) 
amitié (f) 
écart (m) 
génération (f) 
don (m) 
verre (m) 
or (m) 
gouvernement (m) 
gymnase (m) 
bonheur (f) 
chapeau (m) 
écouteurs (m) 
casque (m) 
secours (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
117 
Nouns: Higher ONLY 
English French 
home 
impression 
individual 
industry 
inhabitant, resident 
intention 
interview 
jacket 
job 
joy 
judgement 
justice 
knife 
knowledge 
lack 
landscape 
law 
library 
lift 
light 
loss, waste 
mail 
foyer (m) 
impression (f) 
individu (m) 
industrie (f) 
habitant (m) 
intention (f) 
entretien (m) 
veste (f) 
métier (m) 
joie (f) 
jugement (m) 
justice (f) 
couteau (m) 
connaissance (f) 
manque (m) 
paysage (m) 
loi (f) 
bibliothèque (f) 
ascenseur (m) 
lumière (f) 
perte (f) 
courrier (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
118 
Nouns: Higher ONLY 
English French 
memory 
minority 
most 
need 
novel 
object 
objective 
occasion, chance, opportunity 
origin 
path, way 
peace 
piece of information 
place 
plate 
platform 
play, coin, room 
police station 
power 
pressure 
pride 
principle 
product 
mémoire (f) 
minorité (f) 
plupart (f) 
besoin (m) 
roman (m) 
objet (m) 
objectif (m) 
occasion (f) 
origine (f) 
chemin (m) 
paix (f) 
renseignement (m) 
lieu (m) 
assiette (f) 
quai (m) 
pièce (f) 
commissariat (m) 
pouvoir (m) 
pression (f) 
fierté (f) 
principe (m) 
produit (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
119 
Nouns: Higher ONLY 
English French 
protest, demonstration 
public, audience 
purchase 
rate 
regime, diet 
relationship 
representation 
responsibility 
review, criticism 
river 
salt 
sand 
scene, stage 
scholarship, grant 
screen 
seat 
separation 
shame 
sign 
skin 
smile 
sound 
manifestation (f) 
public (m) 
achat (m) 
taux (m) 
régime (m) 
rapport (m) 
représentation (f) 
responsabilité (f) 
critique (f) 
rivière (f) 
sel (m) 
sable (m) 
scène (f) 
bourse (f) 
écran (m) 
siège (m) 
séparation (f) 
honte (f) 
signe (m) 
peau (m) 
sourire (m) 
son (m) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
120 
Nouns: Higher ONLY 
English French 
species, type, kind, cash 
speech, word, speaking; lyrics 
spirit 
spoon 
stairs 
state, condition 
stop 
subscription 
suburb 
success 
suitcase 
support 
survey 
teaching 
temperature, fever 
test 
third 
thought 
threat 
timetable 
track, trail 
traffic 
espèce (f) 
parole (f); paroles (fpl) 
esprit (m) 
cuillère (f) 
escalier (m) 
état (m) 
arrêt (m) 
abonnement (m) 
banlieue (f) 
réussite (f) 
valise (f) 
soutien (m) 
enquête (f) 
enseignement (m) 
fièvre (f) 
épreuve (f) 
tiers (m) 
pensée (f) 
menace (f) 
emploi du temps (m) 
piste (f) 
circulation (f) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
121 
Nouns: Higher ONLY 
English French 
trust, confidence 
unemployment 
union 
unity 
vehicle 
voice 
waste, rubbish 
way 
weight 
will, desire 
wish, desire, want 
work, task 
worry 
worry, anxiety 
the worst 
youth 
confiance (f) 
chômage (m) 
union (f) 
unité (f) 
véhicule (m) 
voix (f) 
déchets (mpl) 
façon (f) 
poids (m) 
volonté (f) 
envie (f) 
œuvre (f) 
souci (m) 
inquiétude (f) 
(le/la) pire, (les) pires 
jeunesse (f) 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
122 
Verbs 
Students are required to know the conjugated forms of these verbs following the 
regular patterns in the tenses outlined at each tier in the ‘Verbs’ section of Appendix 2: 
Grammar. They are also required to know some irregular inflected forms: where this is 
the case, we have marked the infinitive form with an asterisk (*) and then set out the 
required irregular inflected forms, per tier, in separate tables below. 
For infinitives, as well as for the present and imperfect tenses, students are expected to 
know both the English simple (e.g. infinitive to do; present I do; imperfect I did, I used to 
do) and English continuous (e.g. infinitive to be doing; present I am doing; imperfect I was 
doing) translations. We have only listed the English simple translations in the table below 
for simplicity. 
Foundation and Higher 
Verbs: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
to accept 
to ache, hurt 
to announce 
to answer, reply (to) 
to arrive; to manage 
to ask (someone to + verb); to wonder, 
ask oneself 
to ask, pose (a question) 
to be* 
to be able to, can* 
to be interested in 
to be…years old 
to become 
accepter 
avoir mal à la/au/aux 
annoncer 
répondre (à) 
arriver; arriver à 
demander (à… de + infinitive) ; se 
demander 
poser 
être* 
pouvoir* 
s'intéresser à 
avoir…ans 
devenir 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
123 
Verbs: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
to believe* 
to buy 
to call; to be called 
to cause 
to change; to get changed 
to choose 
to close, shut (down) 
to come 
to come back 
to compare 
to continue, go on, carry on 
to cost 
to cross 
to cry 
to cut, switch off 
to dance 
to decide (to) 
to depend (on) 
to describe 
to deserve 
to discuss, talk about, chat 
croire* 
acheter 
appeler; s’appeler 
causer 
changer; se changer 
choisir 
fermer 
venir 
revenir 
comparer 
continuer (de) 
coûter 
traverser 
pleurer 
couper, se couper 
danser 
décider (de) 
dépendre (de) 
décrire 
mériter 
discuter (de) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
124 
Verbs: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
to do, make, go on/for + noun; to do + -
ing, go + -ing, play + noun* 
to download 
to dream (about, of) 
to dress; to get dressed 
to drink* 
to drive, lead 
to eat 
to enjoy oneself 
to enter, go in 
to exchange 
to fall 
to find; to be situated 
to finish 
to follow* 
to forbid, ban 
to forget 
to form 
to function, work 
to gather, meet, reunite 
to get married 
to give 
faire; faire de + noun* 
 
télécharger 
rêver (à/de) 
habiller; s’habiller 
boire* 
conduire 
manger 
s'amuser 
entrer 
échanger 
tomber 
trouver; se trouver 
finir (de + infinitive) 
suivre* 
interdire de 
oublier 
former 
fonctionner 
réunir 
se marier 
donner 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
125 
Verbs: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
to go* 
to go back in, return 
to go down 
to go out 
to go up 
to hate 
to have* 
to have to, must* 
to hear; to get on (with) 
to help (to)  
to hold 
to hope 
to improve 
to inform 
to inspire 
to invite 
to know, be familiar with* 
to know how to, can* 
to last 
to laugh* 
to learn 
to leave 
aller* 
rentrer 
descendre 
sortir 
monter 
détester 
avoir* 
devoir* 
entendre; s’entendre (avec) 
aider (à) 
tenir 
espérer 
améliorer 
informer 
inspirer 
inviter 
connaître*^ 
savoir* 
durer 
rire* 
apprendre 
partir 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
126 
Verbs: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
to leave 
to let, leave behind 
to lift, raise; to get up 
to like 
to listen (to) 
to live 
to load, charge 
to look for, search 
to look for, search, collect 
to lose 
to love 
to mean 
to meet (up) 
to miss (public transport) 
to move 
to open 
to order 
to organise 
to participate, take part (in) 
to party, have fun 
to pay 
to phone 
quitter 
laisser 
lever; se lever 
aimer 
écouter (de) 
habiter 
charger 
chercher 
rechercher 
perdre 
adorer 
vouloir dire 
rencontrer 
manquer 
bouger 
ouvrir 
commander 
organiser 
participer (à) 
faire la fête 
payer 
téléphoner 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
127 
Verbs: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
to play (+ noun e.g. sport/instrument) 
to practise 
to prefer 
to prepare 
to pronounce 
to protect 
to put (in, on)* 
to read* 
to recall, remind; to remember 
to receive* 
to recognise 
to recommend 
to recycle 
to reduce 
to regret 
to repeat 
to reserve, book 
to respect, follow 
to rest 
to return, come back 
to return, hand in, give back 
to run* 
jouer (à/de) 
pratiquer 
préférer 
préparer 
prononcer 
protéger 
mettre* 
lire* 
rappeler ; se rappeler de 
recevoir* 
reconnaître 
recommander 
recycler 
réduire 
regretter 
répéter 
réserver 
respecter 
se reposer 
retourner 
rendre 
courir* 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
128 
Verbs: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
to save, rescue 
to say, tell 
to see* 
to sell 
to send 
to serve 
to share 
to show 
to sing 
to sleep 
to smile 
to speak, talk (about) 
to spend (time), take (an exam); to 
happen, take place 
to start (to), begin (to) 
to stay 
to stop, arrest 
to struggle, fight, battle 
to study 
to succeed, pass (an exam) 
to take, have 
to take, remove; to take away 
sauver 
dire 
voir* 
vendre 
envoyer 
servir 
partager 
montrer 
chanter 
dormir 
sourire 
parler (de) 
passer; se passer 
 
commencer (à) 
rester 
arrêter (de) 
lutter 
étudier 
réussir (à) 
prendre 
emporter ; à emporter 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
129 
Verbs: Foundation and Higher 
English French 
to think (of) 
to throw away, out 
to translate 
to travel 
to treat, handle, deal with 
to try; to try on (clothes) 
to turn 
to understand 
to use 
to visit 
to wait 
to walk, to function 
to want (to)* 
to watch, to look 
to wear, to carry 
to win, to earn 
to work 
to write* 
penser (à/de) 
jeter 
traduire 
voyager 
traiter 
essayer; essayer de 
tourner 
comprendre 
utiliser 
visiter 
attendre 
marcher 
vouloir* 
regarder 
porter 
gagner 
travailler 
écrire* 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
130 
Higher ONLY 
Verbs: Higher ONLY 
English French 
to accompany, go with 
to act 
to adapt 
to adopt 
to advise 
to allow, permit 
to apologise 
to appreciate 
to attract 
to avoid 
to be bored, get bored 
to be quiet, keep quiet* 
to behave 
to belong (to) 
to borrow 
to bring 
to build 
to burn 
to call, name 
to celebrate 
to check 
accompagner 
agir 
adapter 
adopter 
conseiller 
permettre 
s’excuser 
apprécier 
attirer 
éviter (de) 
s'ennuyer 
se taire* 
se comporter 
appartenir (à) 
emprunter 
apporter 
construire 
brûler, se brûler^ 
nommer 
fêter 
vérifier 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
131 
Verbs: Higher ONLY 
English French 
to check, control 
to communicate 
to complain*  
to concentrate 
to concern, be relevant to 
to consider 
to contain 
to contribute 
to convince 
to count (on), intend 
to create 
to dare 
to defend; to forbid, ban 
to desire 
to destroy 
to develop 
to disappear 
to disappoint 
to discover* 
to encourage 
to escape (from) 
to exist 
contrôler 
communiquer 
se plaindre* 
se concentrer 
concerner 
considérer 
contenir 
contribuer 
convaincre 
compter (sur) 
créer 
oser 
défendre; défendre de 
désirer 
détruire 
développer 
disparaître^ 
décevoir 
découvrir* 
encourager 
échapper (à) ; s’échapper (de) 
exister 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
132 
Verbs: Higher ONLY 
English French 
to explain 
to express; to express oneself 
to fight 
to fill (in, out, up) 
to finish, end 
to follow* 
to free, set free, release 
to get, obtain, get hold of 
to harm 
to hide 
to hire, rent 
to hurt, injure ; to hurt oneself, injure 
oneself 
to identify (with), relate (to) 
to ignore, not know 
to imagine 
to impose 
to increase 
to integrate, to fit in 
to introduce 
to invent 
to judge 
expliquer 
exprimer; s’exprimer 
combattre 
remplir 
terminer 
suivre* 
libérer 
obtenir 
nuire 
cacher, se cacher 
louer 
blesser; se blesser 
 
s’identifier (à) 
ignorer 
imaginer 
imposer 
augmenter 
intégrer, s'intégrer 
introduire 
inventer 
juger 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
133 
Verbs: Higher ONLY 
English French 
to keep 
to keep, preserve 
to lead 
to lend 
to limit 
to live 
to look after, take care of 
to look like, resemble 
to lower, turn down 
to maintain 
to mean 
to note, notice 
to observe, watch 
to offer 
to own, have, possess 
to play (sports match); to argue, to be 
played (sports match) 
to please 
to present; to introduce yourself 
to prevent 
to produce 
to promise 
garder 
conserver 
mener 
prêter 
limiter 
vivre 
s'occuper de 
ressembler à 
baisser 
maintenir 
signifier 
noter 
observer 
offrir 
posséder 
disputer; se disputer 
plaire 
présenter; se présenter 
empêcher de 
produire 
promettre 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
134 
Verbs: Higher ONLY 
English French 
to propose, suggest 
to protest, show 
to provide, supply, give 
to pursue 
to rain* 
to reach 
to record 
to reflect 
to refuse 
to rely on 
to remember 
to replace, swap 
to represent 
to require, oblige, force 
to reuse 
to risk 
to see, notice 
to seem 
to separate 
to settle, set 
to shout 
to show concern (for) 
proposer 
manifester 
fournir 
poursuivre 
pleuvoir* 
atteindre 
enregistrer 
refléter 
refuser de 
se fier 
se souvenir (de) 
remplacer 
représenter 
obliger 
réutiliser 
risquer 
apercevoir 
sembler 
séparer; se séparer  
régler 
crier 
se soucier 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
135 
Verbs: Higher ONLY 
English French 
to sign 
to sit 
to situate, locate 
to smell; to feel 
to solve, resolve 
to spend (money) 
to steal, fly 
to stop 
to suffer, be in pain 
to support, sustain 
to surprise 
to take advantage, profit, make the most 
of 
to taste, try 
to teach 
to tell 
to thank 
to think about, reflect 
to threaten 
to tolerate 
to touch, affect 
to train 
signer 
s’asseoir 
situer, se situer 
sentir; se sentir 
résoudre 
dépenser 
voler 
cesser 
souffrir 
soutenir 
surprendre 
profiter de 
 
goûter^ 
enseigner 
raconter 
remercier 
réfléchir 
menacer 
tolérer 
toucher 
s'entraîner^ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
136 
Verbs: Higher ONLY 
English French 
to try, attempt 
to vote 
to warn 
to watch, keep an eye on 
to welcome 
to wish 
to worry 
tenter de 
voter 
prévenir 
surveiller 
accueillir 
souhaiter 
inquiéter, s'inquiéter 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
137 
Irregular inflected verb forms: Higher and Foundation 
 
English French  
(to) be être 
(I) am | (I) was 
(you) are | (you) were 
(she, he, it, one) is | (she, he, it, one) was 
| (we) are | (we) were 
(we) are | (we) were 
(you (pl, sing formal)) are | (you (pl, sing 
formal)) were 
(they) are | (they) were 
 
was | (have, has) been 
 
(I) was | (I) used to be | (you) were | 
(you) used to be 
(she, he, it, one) was | (she, he, it, one) 
used to be | (we) were | (we) used to be 
suis 
es 
est 
 
sommes 
êtes 
 
sont 
 
(aux) été 
 
étais 
 
était 
 
(to) be able to, can pouvoir 
(I) am able to, can | (you) are able to, can 
(she, he, it, one) is able to, can | (we) are 
able to, can 
(we) are able to, can 
(you (pl, sing formal)) are able to, can 
(they) are able to, can 
peux 
peut 
 
pouvons 
pouvez 
peuvent 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
138 
 
English French  
(to) believe croire 
(I, you) believe | believe! (sing informal) 
(she, he, it, one) believes | (we) believe 
believed | (have, has) believed 
crois | crois ! 
croit 
(aux) cru 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
139 
English French  
(to) do, make, go on/for + noun; (to) 
do + -ing, go + -ing, play + noun 
faire; faire de + noun 
(I, you) do, make, go (on/for) + noun | do!, 
make!, go (on/for) + noun! (sing informal); 
(I, you) do + -ing, go + -ing, play + noun | 
do + -ing!, go + -ing!, play + noun! (sing 
informal) 
(she, he, it, one) does, makes, goes (on/for) 
+ noun | (we) do, make, go (on/for) + noun 
| did, made, went (on/for) + noun | (have, 
has) done, (have, has) made, (have, has) 
gone (on/for) + noun; (she, he, it, one) does 
+ -ing, goes + -ing, plays + noun | (we) do + 
-ing, go + -ing, play + noun | did + -ing, 
went + -ing, played + noun | (have, has) 
done + -ing, (have, has) gone + -ing, (have, 
has) played + -ing 
(we) do, make, go (on/for) + noun; (we) do 
+ -ing, go + -ing, play + noun 
you (pl, sing formal) do, make, go (on/for) + 
noun | do!, make!, go (on/for) + noun! (pl, 
sing formal); you (pl, sing formal) do + -ing, 
go + -ing, play + noun | do + -ing!, go + -
ing!, play + noun! (pl, sing formal) 
(they) do, make, go (on/for) + noun; (they) 
do + -ing, go + -ing, play + noun  
(I, you) used to do, used to make, used to 
go (on/for) + noun; (I, you) used to do + -
ing, used to go + -ing, used to play + noun 
(she, he, it, one) used to do, used to make, 
used to go (on/for) + noun | (we) used to 
do, used to make, used to go (on/for) + 
noun; (she, he, it, one) used to do + -ing, 
used to go + -ing, used to play + noun | 
(we) used to do + -ing, used to go + -ing, 
used to play + noun 
fais | fais !; fais de + noun | fais de + 
noun ! 
 
 
 
fait | (aux) fait; fait de + noun | (aux) fait 
de + noun 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
faisons; faisons de + noun 
 
faites | faites !; faites de | faites de ! 
 
 
 
 
font; font de 
 
faisais; faisais de 
 
 
faisait; faisait de 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
140 
English French  
to drink boire 
(I, you) drink | drink! (sing informal) 
(she, he, it, one) drinks | (we) drink 
 
drank | (have, has) drunk 
bois | bois ! 
boit 
 
(aux) bu 
to follow suivre 
(I, you) follow | follow! (sing informal) 
(she, he, it, one) follows | (we) follow 
 
followed | (have, has) followed 
suis | suis ! 
suit 
 
(aux) suivi 
to go aller 
(I) go 
(you) go 
(she, he, it, one) goes | (we) go | go! (sing 
informal) 
(they) go 
vais 
vas 
va | va ! 
 
vont 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
141 
English French  
to have avoir 
(I) have  
(you) have 
(she, he, it, one) has |  (we) have 
(we) have  
(you (pl, sing formal)) have  
(they) have 
 
had | (have, has) had 
 
(I, you) had | (I, you) used to have 
(she, he, it, one) had | (she, he, it, one) 
used to have | (we) had | (we) used to 
have 
ai 
as 
a 
avons 
avez 
ont 
 
(aux) eu 
 
avais 
avait 
 
 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
142 
 
English French  
to have to, must devoir 
(I, you) have to, must  
(she, he, it, one) has to, must | (we) have 
to, must 
(we) have to, must 
(you (pl, sing formal)) have to, must 
(they) have to, must 
dois 
doit 
 
devons 
devez 
doivent 
to know, be familiar with connaître^ 
(I) know, am familiar with | (you) know, 
are familiar with | know! (sing informal) 
(she, he, it, one) knows, is familiar with | 
(we) know, are familiar with 
knew, was familiar with | (have, has) 
known, (have, has) been familiar with 
connais | connais ! 
 
connaît^ 
 
(aux) connu 
 
to know how to, can savoir 
(I, you) know how to, can 
(she, he, it, one) knows how to, can | (we) 
know how to, can 
(we) know how to, can 
(you (pl, sing formal)) know how to, can 
(they) know how to, can 
sais 
sait 
 
savons 
savez 
savent 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
143 
English French  
to laugh rire 
(I) laugh | (you) laugh | laugh! (sing 
informal) 
(she, he, it, one) laughs | (we) laugh 
 
laughed | (have, has) laughed 
ris | ris ! 
 
rit 
 
(aux) ri 
to put (in, on) mettre 
(I, you) put (in, on) 
(he, she, it, one) puts (in, on) 
 
put (in, on) | (has, have) put (in, on) 
mets 
met 
 
(aux) mis 
to read lire 
read | (has, have) read (aux) lu 
to receive recevoir 
(I, you) receive | receive! (sing informal) 
(she, he, it, one) receives | (we) receive 
 
received | (have, has) received 
reçois | reçois ! 
reçoit 
 
(aux) reçu 
to run courir 
(I, you) run | run! (sing informal) 
(she, he, it, one) runs | (we) run 
 
ran | (have, has) run 
cours | cours ! 
court 
 
(aux) couru 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
144 
English French  
to see voir 
(I, you) see | see! (sing informal) 
(she, he, it, one) sees | (we) see 
 
saw | (have, has) seen 
vois | vois ! 
voit 
 
(aux) vu 
to want (to) vouloir 
(I, you) want (to) 
(she, he, it, one) wants (to) | (we) want 
(to) 
(we) want (to) 
(you (pl, sing formal)) want (to) 
(they) want (to) 
 
(I) would like | (you) would like 
(she, he, it, one) would like | (we) would 
like 
veux 
veut 
 
voulons 
voulez 
veulent 
 
voudrais 
voudrait 
to write écrire 
(I, you) write | write! (sing informal) 
 
(she, he, it, one) writes | (we) write | 
wrote | (have, has) written 
écris | écris ! 
 
écrit | (aux) écrit 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
145 
Irregular inflected verb forms: Higher ONLY 
 
English French  
(to) be être 
(I) have been 
(you) have been 
(she, he, it, one) has been | (we) have 
been 
(we) have been 
(you (pl, sing formal)) have been 
(they) have been 
 
(I) would be | (you) would be 
(she, he, it, one) would be | (we (informal) 
would be 
 
(I) will be | (I) am going to be 
(you) will be | (you) are going to be 
(she, he, it, one) will be | (she, he, it, one) 
is going to be | (we) will be | (we) are 
going to be 
 
be…! (sing informal) 
be…! (pl, sing formal) 
 
being 
suis 
es 
est 
 
sommes 
êtes 
sont 
 
serais 
serait  
 
 
serai 
seras 
sera 
 
 
 
sois… ! 
soyez… ! 
 
étant 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
146 
 
English French  
to be able to, can pouvoir 
was/were able to, could | (have, has) 
been able to 
(aux) pu 
to be quiet, keep quiet se taire 
was quiet | kept quiet (aux) tu 
to believe croire 
(I, you) have been believing 
(she, he, it, one) has been believing | (we) 
have been believing 
crois 
croit 
 
to complain se plaindre 
complained | (has, have) complained (aux) plaint 
to discover découvrir 
discovered | (has, have) discovered (aux) découvert 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
147 
English French  
to do faire 
(I, you) have been doing, have been 
making, have been going on/for + noun; 
(I, you) have been doing + -ing, have been 
going + -ing, have been playing + noun 
(she, he, it, one) has been doing, has 
been making, has been going on/for + 
noun | (we) have been doing, have been 
making, have been going on/for + noun; 
(she, he, it, one) has been doing + -ing, 
has been going + -ing, has been playing + 
noun | (we) have been doing + -ing, have 
been going + -ing, have been playing + 
noun  
(we) have been doing, have been making, 
have been going on/for + noun | let's 
do!, let's make!, let's go on/for + noun!; 
(we) have been doing + -ing, have been 
going + -ing, have been playing | let's do 
+ -ing!, let's go + -ing!, let’s play + noun! 
(you (pl, sing formal)) have been doing, 
have been making, have been going 
on/for + noun | do!, make!, go on/for + 
noun! (pl, sing formal); (you (pl, sing 
formal)) have been doing + -ing, have 
been going + -ing, have been playing + 
noun | do + -ing!, go + -ing!, play + noun! 
(pl, sing formal) 
fais | fais !; fais de + noun | fais de + 
noun ! 
 
 
fait | (aux) fait; fait de + noun | (aux) fait 
de + noun 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
faisons | faisons !; faisons de + noun | 
faisons de + noun ! 
 
 
 
 
faites | faites !; faites de | faites de ! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
148 
English French  
to do faire 
(they) have been doing, have been 
making, have been going on/for + noun; 
(they) have been doing + -ing, have been 
going + -ing, have been playing + noun  
(I, you) would do, would make, would go 
on/for + noun; (I, you) would do + -ing, 
would go + -ing, would play + noun  
(she, he, it, one) would do, would make, 
would go on/for + noun | (we) would do, 
would make, would go on/for + noun; 
(she, he, it, one) would do + -ing, would 
go + -ing, would play + noun | (we) would 
do + -ing, would go + -ing, would play + 
noun 
(I) will do, will make, will go on/for + noun 
| (I) am going to do, am going to make, 
am going to go on/for + noun; (I) will do + 
-ing, will go + -ing, will play + noun | (I) am 
going to do + -ing, am going to go + -ing, 
am going to play + noun 
(you) will do, will make, will go on/for + 
noun | (you) are going to do, are going to 
make, are going to go on/for + noun; 
(you) will do + -ing, will go + -ing, will play 
+ noun | (you) are going to do + -ing, are 
going to go + -ing, are going to play + 
noun 
font; font de 
 
 
 
ferais; ferais de 
 
 
ferait; ferait de 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ferai; ferai de 
 
 
 
 
 
feras; feras de 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
149 
English French  
to do faire 
(she, he, it, one) will do, will make, will go 
on/for + noun | (she, he, it, one) is going 
to do, is going to make, is going to go 
on/for + noun | (we) will do, will make, 
will go on/for + noun | (we) are going to 
do, are going to make, are going to go 
on/for + noun; (she, he, it, one) will do + -
ing, will go + -ing, will play + noun| (she, 
he, it, one) is going to do + -ing, is going 
to go + -ing, is going to play + noun | (we) 
will do + -ing, will go + -ing, will make + 
noun| (we) are going to do + -ing, are 
going to go + -ing, are going to play + 
noun 
doing, making, going on/for + noun; 
doing + -ing, going + -ing, playing + noun 
fera; fera de 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
faisant; faisant de 
to drink boire 
(I, you) have been drinking 
(she, he, it, one) has been drinking | (we) 
have been drinking 
bois 
boit 
 
to follow suivre 
(I, you) have been following 
(she, he, it, one) has been following | (we) 
have been following 
suis 
suit 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
150 
English French  
to go aller 
(I) have been going 
(you) have been going 
(she, he, it, one) has been going | (we) 
have been going 
(they) have been going 
 
(I) would go | (you) would go 
(she, he, it, one) would go | (we) would go 
 
(I) will go | (I) am going to go 
(you) will go | (you) are going to go 
(she, he, it, one) will go | (she, he, it, one) 
is going to go | (we) will go | (we) are 
going to go 
vais 
vas 
va 
 
vont 
 
irais 
irait 
 
irai 
iras 
ira 
 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
151 
English French  
to have avoir 
(I) have been having 
(you) have been having 
(she, he, it, one) has been having | (we) 
have been having 
(we) have been having 
(you (pl, sing formal)) have been having 
(they) have been having 
 
(I, you) would have 
(she, he, it, one) would have | (we) would 
have 
 
(I) will have | (I) am going to have 
(you) will have | (you) are going to have 
(she, he, it, one) will have | (she, he, it, 
one) is going to have | (we) will have | 
(we) are going to have 
 
having 
ai 
as 
a 
 
avons 
avez 
ont 
 
aurais 
aurait 
 
 
aurai 
auras 
aura 
 
 
 
ayant 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
152 
English French  
to have to devoir 
(I, you) have been having to 
(she, he, it, one) has been having to | 
(we) have been having to 
(we) have been having to 
(you (pl, sing formal)) have been having to 
(they) have been having to, must 
 
had to | (have, has) had to 
dois 
doit 
 
devons 
devez 
doivent 
 
(aux) dû 
to know how to, can savoir 
knew how to, could | (have, has) known 
how to, (have, has) been able to 
(aux) su 
to laugh rire 
(I, you) have been laughing  
(she, he, it, one) has been laughing | (we) 
have been laughing 
ris 
rit 
 
to rain pleuvoir 
(it) rained (il a) plu 
to receive recevoir 
(I, you) have been receiving 
(she, he, it, one) has been receiving | (we) 
have been receiving 
reçois 
reçoit 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
153 
English French  
to run courir 
(I, you) have been running 
(she, he, it, one) has been running |(we) 
have been running 
cours 
court 
 
to see voir 
(I, you) have been seeing 
(she, he, it, one) has been seeing | (we) 
have been seeing 
vois 
voit 
 
to want (to) vouloir 
(I, you) have been wanting (to) 
(she, he, it, one) has been wanting (to) | 
(we) have been wanting (to) 
(we) have been wanting (to) 
(you (pl, sing formal)) have been wanting 
(to) 
(they) have been wanting (to) 
 
wanted | (have, has) wanted 
veux 
veut 
 
voulons 
voulez 
 
veulent 
 
(aux) voulu 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
154 
Appendix 2: Grammar 
The following grammar list is the full grammar content that will be assessed by this 
qualification, in both receptive and productive tasks, at each tier.  
Nouns, pronouns and determiners 
 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
Forming feminine nouns 
• Add -e 
• No change 
• -eur ➜ -rice / -euse 
• -en ➜ -enne 
 
Forming plural nouns 
• Add –s 
• Add –x to masculine nouns ending in -
(e)au, -eu 
• No change for nouns ending in –s,  -x 
 
Infinitives used as nouns 
As equivalent of –ing (gerund) in English 
(e.g. Manger trop de fastfood est mauvais 
pour la santé) 
 
Determiners 
Articles 
• Agreement of definite and indefinite 
articles with noun for gender and 
number 
Determiners 
Articles 
• Partitive articles with uncountable 
nouns (e.g. du lait) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
155 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
• le/la ➜ l’ before singular nouns that 
start with a vowel or h muet 
• Functions of definite and indefinite 
articles, including where their use or 
omission differs from English (e.g. La 
santé est importante; le mercredi)  
• Use of definite article before an 
adjective to form a noun, including 
uninflected adjectives for languages 
and addition of a capital letter where 
the resulting noun is a nationality (e.g. 
seul ➜ le seul; anglais ➜ l’anglais, 
français ➜ les Français)  
• Partitive articles when distinguishing 
between parts and wholes (e.g. un 
pain vs du pain); after jouer with 
musical instruments (e.g. jouer du 
piano); after faire with sports (e.g. je 
fais de la danse) 
• Use of de (and omission of article) 
before nouns following a verb in 
negative and after expressions of 
quantity (e.g. je n’ai pas de stylo; 
beaucoup de choses) 
• Contraction of de to d’ before a word 
beginning with a vowel (e.g. beaucoup 
d’animaux) 
 
Other determiners 
• Demonstrative adjectives (ce, cet, cette, 
ces) 
• Use of article with dans; omission of 
article with en (e.g. dans le restaurant; 
en France) 
 
Other determiners  
• Use of negative adjective determiner 
aucun(e) (e.g. je n’ai aucune idée) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
156 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
• Possessive adjectives (mon, ma, mes, 
ton, ta, tes etc.) 
• Interrogative adjectives (quel, quelle, 
quels, quelles) 
• Agreement patterns for indefinite 
adjectives (e.g. chaque, plusieurs, 
autre(s), tout(e)(s), tous) 
Pronouns 
• Subject pronouns, their agreement 
and position 
• Position of all direct object pronouns 
listed at Foundation tier, before verb, 
not juxtaposed with indirect object 
pronouns (e.g. je l’ai envoyé à mon père 
but not je le lui ai envoyé) 
• Position of all indirect object pronouns 
listed at Foundation tier, before verb, 
not juxtaposed with direct object 
pronouns (e.g. il me donne un livre but 
not il me le donne) 
• Position of reflexive pronouns (me, te, 
se, nous, vous, se) before verb 
• me ➜ m’, te ➜ t’, le/la ➜ l’, se ➜ s’ 
before a vowel or h muet  
• Use of all emphatic pronouns listed at 
Foundation tier, including after 
prepositions 
• Use of relative pronoun qui in subject 
relative clauses 
Pronouns 
• Use of pronouns y and en before verb 
(e.g. j’y vais, j’en veux), not juxtaposed 
with other object pronouns except in 
the phrases ‘il y en a’, ‘il y en avait’ and 
‘il y en aura’ 
• Position of all additional direct object 
pronouns listed at Higher tier, before 
verb, not juxtaposed with indirect 
object pronouns (e.g. tu les montres à 
tes amis but not tu les leur montres) 
• Position of all additional indirect object 
pronouns listed at Higher tier, before 
verb, not juxtaposed with direct object 
pronouns (e.g. elle vous achète des 
cadeaux but not elle vous les achète) 
• Use of all additional emphatic 
pronouns listed at Higher tier, 
including after prepositions 
• Negative subject pronouns personne 
ne + verb and rien ne + verb as 
equivalent of English ‘nobody + verb’ 
and ‘nothing + verb’ 
• Relative clauses using pronouns où 
and que 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
157 
Verbs 
 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
Negation 
Syntax of negation with: 
• ne…pas 
• ne…jamais 
• ne…rien (as equivalent of ‘not verb 
anything’ and ‘verb nothing’) 
• ne…personne (as equivalent of ‘not verb 
anyone/anybody’ and ‘verb nobody’) 
Negation 
Syntax of negation with: 
• ne…plus 
• ne…ni… (ni …) 
• ne… pas encore 
• ne…que 
Interrogatives and asking questions 
Interrogatives expressed through: 
• Intonation with SV word order, 
including when followed by a question 
word (qui, quand, quoi, pourquoi, 
comment, combien, où) (e.g. il vient 
quand?; tu veux aller où?) 
• Est-ce que + SV word order (e.g. est-ce 
que tu veux aller au cinéma?), including 
when followed by a question word (qu’, 
quand, pourquoi, comment, combien, 
où: e.g. quand est-ce qu’il vient?; où est-
ce que tu veux aller?) 
• Question word (que/qu’, quand, 
pourquoi, comment, combien, où) + 
VS word order (e.g. quand vient-il?; où 
veux-tu aller?) 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
158 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
 Passive voice  
In the present using par 
Impersonal verbs 
• il y a; il y avait; il y aura 
• il fait + adjective 
• il + weather expressions 
• il faut + infinitive 
• il est for telling the time 
Impersonal verbs 
• il est + adjective + de 
• il manque + noun 
• il vaut mieux + infinitive 
• il vaut la peine de + infinitive 
Reflexive verbs 
1st, 2nd and 3rd persons singular and 
plural (using reflexive pronouns me, te, se, 
nous, vous, se) with reflexive and 
reciprocal meanings (e.g. je m’habille; nous 
nous levons tôt; ils se donnent des cadeaux). 
Reflexive verbs are to be known in all the 
same tenses as non-reflexive verbs as 
applicable to each tier. 
 
 Periphrastic time expressions 
• être en train de 
• venir de 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
159 
Verbs: Tenses 
 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
Present 
Present indicative, as equivalent of: 
• English simple (I walk) 
• English continuous (I am walking)  
• English simple and continuous with 
time adverbs to express the future 
(the holidays start tomorrow; I am 
working this evening) 
 
1st, 2nd and 3rd persons singular and 
plural: 
• -er verbs 
• choisir, partir, venir, ouvrir and other –ir 
verbs following the same four patterns 
• entendre, prendre, traduire and other –
re verbs following the same three 
patterns 
• aller 
• avoir (including avoir + noun as 
equivalent of English ‘be + adjective’, 
e.g. j’ai faim) 
• être 
• faire 
• mettre 
Present 
Present indicative with depuis, as 
equivalent of ‘have been –ing for’ + time 
period 
 
1st, 2nd and 3rd persons singular and 
plural: 
• connaître, écrire and other verbs 
following the same two patterns 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
160 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
• devoir + infinitive 
• pouvoir + infinitive 
• savoir + infinitive 
• vouloir + infinitive 
 
1st, 2nd and 3rd persons singular only: 
• boire 
• connaître 
• courir 
• croire 
• écrire 
• recevoir 
• rire 
• suivre 
• voir 
Perfect 
As equivalent of: 
• English simple past (I walked, he 
went) 
• present perfect (I have walked, he 
has gone) 
 
• 1st, 2nd and 3rd persons singular and 
plural, including past participle 
formation and agreement of past 
Perfect 
1st, 2nd and 3rd persons singular and 
plural, including past participle 
formation: 
• connaître, écrire and other verbs 
following the same two patterns 
• devoir + infinitive 
• pouvoir + infinitive 
• savoir + infinitive 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
161 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
participles with preceding direct 
objects: 
• -er verbs 
• choisir, partir, venir, ouvrir and other –ir 
verbs following the same four patterns 
• entendre, prendre, traduire and other –
re verbs following the same three 
patterns 
• aller 
• avoir (including avoir + noun as 
equivalent of English ‘be + adjective’) 
• être 
• faire 
• lire 
• mettre 
• pleuvoir (il form only) 
• vouloir + infinitive 
• découvrir 
• se plaindre 
• convaincre 
• taire 
 
Imperfect 
As equivalent of: 
• habitual (I used to walk) 
• continuous (I was walking) 
 
1st, 2nd and 3rd persons singular only, 
excluding ‘you’ formal: 
• -er verbs 
• choisir, partir, venir, ouvrir and other –ir 
verbs following the same four patterns 
Imperfect 
1st, 2nd and 3rd persons plural: 
• -er verbs 
• choisir, partir, venir, ouvrir and other –ir 
verbs following the same four patterns 
• entendre, prendre, traduire and other –
re verbs following the same three 
patterns 
• aller 
• avoir (including avoir + noun as 
equivalent of English ‘be + adjective’) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
162 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
• entendre, prendre, traduire and other –
re verbs following the same three 
patterns 
• aller 
• avoir (including avoir + noun as 
equivalent of English ‘be + adjective’) 
• être 
• faire 
• être 
• faire 
1st, 2nd and 3rd persons singular and 
plural: 
• connaître, écrire and other verbs 
following the same two patterns 
Periphrastic future 
Aller + infinitive, as equivalent of: 
• ‘will’ + verb (I will walk) 
• ‘be going to’ + verb (I am going to walk) 
 
1st, 2nd and 3rd persons singular and 
plural: 
• -er verbs 
• choisir, partir, venir, ouvrir and other –ir 
verbs following the same four patterns 
• entendre, prendre, traduire and other –
re verbs following the same three 
patterns 
• aller 
• avoir (including avoir + noun as 
equivalent of English ‘be + adjective’) 
• être 
• faire 
Periphrastic future 
1st, 2nd and 3rd persons singular and 
plural: 
• connaître, écrire and other verbs 
following the same two patterns 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
163 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
 Inflectional future 
As equivalent of: 
• ‘will’ + verb (I will walk) 
• ‘be going to’ + verb (I am going to walk) 
 
1st, 2nd and 3rd persons singular and 
plural: 
• -er verbs 
 
• 1st, 2nd and 3rd persons singular only: 
• aller 
• avoir (including avoir + noun as 
equivalent of English ‘be + adjective’) 
• être 
• faire 
Conditional  
1st, 2nd and 3rd persons singular only, 
excluding ‘you’ formal: 
• vouloir (meaning ‘would like’) 
 
Conditional 
1st, 2nd and 3rd persons singular and 
plural: 
• -er verbs 
 
1st, 2nd and 3rd persons singular only: 
• aller 
• avoir (including avoir + noun as 
equivalent of English ‘be + adjective’) 
• être 
• faire 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
164 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
Imperative 
2nd person singular and plural only; not 
reflexive: 
• -er verbs 
• choisir, partir, venir, ouvrir and other –ir 
verbs following the same four patterns 
• entendre, prendre, traduire and other –
re verbs following the same three 
patterns 
• aller 
• faire 
 
Imperative 
2nd person singular and plural; not 
reflexive: 
• être 
• connaître, écrire and other verbs 
following the same two patterns 
1st person plural, not reflexive (meaning 
‘Let’s + verb’): 
• -er verbs 
• choisir, partir, venir, ouvrir and other –ir 
verbs following the same four patterns 
• entendre, prendre, traduire and other –
re verbs following the same three 
patterns 
 Present participle 
After en, including adjectival use where 
relevant: 
-er verbs 
• choisir, partir, venir, ouvrir and other –ir 
verbs following the same four patterns 
• entendre, prendre, traduire and other –
re verbs following the same three 
patterns 
• connaître, écrire and other verbs 
following the same two patterns 
• avoir 
• être 
• faire 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
165 
Adjectives 
 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
Agreement in gender 
• Add final –e 
• No change with adjectives ending in 
mute –e 
• -x ➜ -se  
• -el ➜ -elle  
• -en ➜ -enne  
• -f ➜ -ve  
• -er ➜ -ère 
 
Agreement in number 
• Add final –s 
• No change for masculine forms 
already ending in -s and -x  
• -al ➜ -aux for masculine adjectives 
 
Position 
• Mostly after nouns 
• Before nouns, sometimes with a 
specific meaning: ancien; bon; cher; 
dernier; grand; nouveau; propre; seul 
 
Regular comparative adjectival structures 
(e.g. plus…que, moins…que, aussi…que) 
Regular superlative adjectival structures 
(e.g. le meilleur, la meilleure, les meilleur(e)s) 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
166 
Adverbs 
 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
Position of adverbs of time (e.g. tôt), 
manner (e.g. vite), frequency (e.g. souvent), 
place (e.g. ici) 
 
Regular comparative adverbial structures 
(e.g. plus…que, moins…que, aussi…que) 
Regular superlative adverbial structures 
(le mieux, le pire) 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
167 
Prepositions 
 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
Use of à / de after some verbs or 
adjectives, before a noun or second 
verb(e.g. commencer à chanter; décider de 
faire; dépendre de ses parents; facile à voir; 
important de dire) 
 
Use of en / à with proper nouns for places  
Contraction of definite article when used 
with à and de to agree with the gender 
and number 
 
De to indicate possession  
Pour / sans + infinitive avant de + infinitive 
après avoir + past participle 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
168 
Derivational morphology 
These grammar rules are primarily required for the Reading exam, as derived forms of 
any base words listed in our vocabulary list (for example, ‘cinquième’ as a derived form of 
‘cinq’), or base words for any derived forms in our vocabulary list (for example, ‘particulier’ 
as a derived form of ‘particulièrement’), may usually only appear in the Reading exam. 
Only one affix from this section will be applied to a base word to create a derived form. 
For example, using the rules below we may add the prefix im- to patient to create 
impatient, or we may add the suffix -emment to the stem of patient to create the adverb 
patiemment, but we will not apply both prefix and suffix to create impatiemment. Affixes 
from the rest of the grammar list above, for example to denote gender and number, 
may be applied to derived forms however – i.e. we may use impatiente, impatients or 
impatientes as well as impatient. 
 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
Prefixes 
Adding in- or im- to adjectives, adverbs, 
and nouns, only where the English 
equivalent is un- or in-, or means 
‘opposite of’ (e.g. également ➜ 
inégalement; sécurité ➜ insécurité; possible 
➜ impossible) 
 
Suffixes 
• Ordinal numbers created by adding     
-ième (or by dropping -e and adding     
-ième) to cardinal numbers 
• Adjectives created by adding -able or   
-eable to the verb stem, only where the 
English equivalent is -able or –ible (e.g. 
changer ➜ changeable) 
• Nouns created by adding -ion or -ation 
to the verb stem, only where the 
English equivalent is -ion or –ation (e.g. 
préparer ➜ préparation) 
Suffixes 
• Agent nouns created by adding -eur or 
-ateur to a verb stem, e.g. porter ➜ 
porteur 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
169 
Foundation + Higher Higher only 
• Only where the English equivalent is   
–ly, adverbs created by adding -ment 
to the feminine form of adjectives (e.g. 
première ➜ premièrement) or by 
dropping -ant(e) /-ent(e) from an 
adjective and adding -amment /            
-emment (e.g. patient ➜ patiemment) 
 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
170 
Sound-symbol correspondences (SSCs) 
The list which follows specifies key differences in sound-symbol correspondences (SSCs) 
between French and English which students will need to learn at GCSE to be able to 
read out loud (Read aloud task in Paper 1, Speaking) and transcribe (Dictation task in 
Paper 2, Listening) with sufficient accuracy at this level, along with an example word 
from our vocabulary list containing the SSC. It is not an exhaustive list of all the SSCs in 
the French language. Where a letter or combination of letters is pronounced (or a sound 
spelt) in approximately the same way in French as in English, it is not listed. 
Students will be expected to pronounce words with stress patterns that allow their 
speech to be clear and comprehensible. 
The use of hyphens indicates the position of the letters in a word, when position is 
relevant to the sound: xx- (at the beginning of a word); -xx- (in the middle of a word); -xx 
(at the end of a word).  
 
Sound-symbol correspondence Example 
silent final consonant tout 
a aller 
i/y il/stylo 
eu peu 
e je 
au/eau/closed o/ô autre/eau/nos/tôt 
ou vous 
u tu 
silent final e elle 
é/-er/-ez été/parler/avez 
en/an/em/am entendre/dans/temps/jambe 
on/om mon/combien 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
171 
Sound-symbol correspondence Example 
ain/in/aim/im pain/fin/faim/important 
è/ê/ai collège/être/faire 
oi/oy moi/moyen 
ch cher 
ç/soft 'c' reçu/cette 
qu qui 
j jouer 
-tion pollution 
-ien bien 
s-liaison vous avez 
t-liaison on peut aller 
n-liaison on a 
x-liaison deux heures 
h hôtel 
un un 
-gn- gagner 
r rien 
open eu/œu leur/sœur 
open o notre 
-s- faisons 
th théâtre 
-ill-/-ille billet/famille 
-aill-/ail travailler/travail 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
172 
Appendix 3: Names of people used in 
assessments  
Assessments in this qualification will only use names taken from the following list, which 
is representative of the most popular French names in France and across the French 
speaking world, in the current GCSE level age group, as well as some names for older 
adults. 
We hope students will all become familiar with these names during the course of 
teaching, so that all students come to the exams with the same knowledge and 
understanding. By committing to only use these names in our assessments, we aim to 
remove a barrier to understanding and avoid possible confusion over whether a proper 
noun is referring to a person or place. Ideally, if all students are familiar with these 
names before starting an assessment, all their comprehension focus can be on 
understanding the assessed content of the paper. 
 
14-16-year-old girls’ 
names 
14-16-year-old boys’ 
names 
14-16-year-old names 
used by both boys and 
girls 
Ana Ahmed Alex 
Chloé Alessandro  Axel(le) 
Clara Clément Camille 
Diane Dorian Charlie 
Emma  Enzo Gabriel(lle) 
Eva Hugo Louis(e) 
Fathia Jules Maxime 
Fatima  Louis Morgan(e) 
Inès Lucas Sacha 
Jade Luis Toni 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
173 
14-16-year-old girls’ 
names 
14-16-year-old boys’ 
names 
14-16-year-old names 
used by both boys and 
girls 
Léa Mathis   
Lola Mehdi  
Lucie Mohamed  
Manon Nathan  
Maria Rachid  
Marie Raphaël   
Myriam Sofiane  
Nadia Théo  
Sarah  Thomas  
Yasmina Tom  
Zoé Yanis  
 
Adult male names Adult female names 
Pierre  Sabrina  
Richard Sylvie 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
174 
Appendix 4: Transferable skills 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently flagged 
the need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable them to 
respond with confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the world of 
work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines skills, or 
competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that can be 
learned and that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform an activity 
or task and can be built upon and extended through learning.’ [
3F
1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected and 
evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this process, 
we identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the most evidence-
based and robust skills framework. We adapted the framework slightly to include the 
Program for International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT Literacy and Collaborative 
Problem Solving (CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves: [
4F
2]  
Cognitive skills 
• Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
• Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
• Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve 
general cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
• ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and communicate. [
5F
3]  
 
 
 
[1]  OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012) 
[2]  Koenig J A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop (National 
Academies Press, 2011) 
[3]  PISA – The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy (2011) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
175 
Interpersonal skills 
• Communication – active listening, oral communication, written communication, 
assertive communication and non-verbal communication. 
• Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, service 
orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and negotiation. 
• Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared 
understanding, taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team 
organisation. 
Intrapersonal skills 
• Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work 
stress, adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, and 
physical adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
• Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual 
teams, work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and able 
to acquire new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher 
education, as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the teaching 
and learning of this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning materials, 
developed with stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in French 
Specification – Issue 2 – May 2025 © Pearson Education Limited 2025 
176 
Appendix 5: Codes 
Type of code Use of code Code 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for 
performance tables is assigned a 
discount code indicating the subject 
area to which it belongs. 
Discount codes are published by DfE in 
the RAISEonline library 
(www.raiseonline.org) 
FKF 
 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an 
Ofqual Regulated Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) code. 
The RQF code is known as a 
Qualification Number (QN). This is the 
code that features in the DfE Section 96 
and on the LARA as being eligible for 
16–18 and 19+ funding, and is to be 
used for all qualification funding 
purposes. The QN will appear on 
students’ final certification 
documentation. 
The QN for this 
qualification is: 
610/2718/2 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to 
enter students for a qualification. 
Centres will need to use the entry codes 
only when claiming students’ 
qualifications. 
GCSE – 1FR1 
 
Paper/Component 
codes 
These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be 
entered for individual 
components/papers. 
Non-examination 
assessment: Paper 1: 
1FR1/1F and 1H 
Paper 2: 1FR1/2F and 2H 
Paper 3: 1FR1/3F and 3H 
Paper 4: 1FR1/4F and 4H 
 
DB060524 GQ000023 GCSE_FRENCH_SPECIFICATION_2024_ISSUE_1.DOCX.1–184/3 

 
 
May 2025 
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel,  
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com 
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited 
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office: 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL.  
VAT Reg No GB 278 53712 