This dra/f_t   qualiﬁ  cation has not yet been accredited by Ofqual. It is published to enable teachers to have early sight of our 
proposed approach to Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9 - 1) in Music (1MU0). Further changes may be required 
and no assurance can be given at this time that the proposed qualiﬁ  cation will be made available in its current form, or 
that it will be accredited in time for ﬁ  rst teaching in September 2016 and ﬁ  rst award in 2018.
Speciﬁ  cation
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9 - 1) in Biblical Hebrew (1BH0)
First teaching from September 2018
First certiﬁ  cation from June 2020 Issue 2
GCSE (9-1)
Biblical Hebrew

 
About Pearson 
We are the world’s leading learning company operating in countries all around the world. We 
provide content, assessment and digital services to learners, educational institutions, employers, 
governments and other partners globally. We are committed to helping equip learners with the 
skills they need to enhance their employability prospects and to succeed in the changing world of 
work. We believe that wherever learning flourishes so do people. 
References to third party materials made in this specification are made in good faith. Pearson does 
not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may be subject to 
change, or any opinions expressed therein. (Materials may include textbooks, journals, magazines 
and other publications and websites.) 
 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho 
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
 
ISBN 978 1 446 94707 4 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2023 
Summary of Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) 
in Biblical Hebrew specification 
Issue 2 changes 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this current 
issue  
Page 
number 
The set text for the examinations in 2026–2028 are: 
Set text 1: Genesis – Joseph’s rise to power 
● Chapter 41
● Chapter 42
● Chapter 43
Set text 2: II Kings – the miracles of Elisha 
● Chapter 4
● Chapter 5
● Chapter 6
● Chapter 7
9 
I
f you need further information on these changes or what they mean, contact us via our website at: 
qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/contact-us.html. 
 
Contents 
1 Introduction 2 
Why choose the Pearson Edexcel GCSE in Biblical Hebrew? 2 
Qualification at a glance 3 
2 Subject content and assessment information 5 
Component 1: Language 6 
Component 2: Literature 9 
Assessment Objectives 12 
3 Administration and general information 13 
Entries 13 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special consideration and 
malpractice 13 
Student recruitment and progression 16 
Appendix 1: Vocabulary list 19 
Appendix 2: Grammar list 40 
Appendix 3: Grammatical terminology 42 
Appendix 4: Restricted vocabulary list for the translation of English 
sentences into Biblical Hebrew 46 
Appendix 5: Restricted grammar list for the translation of English 
sentences into Biblical Hebrew 51 
Appendix 6: Command words 52 
Appendix 7: The context for the development of this qualification 53 
Appendix 8: Transferable skills 55 
Appendix 9: Codes 56 
 
 

 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
2 
 
1 Introduction 
Why choose the Pearson Edexcel GCSE in 
Biblical Hebrew? 
We have designed our qualification to offer a unique and exciting course of study that will 
engage students in the study of the language and literature of Biblical Hebrew. 
Clear and coherent structure – our qualification has a straightforward structure, with two 
components, assessed through two externally-examined papers. 
Carefully selected set texts – we have worked closely with teachers and expert 
practitioners to ensure that we include interesting and relevant texts for students. 
Clear and straightforward question papers – we have designed our question papers to 
be clear and accessible for students. Our written mark schemes are straightforward in 
making the requirements clear. 
Supports progression to further study – this GCSE is designed to give students a solid 
introduction to the study of Biblical Hebrew, they can pursue it in more depth at A Level or at 
university. 
Get help and support 
Our subject advisor service is available to answer questions on the qualification, you can 
contact the service via TeachingLanguages@pearson.com 
Learn more at qualifications.pearson.com 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
3 
Qualification at a glance 
Content and assessment overview 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew consists of two 
externally-examined components. 
Students must complete all assessment in May/June in any single year. 
 
Component 1: Language  (*Paper code: 1BH0/01) 
Written examination: 2 hours 
50% of the qualification 
100 marks 
Content overview 
Students will: 
● read and understand unseen passages of Biblical Hebrew 
● translate text from unseen passages into English. 
Students have an option to: 
● show understanding of grammatical structures of Biblical Hebrew 
or 
● translate simple sentences from English into pointed (vocalised) Biblical Hebrew. 
Assessment overview 
● The question paper consists of two sections: Section A and B. 
● Students will be provided with a Source Booklet containing unseen passages from the 
Hebrew Bible (these will not be taken from the set texts from Component 2). There will be 
two unseen passages for Section A and three unseen passages for Section B. 
● All questions assess Assessment Objective 1 (AO1) **. 
Section A: Comprehension (50 marks) 
For each unseen passage: 
● students are required to answer a number of short-response compulsory comprehension 
questions (15 marks) 
● students then have the choice to either: 
o answer grammar questions on the unseen passage (10 marks) 
 or 
o translate three sentences in English into pointed Biblical Hebrew (these will be 
translated sentences taken from the Hebrew Bible) (10 marks).  
Section B: Translation (50 marks) 
Students are required to translate from Biblical Hebrew into English based on three unseen 
passages. 
● The first question requires the translation of words or short phrases from one unseen 
passage into English (15 marks). 
● The second question requires the translation of one short unseen passage into English  
(15 marks). 
● The third question requires the translation of a longer unseen passage into English  
(20 marks). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
4 
 
Component 2: Literature  (*Paper code: 1BH0/02)  
Written examination: 2 hours 
50% of the qualification 
100 marks 
Content overview 
Students will study two set texts to: 
● show their understanding of content and the context 
● show knowledge and understanding of their key grammatical and literary features 
● analyse, evaluate and respond to their content 
● translate text from the set texts into English. 
Assessment overview 
● The question paper consists of three sections: Section A, B and C. 
● Students must answer all questions. 
● Students will be provided with a Source Booklet containing five passages from each of the 
two set texts. 
● This paper assesses AO2 and AO3**. 
Section A: Set text 1 (44 marks) and Section B: Set Text 2 (44 marks) 
In each section, students are required to: 
● answer questions on the first three passages (30 marks). These questions assess 
AO2 and AO3 
● translate the fourth passage from Biblical Hebrew into English (5 marks). This question 
assesses AO2 
● answer one extended-open response question based on the fifth passage (9 marks).  
This question assesses AO3. 
Section C (12 marks) 
● One extended-open response question that will require students to compare and contrast 
ideas, values and social practices from across both texts. 
● This question assesses AO2 and AO3. 
 
*See Appendix 9: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to this 
qualification. 
**Please see the Assessment Objectives section for a description of these Assessment 
Objective(s). 
Additional information  
All answers must be written in English, with the following exceptions, which may be written 
in Biblical Hebrew where relevant: 
● roots 
● individual Hebrew letters 
● words or short phrases from the passages, if the Hebrew is necessary for a complete 
illustration of the answer. 
Answers in Biblical Hebrew must be written using square script (the ‘block’ system). 
Transliteration of Biblical Hebrew words is acceptable only for proper nouns. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
5 
2 Subject content and assessment 
information 
Qualification aims and objectives 
The aims and objectives of this qualification are to enable students to: 
● develop and deploy their knowledge of vocabulary, morphology and syntax in order to 
read, understand and interpret the ancient language 
● develop their knowledge and understanding of ancient literature, values and society 
through the study of original texts 
● select, analyse and evaluate evidence to draw informed conclusions from the literature 
studied to: 
o demonstrate knowledge and understanding of the historical, literary and cultural 
context as described in the set text 
o identify and appreciate its literary form and impact on the reader 
o develop and apply their critical, analytical and reflective skills to evaluate evidence 
● deploy their knowledge and understanding of the ancient language to deepen their 
understanding of other languages 
● relate their knowledge and understanding of the ancient world to other disciplines 
● develop research and analytical skills which will empower them to become independent 
students and enquirers, equipping them for further study in arts, humanities and sciences. 
Cultural consideration 
In this specification and in the assessment materials, Pearson has followed the Orthodox 
Jewish tradition, for example in the presentation of Divine names. Centres are free to follow 
this in their teaching or approach the qualification from a Christian or any other perspective. 
However, students need to be made aware that the assessment materials (Question Papers 
and Source Booklets) will be presented following the Orthodox Jewish tradition. Teachers 
also need to be aware that the mark schemes will also be presented following this tradition 
and examiners will be briefed to accept correct non-Orthodox Jewish responses. 
A further note on the presentation of Divine names: 
● the four-letter Divine name will be written יי  
● other Divine names will be written as they appear in the Hebrew Bible, except that a dash 
will be added inbetween the first and second letters, as follows 
אֱ-�, אֲ-דֹנָי  ,צְ  -בָאוֹת  ,אֵ  -ל , שַׁ -דַי   
● when written in English the Divine names will be written as G-d, L-rd. 
Centres should be aware that Hebrew verse counting will be used wherever relevant,  
for example in listing the set texts. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
6 
Component 1: Language 
Overview 
The purpose of studying this component is for students to develop their knowledge and 
understanding of the language of Biblical Hebrew and to demonstrate linguistic competence. 
Students will develop their knowledge and understanding through the study of vocabulary 
and grammatical structures, using this knowledge to understand the meaning of unseen 
passages of Biblical Hebrew. Through studying this component, students will gain the ability 
to read and understand Biblical Hebrew texts in their original language. 
Content 
Skills 
Students should be able to: 
● read and understand unseen passages of Biblical Hebrew 
● translate text from these passages into English. 
There is a choice of optional content and students should be able to either: 
● show understanding of grammatical structures of Biblical Hebrew 
 or 
● translate simple sentences from English into pointed (vocalised) Biblical Hebrew. 
Students need to develop their knowledge of Biblical Hebrew vocabulary and linguistic 
structures through reading and studying a range of unseen narrative texts in Biblical Hebrew.  
Compulsory content – comprehension 
Students need to develop their linguistic competence through the comprehension of unseen 
Biblical Hebrew passages. 
They must be able to respond to a variety of comprehension questions in English by: 
● demonstrating an understanding of unseen Biblical Hebrew, including an understanding of 
individual words, phrases or sentences 
● identifying the overall message, key points and details in the passage in relation to words, 
phrases and sentences 
● processing more complex information to make meaning by deducing and inferring. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
7 
Compulsory content – translation from Biblical Hebrew to English 
Students also need to develop their linguistic competence through the translation of unseen 
Biblical Hebrew passages. 
Students should be able to: 
● demonstrate knowledge of the vocabulary in Appendix 1 
● accurately translate unseen material into idiomatic English. 
Students need to be familiar with the vocabulary listed in Appendix 1. Any vocabulary not 
contained in this appendix will be given to students for assessment purposes, except 
vocabulary that bears an obvious cognate relationship to a word in the appendix.  
For assessment purposes, names of people and places will also be given to students. 
Students need to be able to transfer meaning accurately from Biblical Hebrew to English. 
They must be able to translate Biblical Hebrew words, phrases and sentences into idiomatic 
English, which accurately transfers the meaning of the Biblical Hebrew, while showing an 
awareness of its morphology and syntax.  
Optional content 
Students need to further develop their linguistic ability by: 
either 
● developing knowledge and understanding of the morphology and syntax of  
Biblical Hebrew (i.e. grammatical structures) 
or 
● by developing their ability to translate short sentences from English into pointed 
(vocalised) Biblical Hebrew. 
 
Students will be required to: 
either 
● show an understanding of the grammar listed in Appendix 2 and terms listed in  
Appendix 3  
or 
● demonstrate an ability to transfer meaning accurately and use the standard word order 
from English to pointed Biblical Hebrew 
● use the vocabulary and grammar knowledge as listed in Appendix 4 and Appendix 5, as no 
other vocabulary and grammar will be used for this purpose. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
8 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2020. 
● The assessment is 2 hours. 
● The assessment consists of two sections. 
● The assessment is out of 100 marks. 
● AO1 is assessed. Please see the Assessment Objectives section for a description of this 
Assessment Objective. 
● Students will be provided with a Source Booklet containing unseen passages from the 
Hebrew Bible (these will not be taken from the set texts from Component 2). There will be 
two unseen passages for Section A and three unseen passages for Section B. 
● In Section A, for each unseen passage: 
o students are required to answer a number of short-response compulsory 
comprehension questions (15 marks)  
o students then have the choice to either: 
– answer grammar questions on the unseen passage (10 marks) 
  or 
– translate three sentences in English into pointed Biblical Hebrew (these will be 
translated sentences taken from the Hebrew Bible) (10 marks).  
● In Section B, students are required to translate from Biblical Hebrew into English based on 
three unseen passages. 
o The first question requires the translation of words or short phrases from one unseen 
passage into English (15 marks). 
o The second question requires the translation of one short unseen passage into English 
(15 marks). 
o The third question requires the translation of a longer unseen passage into English  
(20 marks). 
o Please see Appendix 6 for a list of command words that may be used in the question 
paper. 
Additional information  
All answers must be written in English, with the following exceptions, which may be written 
in Biblical Hebrew where relevant: 
● roots 
● individual Hebrew letters 
● words or short phrases from the passages, if the Hebrew is necessary for a complete 
illustration of the answer. 
Answers in Biblical Hebrew must be written using the ‘block’ system. 
Transliteration of Biblical Hebrew words is acceptable only for proper nouns. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and mark scheme for this component can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) 
document. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
9 
Component 2: Literature 
Overview 
The purpose of studying this component is for students to be able to develop a thorough 
appreciation of Biblical Hebrew literature. 
This component is designed to develop students’ exploration of text and their ability to 
analyse and evaluate, and also comppare and contrast, ancient Biblical Hebrew literature 
through the study of two set texts. 
Content 
Skills 
Students should be able to: 
● show understanding of the content and the context of the set texts 
● show knowledge and understanding of the key grammatical and literary features of the  
set texts 
● analyse, evaluate and respond to the content of the set texts 
● translate extracts from the set texts into English. 
● compare and contrast ideas, values and social practices in both set texts. 
Set texts 
Students must study both set texts. 
The set texts for the examinations in 2020–2022 are: 
Set text 1: Joshua – The wars of Joshua 
● Chapter 6 
● Chapter 8 
● Chapter 9 
● Chapter 10: verses 1–28 
Set text 2: I Kings – The reign of Ahab 
● Chapter 18 
● Chapter 20 
● Chapter 21: verses 1–25 
The set text for the examinations in 2023–2025 are: 
Set text 1: Judges – Gideon and Abimelech 
● Chapter 7 
● Chapter 8 
● Chapter 9 
Set text 2: I Kings – The reign of Solomon 
● Chapter 2 
● Chapter 3 
● Chapter 5 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
10 
The set text for the examinations in 2026-2028 are: 
Set text 1: Genesis - Joseph's rise to power 
● Chapter 41
● Chapter 42
● Chapter 43
Set text 2: II Kings - The miracles of Elisha 
● Chapter 4
● Chapter 5
● Chapter 6
● Chapter 7
Any changes to these set texts or new set texts for the examination will be communicated to 
centres in advance, with sufficient time to prepare for such changes. 
Study of the set texts 
Students should study the following in relation to both set texts. 
Translation 
Students must be able to translate the set texts into idiomatic English, which accurately transfers 
the meaning of the Biblical Hebrew, while showing an awareness of its morphology and syntax. 
Content and context 
● Background information about events, characters, places and people, where relevant for a
complete understanding of the themes and storyline. 
● Approximate locations of important places on maps of the region.
Grammatical features 
As well as all the grammatical forms defined in Appendix 2, students should study: 
● more complex grammatical forms where they appear in the set texts
● derivations of nouns which are derived from verbal forms, and of proper nouns (names of
people and places). 
Literary features 
● Aspects of literary style, including the choice of words and word order, imagery,
parallelism, language used in oaths. 
Students should also acquire up to two explanations of the meaning of any complex, 
ambiguous or uncommon word or phrase and be able to support this by contextual and/or 
grammatical justification. 
Students should develop the skills to analyse and evaluate the set texts in terms of themes, 
significant events, relationships and characters. 
Comparing and contrasting the two set texts
Students should develop the skills to draw and express conclusions about both set texts in 
r
elation to the representation of ideas, values and social practices in the texts.  
Students should acquire detailed knowledge and understanding of each set text and be able to 
select relevant points in order to compare and contrast features of content and/or literary style. 
Students should be able to evaluate the representation and significance of the ideas, values 
and social practices in the context of each set text and in relation to the set texts together. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
11 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2020.  
● The assessment is 2 hours. 
● The assessment consists of two sections each covering both set texts. 
● The assessment is out of 100 marks. 
● The assessment consists of three sections: Section A covers set text 1, Section B covers 
set text 2 and Section C covers both set texts. 
● Students answer all questions in all sections. 
● Students will be provided with a Source Booklet containing five passages from each of the 
two set texts. 
● Section A: Set text 1 (44 marks) and Section B: Set text 2 (44 marks) - in each section 
students are required to: 
o answer questions on the first three passages (30 marks). These questions assesses 
AO2 and AO3 
o translate the fourth passage from Biblical Hebrew into English (5 marks). This question 
assesses AO2 
o answer one extended-open response question based on the fifth passage (9 marks). 
This question assesses AO3.  
● Section C (12 marks) 
o Students answer one extended-open response question requiring them to compare and 
contrast ideas, values and social practices from across both set texts. 
o This question assesses AO2 and AO3.  
Please see the Assessment Objectives section for a description of the Assessment Objectives. 
Please see Appendix 6 for a list of command words that may be used in the examination paper. 
Additional information  
All answers must be written in English, with the following exceptions, which may be written 
in Biblical Hebrew where relevant: 
● roots 
● individual Hebrew letters 
● words or short phrases from the passages, if the Hebrew is necessary for a complete 
illustration of the answer. 
Answers in Biblical Hebrew must be written using the ‘block’ system. 
Transliteration of Biblical Hebrew words is acceptable only for proper nouns. 
Synoptic assessment  
Students show their accumulated knowledge and understanding of a topic or subject area. 
Synoptic assessment enables students to show their ability to combine their skills, knowledge 
and understanding with breadth and depth of the subject.  
This component assesses synopticity via the extended-open response question in Section C. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and mark scheme for this component can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) 
document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
12 
Assessment Objectives 
 
Students must: % in GCSE 
AO1 demonstrate knowledge and understanding of the language 50 
AO2 demonstrate knowledge and understanding of literature and/or 
other ancient sources* 
25 
AO3 analyse, evaluate and respond to literature and/or other ancient 
sources.* 
25 
Total 100% 
 
*NB: other ancient sources will not be covered in this qualification. 
 
 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
Component 
Assessment Objectives Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives AO1 % AO2 % AO3 % 
Component 1: Language 50 0 0 50% 
Component 2: Literature 0 25 25 50% 
Total for GCSE 50% 25% 25% 100% 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
13 
3 Administration and general information 
Entries 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for this qualification can be found in 
our UK Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations officers and is 
available on our website: qualifications.pearson.com. 
Discount code and performance tables 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more than one GCSE, or other Level 2 
qualifications with the same discount code, will have only the grade for their 'first entry' 
counted for the purpose of the School and College Performance Tables (please see  
Appendix 9: Codes). For further information about what constitutes 'first entry' and full 
details of how this policy is applied, please refer to the DfE website: 
www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-education. 
Students should be advised that if they take two GCSEs with the same discount code, 
schools and colleges to which they wish to progress are likely to take the view that this 
achievement is equivalent to only one GCSE. The same view may be taken if students take 
two GCSEs or other Level 2 qualifications that have different discount codes but have 
significant overlap of content. Students or their advisers who have any doubts about their 
subject combinations should check with the institution they wish to progress to before 
embarking on their programmes. 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, 
special consideration and malpractice 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality policy requires all students to 
have equal opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our qualifications 
to be awarded in a way that is fair to every student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the Equality Act 2010) are not, 
when they are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in comparison to 
students who do not share that characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification and that 
this achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their peers. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be available in English. All student work must be in 
English with the exception of specific questions that require answers in Biblical Hebrew. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
14 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with special 
educational needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to: 
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the assessment. 
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an individual 
student with a disability, without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding bodies comply with the duty under the 
Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students will 
then know what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for assessment. 
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable adjustments 
where a person with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in undertaking an 
assessment. The awarding organisation is required to take reasonable steps to overcome 
that disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be unique to that individual and 
therefore might not be in the list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of factors, 
including: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding 
organisation, or affects timeframes or the security or integrity of the assessment. This is 
because the adjustment is not ‘reasonable’. 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student's mark or grade to 
reflect temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the examination/ 
assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a material effect on a 
candidate’s ability to take an assessment or demonstrate their level of attainment in  
an assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to apply for access arrangements 
and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special 
consideration, please refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
15 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that compromises or seeks to 
compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in examinations must be reported to Pearson using a JCQ Form M1 
(available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com. Please provide as much information and supporting 
documentation as possible. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies 
with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice constitutes staff or centre malpractice. 
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and maladministration of 
our qualifications. As with candidate malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is any act that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the 
integrity of the qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported 
immediately, before any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson on a  
JCQ Form M2(a) (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form, 
supporting documentation and as much information as possible can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions 
lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the document 
General and Vocational Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments Policies and Procedures, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice. 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to comply with the requirements of 
Ofqual's General Conditions of Recognition. 
This GCSE qualification will be graded and certificated on a nine-grade scale from 9 to 1, 
using the total subject mark where 9 is the highest grade. Individual components are  
not graded. 
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum judged by Pearson to be of 
sufficient standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U result. 
The first certification opportunity for this qualification will be 2020. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
16 
Student recruitment and progression 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this qualification. 
Progression 
Students can progress from this qualification to A Level Biblical Hebrew. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
17 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Vocabulary list 19 
Appendix 2: Grammar list 40 
Appendix 3: Grammatical terminology 42 
Appendix 4: Restricted vocabulary list for the translation of English sentences 
into Biblical Hebrew 46 
Appendix 5: Restricted grammar list for the translation of English sentences 
into Biblical Hebrew 51 
Appendix 6: Command words 52 
Appendix 7: The context for the development of this qualification 53 
Appendix 8: Transferable skills 55 
Appendix 9: Codes 56 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
18 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
19 
Appendix 1: Vocabulary list 
 
The following vocabulary list provides the core vocabulary that all students will need to 
acquire in relation to Component 1: Language. 
The guiding principle of this vocabulary list has been to include words that appear 50 times 
or more in the Tanakh/Hebrew Bible in mostly prose contexts. 
 
In addition to the words printed in the list, students will be expected to be familiar with the 
following forms: 
● verbs formed from the listed roots 
● cardinal numbers 1–100, and the qualifying number attached to the numbers 100 and 
1000, including the dual form 
● ordinal numbers 1–10. 
 
All other words in the unseen passages in Component 1 will be given unless they bear 
obvious cognate relationship to words in the list. 
Instructions for using this vocabulary list 
Verb roots are marked with a root sign √ and are not pointed. All other parts of speech are 
pointed with their regular pointing. 
 
In the Meaning columns: 
● a comma marks an alternative meaning that is synonymous or closely related 
● a semi-colon marks an unrelated meaning. 
 
In the Word/Cognate word/s columns: 
● a comma marks an alternative form of the same word 
● a semi-colon marks an alternative form that has a distinct meaning – marked by a  
semi-colon in the ‘Meaning’ column as well. 
 
Word Meaning Cognate word/s Meaning 
אָב  father   
אבד√ destroy; lose   
אבה√ accept, be willing אֶבְיוֹן  poor, oppressed 
אֶבֶן  stone   
אָדוֹן  lord, master אֲ-דֹנָי  G-d 
אָדָם  man, people   
אֲדָמָה  earth, land   
אהב√ love, like   
אֹהֶל  tent   
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
20 
Word Meaning Cognate word/s Meaning 
אוֹ or   
אוּלַי  perhaps   
אָוֶן  wickedness, sin   
אוֹצָר  supply, store-house, 
treasure 
  
אוֹר light   
אוֹת sign   
אָז  then   
אֹזֶן  ear   
אָח  brother אָחוֹת  sister 
אחז√ seize, hold אֲחֻזָה  inherited property, 
possession 
אחר√ delay אַחַר  behind, after 
 אַחֵר  another 
 אַחֲרוֹן  behind; last 
 אַחֲרִית  end, outcome 
אֹיֵב, אוֹיֵב enemy   
אַיֵּה  where?   
אֵי  how   
אַיִל  ram   
אַיִן , אֵין  there is/are not   
אִישׁ , אֲנָשִׁים  s,pl) man, husband   
אַ only; surely   
אכל√ eat, consume   
אֶל  to, towards   
אַל  no, not   
אֵ-ל G-d   
אֵלֶּה  these   
אֱ-� G-d   
אַלְמָנָה  widow   
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
21 
Word Meaning Cognate word/s Meaning 
אֶלֶף  thousand; tribe, clan אַלוּף  tribal chief; friend; ox 
אִם  if, then; not (in an 
oath) 
  
אֵם  mother   
אַמָּה  forearm; cubit   
אָמָה  female slave, 
maidservant 
  
אמן√ be steady, firm, 
trustworthy, faithful; 
believe 
אֱמוּנָה  steadiness, loyalty 
אמר√ say   
אֱמֶת  trustworthiness, 
truth 
  
אֲנַחְנוּ  we   
אָנֹכִי , אֲנִי  I   
אסף√ gather   
אסר√ tie; be imprisoned   
אַף  nose, nostril; anger; 
also, even, the more 
so 
  
אֵצֶל  side; beside   
אָרוֹן  ark   
אֶרֶז  cedar   
אֹרַח  way, path   
אֲרִי , אַרְיֵה  m, m and f) lion   
אֹרֶ  length   
אֶרֶץ  earth, land   
ארר√ curse   
אֵשׁ  fire אִשֶּׁה  offering by fire 
אִשָּׁה , נָשִׁים  s, pl) woman   
אֲשֶׁר  who, which, that   
אֵת  object marker, not 
translated); with, 
beside 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
22 
Word Meaning Cognate word/s Meaning 
אַתְּ  f s) you   
אַתָּה  m s) you   
אַתֶּם  m pl) you   
אַתֶּן  f pl) you   
בְּאֵר  well, pit   
בֶּגֶד  item of clothing, 
garment 
  
בְּהֵמָה  cattle, animals   
בוא√ go in, enter, come   
בּוֹר pit, well   
בושׁ√ be ashamed   
בחר√ choose   
בטח √ trust   
בֶּטֶן  belly, womb   
בֵּין  between   
בין√ understand   
בַּיִת  house   
בכה√ cry   
בְּכ וֹר firstborn   
בִּלְתִּי ; לְבִלְתִּי  not, except; not to   
בָּמָה  high place   
בֵּן  son   
בנה√ build   
בַּﬠַד , בְּﬠַד  behind, through, for 
(the benefit of) 
  
בַּﬠַל  owner, husband; idol 
(Baal) 
  
בער√ burn, remove   
בקע√ split   
בָּקָר  cows, herds, cattle   
בֹּקֶר  morning   
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
23 
Word Meaning Cognate word/s Meaning 
בקשׁ√ ask, search, want   
ברא√ create   
בַּרְזֶל  iron   
ברח √ run away, flee   
בְּרִית  covenant, promise, 
agreement 
  
ברך√ bless בְּרָכָה  blessing 
בָּשָׂר  flesh, meat, living 
creatures 
  
בַּת  daughter   
בְּתוֹ  see תָּוֶ    
בְּתוּלָה  virgin   
גאל√ redeem   
גבהּ√ be high   
גְּבוּל  boundary, territory   
גְּבוּרָה  strength גֶּבֶר  young man; strong 
man 
 גִּבּוֹר  warrior, strong man 
גִּבְ ﬠָה  hill; (cultic) high 
place 
  
גדל√ be(come) strong, 
great; bring up, let 
grow, nourish 
גָּדוֹל  great 
גּוֹי people, nation   
גור√ sojourn, live 
temporarily 
גֵּר  stranger 
גּוֹרָל  lot, lottery; 
allotment, portion 
  
גלה√ reveal; depart; go 
into exile 
  
גַּם  also, indeed   
גָּמָל  camel   
גֶּפֶן  vine, grape   
דבק√ stick to, stay close   
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
24 
Word Meaning Cognate word/s Meaning 
דבר√ speak דָּבָר  word, thing, matter 
דְּבַשׁ  honey   
דּוֹד beloved, lover; uncle   
דּוֹר generation   
דֶּלֶת  door   
דָּם  blood   
דרך√ tread דֶּרֶ  way, road, journey; 
custom 
דרשׁ√ seek, ask   
הֶבֶל  breath; vanity, 
idol(s) 
  
הוּא he   
הִיא  she   
היה√ be, happen, become   
הֵיכָל  palace, temple   
הלך√ go, walk   
הלל√ praise תְּהִלָּה  glory, praise 
הֵם הֵמָּה  m) they, those   
הָמוֹן  tumult, turmoil, 
crowd 
  
הִנֵּה  behold! הֵן  behold!; if 
הֵנָּה  f) they; here   
הפך√ turn, overturn   
הַר  mountain, range   
הרג√ kill   
זבח √ sacrifice זֶבַח  sacrifice 
 מִזְבֵּחַ  altar 
זֶה, זֹאת  m, f) this   
זָהָב  gold   
זָכָר  man, male   
זכר√ remember, mention   
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
25 
Word Meaning Cognate word/s Meaning 
זנה√ commit adultery, be 
a prostitute, be 
unfaithful 
  
זעק√ cry out; call to arms   
זָקֵן  old; old man, elder   
זָר strange, different   
זְרוֹﬠַ  arm   
זרע√ sow זֶרַע  seed, descendants 
חָג , חַג  festival, feast   
חדל√ stop   
חָדָשׁ  new, fresh חֹדֶ שׁ new moon, month 
חוה√ see שׁחה√    
חוֹמָה  city) wall   
חוּץ  outside, street   
חזה√ see   
חזק√ be(come) strong; 
seize, grasp 
חָזָק  hard, strong 
חטא√ sin, transgress  
(a law); miss  
(a mark) 
חֵטְא  sin 
 חַטָאת  sin; sin-offering 
חיה√ live, be alive חַי ; חַיִּים  life, living; lifetime 
 חַיָּה  s or pl) animals 
חַיִל  strength; wealth; 
army 
  
חָכָם  wise חָכְמָה  wisdom 
חֵלֶב  fat   
חלה√ be(come) weak, ill   
חֲלוֹם  dream   
חלל√ pollute; begin חָלָל  slain, struck dead 
חלק√ divide; scatter חֵלֶק  part, portion 
חֵמָה  heat; anger   
חֲמוֹר  donkey   
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
26 
Word Meaning Cognate word/s Meaning 
חָמָס  violence, wrong   
חנה√ camp מַחֲנֶה  camp, army 
חנן√ be gracious to, 
favour 
חֵן  charm, grace, favour 
חֶסֶד  loyalty, kindness   
חפץ√ please, desire,  
take pleasure 
  
חֵץ  arrow   
חֲצִי  half   
חָצֵ ר  courtyard, village   
חֹק  law, statute חֻקָּה  law, statute, custom 
חֶרֶב  sword   
חרה√ be(come) hot, angry   
חרם√ ban, destroy   
חשׁב√ account, regard, 
value, think 
מַחֲשָׁבָה  thought 
חֹשֶׁ  darkness   
טהר√ be clean, pure טָהוֹר  clean, pure 
טוב√ be good, pleasant טוֹב good; goodness 
טמא√ be impure טָמֵא , טְמֵאָה  impure 
טֶרֶם , בְּטֶרֶם  not yet; before   
יְאֹר  great) river  
(Nile, Euphrates) 
  
יבשׁ√ be dry; dry up   
יָד hand   
ידה√ thank, praise, 
confess; throw 
  
ידע√ know, notice דַּﬠַת  knowledge 
 מַדּוּﬠַ  why? 
 
י-ה-ו-ה  Name of G-d 
(will appear in 
assessment as יי )
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
27 
Word Meaning Cognate word/s Meaning 
יוֹם day יוֹמָם  in the daytime; daily 
יַחַד , יַחְדָּו  together   
יטב√ be good   
יַיִן  wine   
יכח √ dispute; rebuke, 
punish; decide 
  
יכל√ be able   
ילד√ bring forth, give birth   
יָם sea; west   
יָמִין  right hand; south   
יסף√ continue, add; stop   
יעד√ meet, gather, set מוֹﬠֵד  appointed place or 
time; season 
 ﬠֵדָה  congregation, 
community 
יַﬠַן  on account of; 
because 
  
יעץ√ give advice; ask 
advice 
ﬠֵצָה  advice 
יַ ﬠַר  forest   
יצא√ go out, come out   
יצק√ pour out (liquid)   
ירא√ fear, be afraid   
ירד√ go down   
ירה√ instruct, teach; shoot תּוֹרָה  teaching, law 
יְרִיﬠָה  curtain, tent   
ירשׁ√ possess, inherit; 
dispossess 
  
יֵשׁ there is/are   
ישׁב√ sit, live יֹשֵׁב  inhabitant 
ישׁע√ be saved; save יְשׁוּﬠָה  salvation 
יָשָׁר  straight, right, 
upright 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
28 
Word Meaning Cognate word/s Meaning 
יתר√ be left, remain יֶתֶר  remainder 
כַּאֲשֶׁר  as   
כבד√ be heavy, be 
honoured 
  
כָּבוֹד honour, glory; 
possessions 
  
כבס√ wash   
כֶּבֶשׂ , כִּבְשָׂה  m, f) lamb, sheep   
כֹּה  so, this   
כֹּהֵן  priest   
כון√ be established; 
establish; prepare 
  
כֹּחַ  strength, power   
כִּי  because, for, that, 
when, but, indeed 
  
כִּכָּר  loaf of bread; coin; 
area of land 
  
כָּל , כּוֹל  all, every   
כלה√ finish, complete   
כְּלִי  vessel, utensil, 
weapon 
  
כְּמוֹ  just like   
כֵּן  this, so; correctly; 
right 
לָכֵן  therefore 
כָּנָף  wing, corner   
כִּסֵּא  seat, throne   
כסה√ cover   
כֶּסֶף  silver, money   
כעס√ (be) irritated, angry   
כַּף hand, palm   
כְּפִי , לְפִי  according to; as, so 
that 
  
כפר√ cover; atone   
כְּרוּב  cherub   
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
29 
Word Meaning Cognate word/s Meaning 
כֶּרֶם  vineyard   
כרת√ cut (off); make (a 
promise) 
  
כֶּשֶׂב , כִּשְׂבָּה  see כֶּבֶשׂ    
כשׁל√ stumble   
כתב√ write   
כָּתֵף  shoulder(-blade)   
לֹא  no, not   
לֵב , לֵבָב  heart   
לְבַ ד alone; besides   
לבשׁ√ put on, clothe, wear   
לֶחֶם  bread, food   
לחם√ fight מִלְחָמָה  war, battle 
לַיְלָה , לַיִל  night   
לין√ spend the night   
לכד√ seize, capture   
למד√ learn; teach   
לָמָה , לָמָּה  why?   
לְמַﬠַן  for the sake of; in 
order that 
  
לְפִי  see כְּפִי    
לקח √ take   
לִקְרַאת  towards, to meet, 
opposite 
  
לָשׁוֹן  tongue, language   
מְאֹד  very; strength   
מֵאָז  since, formerly   
מאס√ reject   
מָגֵן  shield   
מִדְבָּר  wilderness, desert   
מדד√ measure מִדָּה  measure 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
30 
Word Meaning Cognate word/s Meaning 
מָה , מֶה , מַ ה  what? how?   
מהר√ hurry   
מוּסָר  correction   
מות√ die מָוֶת  death 
 מֵת  dead 
מִזְרָח  sunrise, east   
מָחָר  tomorrow, in future   
מִי  who?   
מַיִם  water   
מכר√ sell   
מלא√ be full; fill, fulfil מָלֵא  full 
מַלְאָ  messenger, angel   
מְלָאכָה  work   
מלט√ escape; save, deliver   
מלך√ reign, be king מֶלֶ  king 
 מַמְלָכָה  kingdom 
 מַלְכוּת  kingdom 
מִן  from, out of, part of, 
because of, than 
  
מִנְחָה  gift; offering   
מְﬠַט  few; a little   
מצא√ find   
מַצָּ ה  unleavened bread   
מָקוֹם  place   
משׁח√ anoint   
משׁל√ rule, govern   
מִשְׁפָּחָה  extended) family   
נָא now; please   
נְאֻם  declaration of,  
word of 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
31 
Word Meaning Cognate word/s Meaning 
נבא√ prophesy נָבִיא  prophet 
נבט√ look at   
נֶגֶב  the dry country; 
south 
  
נֶגֶד  opposite, before, 
against 
  
נגד√ make known, tell   
נגע√ touch, reach נֶגַע  plague, blow 
נגף√ strike, plague   
נגשׁ√ draw near, approach   
נדח √ drive away, banish   
נֶדֶר , נֵדֶר  vow, promise   
נָהָר  river, stream   
נוח √ rest, make quiet, lay   
נוס√ run away, flee   
נַחַל  torrent valley, wadi, 
river 
  
נחל√ inherit property נַחֲלָה  inheritance 
נחם√ be sorry, repent; 
comfort, console 
  
נְחֹשֶׁת  copper, bronze   
נטה√ turn, stretch out, 
spread out 
מַטֶּה  stick; tribe 
נטע√ plant   
נכה√ hit, strike   
נכר√ be foreign, be 
unknown; recognise 
  
נֶסֶ , נֵסֶ  libation (liquid 
offering) 
  
נסע√ travel, depart   
נַﬠַר  lad, youth, servant נַﬠֲרָה  young girl, maid 
נפל√ fall   
נֶפֶשׁ  life, self, soul, mind   
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
32 
Word Meaning Cognate word/s Meaning 
נצב√ take a stand, be 
stationed 
  
נצל√ save; take away   
נצר√ watch, guard   
נשׂא√ lift, carry נָשִׂיא  prince, leader 
נשׂג√ overtake, reach   
נתן√ give, put, allow, 
make 
  
סבב√ turn (around), 
surround 
סָבִיב  circuit; surrounding 
סגר√ shut, close;  
hand over 
  
סוּס, סוּסָה  m, f) horse   
סור√ turn aside; take 
away, remove 
  
סֶלַ ע rock   
סֹלֶת  fine wheat flour   
ספר√ write, count; tell מִסְפָּר  number 
 סֹפֵר  scribe, writer 
 סֵפֶר  scroll, book 
סתר√ conceal, hide   
עבד√ serve, work ﬠֶבֶד  servant 
ﬠֲבוֹדָה  service, work 
עבר√ pass, cross, 
transgress 
ﬠֵבֶר  side, opposite side 
ﬠַד  to, as far as, until, 
while; eternity, 
always 
  
עוֹד yet, still, again   
עוד√ testify 
 
 
 
ﬠֵדוּת , ﬠֵדָה  warning sign, 
reminder, testimony; 
commandment 
 ﬠֵד, ﬠֵדָה  witness 
עוֹלָם , עֹלָם  forever, eternity, 
remote time 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
33 
Word Meaning Cognate word/s Meaning 
ﬠָוֹן  transgression, sin   
עוֹף flying creatures; 
birds 
  
עוֹר skin, leather   
עור√ arouse, awake; blind   
ﬠֵז  goat; goat's hair   
עֹז , ﬠָז  strength, power   
עזב√ leave, abandon   
עזר√ help   
ﬠַיִן  eye; fountain   
ﬠִיר , ﬠָרִים  s, pl) city   
ﬠַל on, upon, against, 
over 
  
עלה√ go up; offer up מַﬠַל  upwards; above 
 עֹלָה  burnt offering 
 ﬠֶלְיוֹן  upper, Most High  
(G-d) 
ﬠִם  with   
ﬠַם  people, nation   
עמד√ stand ﬠַמּוּד pillar, column 
ﬠָמָל  distress, trouble; 
effort 
  
ﬠֵמֶק  valley   
ענה√ answer; be afflicted, 
oppress 
ﬠָנִי  afflicted, poor 
ﬠָנָן  clouds   
ﬠָפָר  dry earth, dust   
ﬠֵץ  tree, wood   
ﬠֶצֶם  bone; self, substance   
ﬠֶרֶב  evening   
ﬠֲרָבָה  desert, plain   
ﬠֶרְוָה  nakedness   
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
34 
Word Meaning Cognate word/s Meaning 
ערך√ arrange, set in order   
עשׂה√ do, make מַﬠֲ שֶׂה  work 
ﬠֵת  time   
ﬠַתָּ ה now   
פֵּאָה  side, corner   
פדה√ buy (off), redeem, 
ransom 
  
פֶּה  mouth   
פֹּה , פּוֹ , פֹּא  here   
פוץ√ scatter, disperse   
פלא√ be extraordinary, 
wonderful 
  
פלל√ pray תְּפִלָּה  prayer 
פֶּן  in case, for fear that   
פנה√ turn פָּנִים  face 
 לִפְ נֵי before, in front of 
פעל√ make, do   
פַּﬠַם  foot, step; time   
פקד√ visit, count, appoint; 
miss; remember 
  
פַּר , פָּרָה  m, f) young bull; 
cow 
  
פְּרִי  fruit, offspring   
פרץ√ make a breach; burst 
out 
  
פרר√ break out, burst 
forth 
  
פָּרָשׁ  horseman, horse   
פרשׂ√ spread out; flaunt   
פֶּשַׁע  rebellion, revolt, 
transgression 
  
פתח √ open, loosen פֶּתַח  opening, entrance 
צֹאן  flock, sheep   
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
35 
Word Meaning Cognate word/s Meaning 
צָבָא  army   
צַדִּיק  righteous; fair, just צֶדֶק  righteousness; what is 
right 
 צְדָקָה  righteousness 
צוה√ command מִצְוָה  commandment 
צוּר large) rock   
צֵל  shadow, shade   
צלח √ advance, rush; 
succeed 
  
צעק√ cry out   
צָפוֹן  north   
צרר√ wrap up; be hostile 
toward; be 
distressed 
צַר  enemy 
 צָרָה  distress 
קבץ√ assemble, gather 
together 
  
קבר√ bury קֶבֶר  grave, burial place 
קֶדֶם , קֵדֶם  in front; east;  
long ago 
קָדִים  east side, east 
קדשׁ√ be holy; make holy קָדוֹשׁ  holy 
 קֹדֶשׁ  holy (place, thing), 
holiness 
 מִקְדָּשׁ  sanctuary, holy place 
קָהָל  assembly, 
congregation 
  
קוֹל voice, sound   
קום√ get up, rise, stand   
קָטָן קָטֹן  small, unimportant, 
young 
  
קטר√ send an offering up 
in smoke; make 
smoke 
קְטֹרֶת  smoke (of sacrifice); 
incense 
קִיר  wall   
קלל√ curse; be slight, 
make light 
  
קנה√ acquire, buy מִקְנֶה  cattle, livestock 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
36 
Word Meaning Cognate word/s Meaning 
קֵץ  end; boundary קָצֶה  end, border 
קצר√ be short, shorten, 
harvest 
  
קרא√ call; meet; read; 
happen 
  
קֶרֶב ; בְּקֶרֶב  inward part; in the 
middle of 
  
קרב√ draw near קָרוֹב , קְרוֹבָה  near 
 קָרְבָּן  offering, gift 
קֶרֶן  horn   
קרע√ tear up   
קֶשֶׁת  bow (weapon); 
rainbow 
  
ראה√ see מַרְאֶה  sight, appearance 
רֹאשׁ  head רֵאשִׁית  beginning, first 
רבב√ be(come) numerous; 
multiply 
רַב  much, many; captain, 
chief 
 רֹב  abundance, multitude 
רבה√ be(come) numerous; 
multiply 
  
רֶגֶל  foot   
רדף√ pursue, chase   
רוּחַ  spirit, wind רֵיחַ  scent, smell 
רום√ be high, raise תְּרוּמָה  tribute, contribution 
 מָרוֹם  height 
רוץ√ run away, flee   
רֹחַב  width   
רחץ √ wash (oneself)   
רחק√ be(come) far, distant רָחוֹק  far, distant; distance 
ריב√ argue, plead (a case) רִיב , רִיבָה  argument, quarrel; 
legal speech 
רכב√ ride רֶכֶב  chariot, chariotry 
רנן√ shout (for joy), cheer   
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
37 
Word Meaning Cognate word/s Meaning 
רֵﬠַ  friend, companion   
רָﬠָב  hunger, famine   
רעה√ feed, graze, look 
after (animals) 
רֹﬠֶה  shepherd 
רעע√ be wicked, evil רָע , רַע , רָﬠָה  evil 
רפא√ heal   
רצה√ be pleased with; like רָצוֹן  pleasure, favour, will 
רַק  only   
רָשָׁע  s m, f) guilty; 
wicked (one) 
  
שׁאל√ ask   
שׁאר√ remain; be left over שְׁאֵרִית  remainder 
שֵׁבֶט  rod, stick; tribe   
שׁבע√ swear, promise   
שׂבע√ satisfy, be satisfied   
שׁבר√ break   
שׁבת√ rest, stop שַׁבָּת  sabbath, rest 
שׁדד√ devastate, lay waste   
שָׂדֶה  field   
שָׁוְא  worthlessness; in 
vain 
  
שׁוב√ turn, return   
שׁוֹפָר  ram's horn, trumpet   
שׁוֹר bull, ox   
שׁחה√ )חוה√( bow down   
שׁח ט√ slaughter, kill   
שׁחת√ ruin, destroy   
שׂים√ put, place, make   
שׁיר√ sing שִׁיר ,  שִׁירָה  m, f) song 
שׁית√ put, place   
שׁכב√ lie down, sleep   
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
38 
Word Meaning Cognate word/s Meaning 
שׁכח √ forget   
שׂכל√ have success; 
understand 
  
שְׁכֶם  shoulder   
שׁכם√ rise early   
שׁכן√ live, settle מִשְׁכָּן  dwelling, tabernacle 
שׁלח √ send, stretch out,  
let go 
  
שֻׁלְחָן  table   
שׁלך√ throw   
שָׁלָל  plunder, booty   
שׁלם√ be whole, complete; 
repay; make peace 
שֶׁלֶם   ,שְׁלָמִים  final or peace offering 
 שָׁלוֹ ם  peace, health 
שֵׁם  name   
שָׁם  there   
שְׂמֹאל  left; left hand; north   
שׁמד√ be destroyed; 
destroy 
  
שׂמח √ be happy שִׂמְחָה  joy, rejoicing 
שָׁמַיִם  heavens, sky   
שׁמם√ be astonished;  
be desolate 
שְׁמָמָה  horror, desolation 
שֶׁמֶן  oil   
שׁמע√ hear, listen, obey   
שׁמר√ keep, guard מִשְׁמֶרֶת  guard, obligation, 
service 
שֶׁמֶשׁ  sun   
שֵׁן  tooth; cliff   
שׂנא√ hate   
שָׁנָה  year   
שָׂﬠִיר  he-goat; hairy   
שַׁﬠַר  gate   
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
39 
Word Meaning Cognate word/s Meaning 
שָׂפָה  lip; shore   
שִׁפְחָה  female slave, 
maidservant 
  
שׁפט√ judge מִשְׁפָּט  judgement, custom, 
justice 
 שֹׁפֵט  judge 
שׁפך√ pour out   
שׁקה√ give to drink   
שֶׁקֶל  shekel (unit of 
weight) 
  
שֶׁקֶר  lie, falsehood   
שַׂר  leader, prince   
שׂרף√ burn   
שׁרת√ serve   
שׁתה√ drink   
תָּוֶ ; בְּתוֹ  middle; in the middle 
of, through 
  
תּוֹﬠֵבָ ה abomination   
תַּחַת  beneath, under, 
instead of 
  
תָּמִיד  regularly, always; 
continuance 
  
תמם√ be complete, finish תָּמִים  whole, blameless 
תִפְאֶרֶת  glory, decoration   
תפשׂ√ seize, take hold of   
תקע√ drive, thrust; strike; 
pitch; blow 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
40 
Appendix 2: Grammar list 
 
The general principle of this list is to cover all forms which may be examined in  
Component 1: Language.  
Additional forms may appear in the unseen passages used in Component 1. These will not be 
examined in the optional grammar questions. However, they may occasionally appear in the 
comprehension and translation passages. In this case, students are expected to understand 
the meaning from the context, without knowledge of the grammatical form. 
Students should be able to identify and explain more complex forms where they appear in 
the set texts for Component 2. 
It is recognised that some terms have different variations, for example imperfect with  
vav conversive, wayyiqtol or waw consecutive imperfect. In these instances, centres have 
the choice to teach whichever term is more familiar. However, for the purposes of 
assessment we will use the terms listed in this appendix. 
 
Morphology 
Formation of nouns, adjectives, and pronouns 
● Gender, number and state of both regular and those irregular nouns that appear in the 
vocabulary list. 
● Nouns formed with preformative letters א, מand ת 
● Agreement of adjectives with nouns. 
● Formation of comparatives and superlatives of adjectives in the vocabulary list. 
● Cardinal and ordinal numbers. 
● Pronominal suffixes attached to nouns, verbs and prepositions. 
 
Formation of verbs 
● Weaknesses in verb roots. 
● All persons and numbers of the perfect and imperfect. 
● Pluperfect in a narrative where the subject noun precedes the verb. 
● Imperative and cohortative. 
● Qal participles used as verbs. 
● Regular formation and function of qal, niphal, piel, hiphil and hithpael  
(in the prescribed aspects/tenses). 
● The following contracted/irregular forms of verbs in the vocabulary list:פ''י ; פ'' נ  ;ע ''ו ; 
ל''ה ; פand עguttural; geminate. 
● Commonly occurring formations of hophal and pual. 
● Infinitive construct with prefixes ב, כ, לand מ 
● Infinitive absolute occurring before a perfect or imperfect verb. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
41 
Formation of words with prefixed and suffixed morphemes 
● Inseparable prepositions and the preposition ‘from’. 
● Definite article. 
● Interrogative ה 
● Vav conjunctive. 
● Vav consecutive/conversive. 
● Gentilic י 
● Locative ה 
 
Pointing 
● Syllables and vowels, including sheva and hataf vowels. 
● Weak dagesh and common occurrences of strong dagesh. 
● The effect of the guttural and labial letters on pointing. 
 
Syntax 
Unseen passages selected for examination in Component 1 may contain any of the following 
syntactical constructions: 
● relative clauses 
● common types of conditional sentence 
● common temporal, concessive and causal clauses 
● purpose clauses 
● result clauses 
● verbless clauses 
● asseverative clauses 
● common negative clauses (including legal prohibitions) 
● common oath clauses 
● common interrogative clauses. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
42 
Appendix 3: Grammatical terminology 
Students should be able to recognise and accurately use appropriate grammatical 
terminology from the following list. 
The Term column in this list defines the vocabulary that will be used in examination, either 
in the question asked or as part of the answer required. 
Students will not be penalised for correctly using any of the acceptable alternative terms 
from the list but they should not use unacceptable alternatives. 
Phonetic spellings in English letters will be accepted as long as the intended meaning is clear. 
Terms in italics are not included in the grammar list for Component 1. They are listed here in 
the event that they are relevant for a complete study of the set texts for Component 2. 
 
Term Acceptable alternative/s Examples of unacceptable 
alternative/s 
nouns, adjectives and pronouns 
construct form construct state semichut 
סמיכות 
preformative noun prefix introductory 
cardinal   
ordinal   
dual form   
mappiq mapik  
pronominal suffix   
singular  יחיד 
plural  רבים  
comparative   
superlative   
verbs 
root shoresh שׁרשׁ  
tense aspect  
geminate double ע  
first root letter פ 
pe- 
first radical 
I– 
 
second root letter ע 
ayin- 
second radical 
II – 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
43 
 
Term Acceptable alternative/s Examples of unacceptable 
alternative/s 
verbs 
third root letter ל 
lamed- 
third radical 
III – 
 
perfect (aspect/tense) past tense עבר 
imperfect  
(aspect/tense) 
future tense עתיד 
cohortative   
jussive   
imperative command צווי 
infinitive construct  מקור 
infinitive 
negative מ privative מ  
infinitive absolute  מקור 
infinitive 
binyan  stem 
conjugation 
בנין 
qal kal 
pa’al 
פעל 
Note that phonetic spellings of 
pa’al are likely to be confused 
with other conjugations. 
Candidates should be 
encouraged to learn the 
recommended spelling or use 
the terms ‘qal’ or ‘kal’. 
niphal nifal נפעל 
piel  פיעל 
hiphil hifil הפעיל 
hithpael hitpael 
hispael 
התפעל 
pual  פועל 
hophal hofal 
hufal 
הפעל 
 
active   
passive   
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
44 
 
Term Acceptable alternative/s Examples of unacceptable 
alternative/s 
verbs (continued) 
causative   
reflexive   
interactive reciprocal   
participle  present aspect/tense 
qal passive participle qal passive passive participle 
prefixed and suffixed morphemes 
definite article  he hayedia 
ה הידיעה  
interrogative ה questioning ה he hasheila 
ה השאלה 
locative ה directional ה 
ה locale 
ה directive 
 
vav conjunctive   
vav consecutive 
 
vav conversive vav hahipuch 
ו ההיפוך 
gentilic י   
pointing 
pointing vowels 
niqqud 
ניקוד 
patah patach פתח 
kamats qamets קמץ 
segol  סגול 
hataf- reduced 
chataf- 
composite 
compound 
חטף  
hiriq chirik חיריק 
tsere zeire צירי 
holam cholam חולם 
kubuts  קבוץ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
45 
 
Term Acceptable alternative/s Examples of unacceptable 
alternative/s 
pointing (continued) 
shuruk  שורוק 
melupim 
vocal sheva pronounced sheva 
 
שוא נע 
sheva na 
silent sheva unpronounced sheva 
 
שוא נח 
sheva nach 
open syllable   
closed syllable   
accented syllable tone syllable 
stressed syllable 
 
unaccented syllable unstressed syllable  
guttural letters letters אהחרע  
labial letters letters בומפ 
lip letters 
 
weak dagesh dagesh lene 
dagesh qal/kal 
בגדכפתdagesh 
דגש קל 
beged kefet dagesh 
strong dagesh dagesh forte 
dagesh chazak 
דגש חזק  
syntax 
parallelism   
pausal form in pause  
subject   
object   
ellipsis   
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
46 
Appendix 4: Restricted vocabulary list for 
the translation of English sentences into 
Biblical Hebrew 
Instructions for using this vocabulary list: 
Verb roots are marked with a root sign √ and are not pointed. All other parts of speech are 
pointed with their regular pointing. 
 
In the Meaning column: 
● a comma marks an alternative meaning that is synonymous or closely related 
● a semi-colon marks an unrelated meaning. 
In the Word column: 
● a comma marks an alternative form of the same word 
● a semi-colon marks an alternative form that has a distinct meaning – marked by a  
semi-colon in the ‘Meaning’ column as well. 
 
Meaning Word Part of speech Required 
conjugation  
(for verbs) 
(object marker, not 
translated); with, beside 
אֵת preposition  
altar מִזְבֵּחַ noun  
be, happen, become היה√  verb qal 
before, in front of לִפְנֵי preposition  
behind, after אַחַר  preposition  
beneath, under,  
instead of 
תַּחַת preposition  
between בֵּין preposition  
bless ברך√  verb piel 
blood דָּם noun  
boundary, territory גְּבוּל noun  
bread, food לֶחֶם noun  
bring forth, give birth ילד√  verb qal 
brother אָח noun  
burnt offering עֹלָה noun  
call קרא√  verb qal 
city (s, pl) ﬠִיר , ﬠָרִים noun  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
47 
Meaning Word Part of speech Required 
conjugation  
(for verbs) 
command צוה√  verb piel 
covenant, promise בְּרִית noun  
cut (off); make  
(a promise) 
כרת√  verb qal 
daughter בַּת noun  
day יוֹםnoun  
die מות√  verb qal 
do, make עשׂה√  verb qal 
earth, land אֶרֶץ noun  
eat אכל√  verb qal 
enemy אֹיֵב , אוֹיֵבnoun  
(extended) family; clan מִשְׁפָּחָה noun  
eye ﬠַיִן noun  
face פָּנִים noun  
fall נפל√  verb qal 
father אָב noun  
field שָׂדֶה noun  
find מצא√  verb qal 
fire אֵשׁ noun  
flesh בָּשָׂר noun  
flock, sheep צֹאן noun  
foot רֶגֶל noun  
from, out of, part of, 
because of, than 
מִן preposition  
gate שַׁﬠַר noun  
get up, rise, stand קום√  verb qal 
give נתן√  verb qal 
go down ירד√  verb qal 
go in, enter, come בוא√  verb qal 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
48 
Meaning Word Part of speech Required 
conjugation  
(for verbs) 
go out, come out יצא√  verb qal 
go up עלה√  verb qal 
go, walk הלך√  verb qal 
gold זָהָב noun  
good טוֹבadjective  
great גָּדוֹל adjective  
ground אֲדָמָה noun  
hand יָדnoun  
he הוּאpronoun  
head רֹאשׁ noun  
hear, listen, obey שׁמע√  verb qal 
heart לֵב , לֵבָב noun  
heavens, sky שָׁמַיִם noun  
holy (place, thing), 
holiness 
קֹדֶשׁ noun  
house בַּיִת noun  
I אָנֹכִי , אֲנִי pronoun  
in the middle of בְּקֶרֶב preposition  
in the middle of בְּתוֹ preposition  
judgement, custom, 
justice 
מִשְׁפָּט noun  
keep watch, guard שׁמר√  verb qal 
king מֶלֶ noun  
know, notice ידע√  verb qal 
lad, youth, servant נַﬠַר noun  
leader, prince שַׂר noun  
life, living; lifetime חַי ; חַיִּים noun  
life, self, soul, mind נֶפֶשׁ noun  
lift, carry נשׂא√  verb qal 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
49 
Meaning Word Part of speech Required 
conjugation  
(for verbs) 
lord, master אָדוֹן noun  
man אָדָם noun  
man (s,pl) אִישׁ , אֲנָשִׁים noun  
mountain, range הַר noun  
mouth פֶּה noun  
name שֵׁםnoun  
new moon, month חֹדֶשׁ noun  
night לַיְלָה noun  
on, upon, against, over ﬠַל preposition  
pass, cross, transgress עבר√  verb qal 
people, nation גּוֹיnoun  
people, nation ﬠַם noun  
place מָקוֹם noun  
priest כֹּהֵן noun  
prophet נָבִיא noun  
reign, be king מלך√  verb qal 
remember זכר√  verb qal 
say אמר√  verb qal 
sea; west יָםnoun  
see ראה√  verb qal 
seed, descendants זֶרַע noun  
send, stretch out שׁלח √  verb qal 
servant ﬠֶבֶד noun  
serve, work עבד√  verb qal 
service in war; army צָבָא noun  
she הִיא pronoun  
silver כֶּסֶף noun  
sin; sin-offering חַטָאת noun  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
50 
Meaning Word Part of speech Required 
conjugation  
(for verbs) 
sit, live ישׁב√  verb qal 
son בֵּן noun  
speak דבר√  verb piel 
spirit, wind רוּחַ noun  
stand עמד√  verb qal 
stone אֶבֶן noun  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
51 
Appendix 5: Restricted grammar list for the 
translation of English sentences into 
Biblical Hebrew 
 
Morphology, pointing and syntax required for translating the English sentences into Biblical 
Hebrew in Component 1. 
Morphology and pointing 
● The forms of verbs from the restricted vocabulary list in their natural conjugation of  
qal or piel, perfect and imperfect. 
● The forms of the nouns in the restricted vocabulary list, including gender, number  
and state. 
● Pronominal suffixes attached to words in the restricted vocabulary list. 
● Inseparable prepositions and the preposition ‘from’. 
● Definite article. 
● Vav conjunctive. 
● Vav consecutive/conversive attached to the imperfect. 
Syntax 
● Standard word order (verb – subject – preposition – object). 
● The use of the imperfect aspect/tense with vav consecutive/conversive for narrative prose. 
● Direct statements. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
52 
Appendix 6: Command words 
The following command words summarise the essential skills required of students in 
responding to questions. To ensure that students have a full understanding as to how to 
respond, please refer to the relevant levels-based mark schemes provided in the Pearson 
Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) 
document. 
 
Command word Definition AO assessed 
Component 1 Component 2 
Give 
Identify 
List 
Name 
State 
Recall/select one or more pieces of 
information from text. 
AO1 
 
AO2 
 
Describe Give an account of the main 
characteristic of something from text. 
Statements in the response should be 
developed but do not need to include a 
justification or reason. 
Translate Take words from Biblical Hebrew and 
change them into English or from 
English and change them into pointed 
Biblical Hebrew. 
AO1 
 
AO2 
 
Explain Provide reasoning to justify or 
exemplify a point. The answer should 
respond to the question and give 
reasons. 
AO1 AO3 
 
Examine To analyse carefully by identifying 
aspects of content and features of 
literary style in text, then drawing and 
expressing conclusions. 
 AO3 
 
Compare and 
contrast 
To analyse the similarities and/or 
differences of the two set texts and 
evaluate their representation and 
significance. 
(NB: the comparison and contrast 
focuses on the ideas, values and social 
practices presented throughout both 
set texts.) 
 AO2 
AO3 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
53 
Appendix 7: The context for the 
development of this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] and our 
ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
● reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with those 
taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
● consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including learned bodies, 
higher-education academics, teachers to ensure this qualification is suitable for a  
UK context 
● reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in their 
documents GCSE (9 to 1)/GCE Qualification Level Conditions and Requirements, and 
GCSE/GCE Subject Level Conditions and Requirements for Ancient Languages, published in 
March 2017. 
 
 
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification Principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
● demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning and 
measuring higher-order skills 
● rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and valid 
assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in end users of the knowledge, skills 
and competencies of certified students 
● inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students develop at 
different rates and have different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
● empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills, see Appendix 8. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
54 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
May 2014 
“The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important change to the 
education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications will assist them in 
helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an ‘Expert 
Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or because of 
our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the world as diverse as 
Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification development 
process that has included: 
● establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-specific 
expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
● subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future oriented. The 
design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, meaning learner outcomes 
have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a learner’s 
success in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident that we have 
supported the development of qualifications that are outstanding for their coherence, 
thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as representing world-class best 
practice.”    
  
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Lee Sing Kong  
Director, National Institute of Education, 
Singapore 
  
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
  
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
 
All titles are correct as of May 2014. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
55 
Appendix 8: Transferable skills 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently flagged the 
need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable them to respond with 
confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines skills, or 
competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that can be learned and 
that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform an activity or task and can be 
built upon and extended through learning.’ 
[1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected and 
evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this process,  
we identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the most evidence-based 
and robust skills framework. We adapted the framework slightly to include the Program  
for International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT Literacy and Collaborative Problem  
Solving (CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves: [2]  
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve general 
cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and communicate. [3]  
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, oral communication, written communication, assertive 
communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, service 
orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared understanding, 
taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team organisation. 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work stress, 
adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, and physical 
adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual teams, 
work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and able to acquire 
new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher education, 
as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the teaching and learning of 
this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning materials, developed with 
stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
 
[1]  OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012) 
[2]  Koenig J A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop  
(National Academies Press, 2011) 
[3]  PISA – The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy (2011) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Biblical Hebrew 
Specification – Issue 2 – July 2023 © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
56 
Appendix 9: Codes 
 
Type of code Use of code Code 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for performance 
tables is assigned a discount code that 
indicates the subject area to which it 
belongs. 
Discount codes are published by the DfE. 
Please see the GOV.UK 
website* 
 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an Ofqual 
Regulated Qualifications Framework (RQF) 
code.  
The RQF code is known as a Qualification 
Number (QN). This is the code that features 
in the DfE Section 96 and on the LARA as 
being eligible for 16–18 and 19+ funding, 
and is to be used for all qualification funding 
purposes. The QN will appear on students’ 
final certification documentation. 
The QN for this 
qualification is: 
603/3183/5 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to enter 
students for a qualification. Centres will need 
to use the entry codes only when claiming 
students’ qualifications. 
GCSE – 1BH0 
 
Component codes These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be 
entered for individual components. 
Component 1: 1BH0/01 
Component 2: 1BH0/02 
 
*www.gov.uk/government/publications/2018-performance-tables-discount-code  
 
 
DB300623 9781446947074_GCSE2017_L12_BIBLICAL_HEBREW_ISS2.DOC.1–62/0 

For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office:  80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121