This draft qualification has not yet been accredited by Ofqual. It is published to enable teachers to have early sight of our 
proposed approach to Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9 - 1) in Music (1MU0). Further changes may be required 
and no assurance can be given at this time that the proposed qualification will be made available in its current form, or 
that it will be accredited in time for first teaching in September 2016 and first award in 2018.
Specification
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9 - 1) in Business (1BS0)
First teaching from September 2017
First certification from 2019
GCSE (9-1)
Business
Issue 2
 
Summary of Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1)  
in Business specification Issue 2 changes  
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this current issue  Page 
number  
The paper timings have been updated for both Paper 1 and Paper 2 from  
‘1 hour and 30 minutes’ to 
‘1 hour and 45 minutes’ 
4, 5, 13, 
21 
In Assessment information the following has been updated: 
‘Questions in Sections B and C will be based on business contexts given in the paper’ 
to 
‘Questions in Sections B and C will be based on business contexts given in a Source 
Booklet.’ 
13, 21 
 
If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, contact us via our website at: 
qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/contact-us.html. 
 
 
 
Contents 
1 Introduction 2 
Why choose Edexcel GCSE Business? 2 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this qualification 3 
Qualification at a glance 4 
2 Subject content and assessment information 6 
Theme 1: Investigating small business 7 
Theme 2: Building a business 14 
Assessment Objectives 22 
3 Administration and general information 23 
Entries 23 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special consideration and malpractice 23 
Student recruitment and progression 25 
Appendix 1: Command word taxonomy and definitions of business 
terms 29 
Appendix 2: Quantitative skills 31 
Appendix 3: Formulae 32 
Appendix 4: Calculators 33 
Appendix 5: The context for the development of this qualification 34 
Appendix 6: Transferable skills 36 
Appendix 7: Codes 37 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business – Specification 
Issue 2 – July 2022  © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
2 
 
1 Introduction 
Why choose Edexcel GCSE Business? 
We’ve listened to feedback from all parts of the business subject community, including 
teachers, subject associations, professional bodies and higher education. We’ve used this 
opportunity of curriculum change to redesign a qualification that is engaging and inspiring, 
and which reflects the demands of a truly modern and evolving business environment – a 
qualification that enables your students to develop as commercially minded and enterprising 
individuals and helps them to succeed in their chosen pathway. 
Developing enterprising minds 
Familiar course content and approach – we’ve retained the structure of our current 
specification while building in new content areas to give you as much continuity as possible, 
starting the course with an exploration of how and why businesses start, moving through to 
the issues and decisions businesses make as they grow. 
Clear and simple structure – based on your feedback we’ve taken the opportunity to make 
some improvements to the clarity and structure of our new specification and exam papers to 
make sure you are clear about the new teaching and assessment requirements from your 
first glance. 
Engaging and contemporary contexts – our engaging themes will spark your students’ 
imagination and inspire commercial thinking as they develop their business knowledge. We 
know you use contemporary business contexts in your teaching and our new specification will 
enable you to continue to bring practical and engaging case studies into the classroom. We 
also know that real and relevant business examples engage your students so you’ll continue 
to see these in our assessments.  
Clear and accessible assessment for all – our new papers will build confidence through 
ramped questions which increasingly challenge students as they move through the paper. 
Our consistent assessment structure and straight forward mark schemes make the 
expectations clear to teachers and students. 
Trusted expert support when you need it – we’ll provide detailed content and 
assessment guidance as well as course planners, case studies and guides for how to include 
investigative tasks within the teaching and learning, to help you implement the new 
specification with confidence. Our Subject Advisor Colin Leith is available to answer your 
questions and provide guidance and support. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business – Specification 
Issue 2 – July 2022  © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
3 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this 
qualification 
Planning  
● Our Getting Started Guide gives you a comprehensive overview of the new GCSE 
qualification to help you to get to grips with the changes to content and assessment, and 
to help you understand what these changes mean for you and your students. 
● We will give you editable course planners and a scheme of work that you can adapt to 
suit your department. 
● Our mapping documents highlight key differences between the new and legacy 
specifications. 
Teaching and learning 
There will be lots of free teaching and learning support to help you deliver the new 
qualification, including: 
● case studies and activities 
● a guide to using practical examples and business investigations 
● additional support and guidance for the new content areas. 
Preparing for exams 
We will provide a range of resources to help you prepare your students for the assessments, 
including: 
● specimen papers to support formative assessments and mock exams 
● marked exemplars of student work with examiner commentaries. 
ResultsPlus 
ResultsPlus provides the most detailed analysis available of your students’ exam 
performance. It can help you identify the topics and skills where further learning would 
benefit your students. 
examWizard 
examWizard is a free online resource for teachers containing a huge bank of past paper 
questions and support materials to help you create your own mock exams and tests. 
Get help and support 
Our subject advisor service, led by Colin Leith, will ensure you receive help and guidance 
from us. You can sign up to receive e-newsletters from Colin to keep up to date with 
qualification updates and product and service news.  
UK: 020 7010 2182 
Intl: + 44 (0)20 7010 2182 
TeachingBusiness@pearson.com 
Learn more at qualifications.pearson.com 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business – Specification 
Issue 2 – July 2022  © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
4 
Qualification at a glance 
Content and assessment overview 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business consists of two  
externally-examined papers. 
Students must complete all assessment in May/June in any single year. 
 
Theme 1: Investigating small business (*Paper code: 1BS0/01) 
Written examination: 1 hour and 45 minutes  
50% of the qualification 
90 marks 
Content overview 
● Topic 1.1 Enterprise and entrepreneurship 
● Topic 1.2 Spotting a business opportunity 
● Topic 1.3 Putting a business idea into practice 
● Topic 1.4 Making the business effective 
● Topic 1.5 Understanding external influences on business 
Assessment overview 
The paper is divided into three sections: 
Section A: 35 marks 
Section B: 30 marks 
Section C: 25 marks. 
The paper will consist of calculations, multiple-choice, short-answer and extended-writing 
questions. 
Questions in Sections B and C will be based on business contexts given in the paper. 
Calculators may be used in the examination. Information on the use of calculators during the 
examinations for this qualification can be found in Appendix 4: Calculators. 
*See Appendix 7: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to this 
qualification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business – Specification 
Issue 2 – July 2022  © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
5 
 
Theme 2: Building a business (Paper code: 1BS0/02) 
Written examination: 1 hour and 45 minutes  
50% of the qualification 
90 marks 
Content overview 
● Topic 2.1 Growing the business 
● Topic 2.2 Making marketing decisions 
● Topic 2.3 Making operational decisions 
● Topic 2.4 Making financial decisions 
● Topic 2.5 Making human resource decisions 
Assessment overview 
The paper is divided into three sections: 
Section A: 35 marks 
Section B: 30 marks 
Section C: 25 marks. 
The paper will consist of calculations, multiple-choice, short-answer and extended-writing 
questions. 
Questions in Sections B and C will be based on business contexts given in the paper. 
Calculators may be used in the examination. Information on the use of calculators during the 
examinations for this qualification can be found in Appendix 4: Calculators. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business – Specification 
Issue 2 – July 2022  © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
6 
2 Subject content and assessment 
information 
Qualification aims and objectives 
The aims and objectives of this qualification are to enable students to: 
● know and understand business concepts, business terminology, business objectives, the 
integrated nature of business activity and the impact of business on individuals and wider 
society 
● apply knowledge and understanding to contemporary business issues and to different 
types and sizes of businesses in local, national and global contexts 
● develop as enterprising individuals with the ability to think commercially and creatively to 
demonstrate business acumen, and draw on evidence to make informed business 
decisions and solve business problems 
● develop as effective and independent students, and as critical and reflective thinkers with 
enquiring minds 
● use an enquiring, critical approach to make informed judgements 
● investigate and analyse real business opportunities and issues to construct well-argued, 
well-evidenced, balanced and structured arguments, demonstrating their depth and 
breadth of understanding of business 
● develop and apply quantitative skills relevant to business, including using and interpreting 
data.  
Business contexts 
Through studying this qualification students will: 
● apply knowledge and understanding to different business contexts. These include 
businesses ranging from small enterprises to large multinationals and businesses 
operating in local, national and global contexts 
● develop an understanding of how these contexts impact on business behaviour 
● use business terminology to identify and explain business activity 
● apply business concepts to familiar and unfamiliar contexts. 
Business decision making 
Through studying this qualification students will: 
● apply knowledge and understanding to business decision making, including: 
o the interdependent nature of business activity, influences on business, business 
operations, finance, marketing and human resources; and how these interdependencies 
underpin business decision making 
o how different business contexts affect business decisions 
o the use and limitation of quantitative and qualitative data in making business decisions 
● develop problem-solving and decision-making skills relevant to business 
● investigate, analyse and evaluate business opportunities and issues 
● make justified decisions using both qualitative and quantitative data, including its 
selection, interpretation, analysis and evaluation, and the application of appropriate 
quantitative skills. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business – Specification 
Issue 2 – July 2022  © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
7 
Theme 1: Investigating small business 
Overview 
Theme 1 concentrates on the key business concepts, issues and skills involved in starting 
and running a small business. It provides a framework for students to explore core concepts 
through the lens of an entrepreneur setting up a business. 
In this theme, students will be introduced to local and national business contexts and will 
develop an understanding of how these contexts impact business behaviour and decisions. 
Local contexts refer specifically to small businesses or those operating in a single UK location 
and national contexts relate to businesses operating in more than one location or across the 
UK. 
Students must develop an understanding of the interdependent nature of business activity 
through interactions between business operations, finance, marketing and human resources, 
as well as the relationship between the business and the environment in which it operates. 
Students must understand how these interdependencies and relationships underpin business 
decisions. Teaching approaches to the content must reflect this. 
Content 
Theme 1 comprises five topic areas. 
● Topic 1.1 Enterprise and entrepreneurship – students are introduced to the dynamic 
nature of business in relation to how and why business ideas come about. They also 
explore the impact of risk and reward on business activity and the role of 
entrepreneurship. 
● Topic 1.2 Spotting a business opportunity – students will explore how new and small 
businesses identify opportunities through understanding customer needs and conducting 
market research. They will also focus on understanding the competition. 
● Topic 1.3 Putting a business idea into practice – this topic focuses on making a business 
idea happen through identifying aims and objectives and concentrating on the financial 
aspects. 
● Topic 1.4 Making the business effective – students will explore a range of factors that 
impact on the success of the business, including location, the marketing mix and the 
business plan. 
● Topic 1.5 Understanding external influences on business – students are introduced to a 
range of factors, many of which are outside of the immediate control of the business, such 
as stakeholders, technology, legislation and the economy. Students will explore how 
businesses respond to these influences. 
Quantitative Skills 
Students must draw on their knowledge and understanding of Theme 1 topics to apply a 
range of quantitative skills relevant to business contexts. This includes calculations and the 
interpretation, use and limitation of quantitative and qualitative data in business contexts to 
support, inform and justify business decisions. These will be embedded within the 
examinations for this qualification. Please see Appendix 2: Quantitative Skills for full details 
of quantitative skills and examples of their application within this qualification. Formulae for 
use in this qualification can be found in Appendix 3: Formulae. Formulae will not be provided 
in the examinations. Information on the use of calculators during the examinations for this 
qualification can be found in Appendix 4: Calculators. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business – Specification 
Issue 2 – July 2022  © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
8 
Topic 1.1 Enterprise and entrepreneurship 
Subject content What students need to learn:  
1.1.1 
The dynamic nature of 
business 
Why new business ideas come about: 
● changes in technology 
● changes in what consumers want 
● products and services becoming obsolete. 
 
How new business ideas come about: 
● original ideas  
● adapting existing products/services/ideas. 
 
1.1.2 
Risk and reward 
The impact of risk and reward on business activity: 
● risk: business failure, financial loss, lack of security 
● reward: business success, profit, independence. 
 
1.1.3 
The role of business 
enterprise 
The role of business enterprise and the purpose of business 
activity: 
● to produce goods or services 
● to meet customer needs 
● to add value: convenience, branding, quality, design, 
unique selling points. 
 
The role of entrepreneurship: 
● an entrepreneur: organises resources, makes business 
decisions, takes risks. 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business – Specification 
Issue 2 – July 2022  © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
9 
Topic 1.2 Spotting a business opportunity 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
1.2.1 
Customer needs 
Identifying and understanding customer needs: 
● what customer needs are: price, quality, choice, 
convenience 
● the importance of identifying and understanding 
customers: generating sales, business survival. 
 
1.2.2 
Market research 
The purpose of market research: 
● to identify and understand customer needs 
● to identify gaps in the market 
● to reduce risk 
● to inform business decisions. 
 
Methods of market research: 
● primary research: survey, questionnaire, focus group, 
observation 
● secondary research: internet, market reports, government 
reports. 
 
The use of data in market research: 
● qualitative and quantitative data 
● the role of social media in collecting market 
research data 
● the importance of the reliability of market research data. 
 
1.2.3 
Market segmentation 
How businesses use market segmentation to target 
customers: 
● identifying market segments: location, demographics, 
lifestyle, income, age 
● market mapping to identify a gap in the market and the 
competition. 
 
1.2.4 
The competitive 
environment 
Understanding the competitive environment: 
● strengths and weaknesses of competitors based on: price, 
quality, location, product range and 
customer service 
● the impact of competition on business decision making. 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business – Specification 
Issue 2 – July 2022  © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
10 
Topic 1.3 Putting a business idea into practice 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
1.3.1 
Business aims and 
objectives 
What business aims and business objectives are. 
 
Business aims and objectives when starting up: 
● financial aims and objectives: survival, profit, sales, 
market share, financial security 
● non-financial aims and objectives: social objectives, 
personal satisfaction, challenge, independence 
and control. 
 
Why aims and objectives differ between businesses. 
 
1.3.2 
Business revenues, costs 
and profits 
The concept and calculation of: 
● revenue 
● fixed and variable costs 
● total costs 
● profit and loss 
● interest 
● break even level of output 
● margin of safety. 
 
Interpretation of break even diagrams: 
● the impact of changes in revenue and costs 
● break even level of output 
● margin of safety 
● profit and loss. 
 
1.3.3 
Cash and cash-flow 
The importance of cash to a business: 
● to pay suppliers, overheads and employees 
● to prevent business failure (insolvency) 
● the difference between cash and profit. 
 
Calculation and interpretation of cash-flow forecasts: 
● cash inflows 
● cash outflows 
● net cash flow 
● opening and closing balances. 
 
1.3.4 
Sources of business finance 
Sources of finance for a start-up or established small 
business: 
● short-term sources: overdraft and trade credit 
● long-term sources: personal savings, venture capital, 
share capital, loans, retained profit and crowd funding. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business – Specification 
Issue 2 – July 2022  © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
11 
Topic 1.4 Making the business effective 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
1.4.1 
The options for start-up and 
small businesses 
The concept of limited liability: 
● limited and unlimited liability 
● the implications for the business owner(s) of limited and 
unlimited liability. 
 
The types of business ownership for start-ups: 
● sole trader, partnership, private limited company 
● the advantages and disadvantages of each type of 
business ownership. 
 
The option of starting up and running a franchise operation: 
● the advantages and disadvantages of franchising. 
 
1.4.2 
Business location 
Factors influencing business location: 
● proximity to: market, labour, materials and competitors 
● nature of the business activity 
● the impact of the internet on location decisions: 
e-commerce and/or fixed premises. 
 
1.4.3 
The marketing mix 
What the marketing mix is and the importance of each 
element: 
● price, product, promotion, place. 
 
How the elements of the marketing mix work together: 
● balancing the marketing mix based on the competitive 
environment 
● the impact of changing consumer needs on the marketing 
mix 
● the impact of technology on the marketing mix: 
e-commerce, digital communication. 
 
1.4.4 
Business plans 
The role and importance of a business plan: 
● to identify: the business idea; business aims and 
objectives; target market (market research); forecast 
revenue, cost and profit; cash-flow forecast; sources of 
finance; location; marketing mix. 
 
The purpose of planning business activity: 
● the role and importance of a business plan in minimising 
risk and obtaining finance. 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business – Specification 
Issue 2 – July 2022  © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
12 
Topic 1.5 Understanding external influences on business 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
1.5.1 
Business stakeholders 
 
Who business stakeholders are and their different 
objectives: 
● shareholders (owners), employees, customers, managers, 
suppliers, local community, pressure groups, the 
government. 
 
Stakeholders and businesses: 
● how stakeholders are affected by business activity 
● how stakeholders impact business activity 
● possible conflicts between stakeholder groups. 
 
1.5.2 
Technology and business 
 
Different types of technology used by business: 
● e-commerce 
● social media 
● digital communication 
● payment systems. 
 
How technology influences business activity in terms of: 
● sales 
● costs 
● marketing mix. 
 
1.5.3 
Legislation and business 
The purpose of legislation: 
● principles of consumer law: quality and consumer rights 
● principles of employment law: recruitment, pay, 
discrimination and health and safety. 
 
The impact of legislation on businesses: 
● cost 
● consequences of meeting and not meeting these 
obligations. 
 
1.5.4 
The economy and business 
 
The impact of the economic climate on businesses: 
● unemployment, changing levels of consumer income, 
inflation, changes in interest rates, government taxation, 
changes in exchange rates. 
 
1.5.5  
External influences 
The importance of external influences on business: 
● possible responses by the business to changes in: 
technology, legislation, the economic climate. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business – Specification 
Issue 2 – July 2022  © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
13 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2019. 
● The assessment is 1 hour and 45 minutes. 
● The assessment is out of 90 marks. 
● Questions will relate to the content that appears in Theme 1 and students may draw on 
underpinning knowledge and understanding developed through Theme 2 as appropriate. 
● The paper is divided into three sections. 
o Section A: 35 marks 
o Section B: 30 marks 
o Section C: 25 marks. 
● Students must answer all questions. 
● The paper will consist of calculations, multiple–choice, short–answer and extended–writing 
questions. 
● The paper will include questions that target mathematics at a minimum of Key Stage 3 
level. 
● Questions in Sections B and C will be based on business contexts given in a Source 
Booklet. 
● Calculators may be used in the examination. Information on the use of calculators during 
the examinations for this qualification can be found in Appendix 4: Calculators. 
Synoptic assessment  
The subject content has been organised into themes according to business contexts to 
ensure a holistic approach is adopted throughout the course of study. This develops students’ 
understanding of the interdependent nature of business activity, business operations, 
finance, marketing and human resources as well as external influences within a business 
context. It also supports students in applying their knowledge and understanding of how 
these interdependencies underpin business decision making. 
Both themes in the subject content represent this holistic approach through the application 
to different business contexts. This approach allows students to draw on knowledge and 
understanding from across their course of study as appropriate in any question on either 
paper. It also provides the basis for contextualised responses which is a key business skill. 
Sample assessment materials  
A sample paper and mark scheme for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Command words and definitions of business terms that will be used in the examination paper 
can be found in Appendix 1: Command word taxonomy and definitions of business terms. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business – Specification 
Issue 2 – July 2022  © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
14 
Theme 2: Building a business 
Overview 
Theme 2 examines how a business develops beyond the start-up phase. It focuses on the 
key business concepts, issues and decisions used to grow a business, with emphasis on 
aspects of marketing, operations, finance and human resources. Theme 2 also considers the 
impact of the wider world on the decisions a business makes as it grows. 
In this theme, students will be introduced to national and global business contexts and will 
develop an understanding of how these contexts impact business behaviour and decisions. 
National contexts build on those in Theme 1 and relate to businesses operating in more than 
one location or across the UK. Global contexts relate to non-UK or transnational businesses. 
Students must develop an understanding of the interdependent nature of business activity 
through interactions between business operations, finance, marketing and human resources, 
as well as the relationship between the business and the environment in which it operates. 
Students must understand how these functional areas influence business activity and how 
interdependencies and relationships between them underpin business decisions. Teaching 
approaches to the content must reflect this. 
Content 
Theme 2 comprises five topic areas. 
● Topic 2.1 Growing the business – students are introduced to methods of growth and how 
and why business aims and objectives change as businesses evolve. The impact of 
globalisation and the ethical and environmental questions facing businesses are explored. 
● Topic 2.2 Making marketing decisions – students will explore how each element of the 
marketing mix is managed and used to inform and make business decisions in a 
competitive marketplace. 
● Topic 2.3 Making operational decisions – this topic focuses on meeting customer needs 
through the design, supply, quality and sales decisions a business makes. 
● Topic 2.4 Making financial decisions – students will explore the tools a business has to 
support financial decision making, including ratio analysis and the use and limitation of a 
range of financial information. 
● Topic 2.5 Making human resource decisions – growing a business means that decisions 
relating to organisational structure, recruitment, training and motivation need to be made 
to influence business activity. These aspects are considered in this final topic. 
Quantitative Skills 
Students must draw on their knowledge and understanding of Theme 2 topics to apply a 
range of quantitative skills relevant to business contexts. This includes calculations and the 
interpretation, use and limitation of quantitative and qualitative data in business contexts to 
support, inform and justify business decisions. These will be embedded within the 
examination for this qualification. Please see Appendix 2: Quantitative Skills for full details of 
quantitative skills and how they are applied within this qualification. Formulae for use in this 
qualification can be found in Appendix 3: Formulae. Formulae will not be provided in the 
examinations. Information on the use of calculators during the examinations for this 
qualification can be found in Appendix 4: Calculators. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business – Specification 
Issue 2 – July 2022  © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
15 
Topic 2.1 Growing the business 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
2.1.1 
Business growth 
Methods of business growth and their impact: 
● internal (organic) growth: new products (innovation, research 
and development), new markets (through changing the 
marketing mix or taking advantage of technology and/or 
expanding overseas) 
● external (inorganic) growth: merger, takeover. 
 
The types of business ownership for growing businesses: 
● public limited company (plc) 
 
Sources of finance for growing and established businesses: 
● internal sources: retained profit, selling assets 
● external sources: loan capital, share capital, including stock 
market flotation (public limited companies). 
 
2.1.2 
Changes in business aims 
and objectives 
Why business aims and objectives change as businesses evolve: 
● in response to: market conditions, technology, performance, 
legislation, internal reasons. 
 
How business aims and objectives change as businesses evolve: 
● focus on survival or growth 
● entering or exiting markets 
● growing or reducing the workforce 
● increasing or decreasing product range. 
 
2.1.3 
Business and globalisation 
The impact of globalisation on businesses: 
● imports: competition from overseas, buying from overseas 
● exports: selling to overseas markets 
● changing business locations 
● multinationals. 
 
Barriers to international trade: 
● tariffs 
● trade blocs. 
 
How businesses compete internationally: 
● the use of the internet and e-commerce 
● changing the marketing mix to compete internationally. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business – Specification 
Issue 2 – July 2022  © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
16 
 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
2.1.4 
Ethics, the environment 
and business 
The impact of ethical and environmental considerations on 
businesses: 
● how ethical considerations influence business activity: 
possible trade-offs between ethics and profit 
● how environmental considerations influence business activity: 
possible trade-offs between the environment, sustainability 
and profit 
● the potential impact of pressure group activity on the 
marketing mix. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business – Specification 
Issue 2 – July 2022  © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
17 
Topic 2.2 Making marketing decisions 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
2.2.1 
Product 
The design mix: 
● function, aesthetics, cost. 
 
The product life cycle: 
● the phases of the product life cycle 
● extension strategies. 
 
The importance to a business of differentiating a product/ 
service. 
 
2.2.2 
Price 
Price 
● pricing strategies 
● influences on pricing strategies: technology, competition, 
market segments, product life cycle. 
 
2.2.3 
Promotion 
Promotion: 
● appropriate promotion strategies for different market 
segments: advertising, sponsorship, product trials, special 
offers, branding 
● the use of technology in promotion: targeted advertising 
online, viral advertising via social media, e-newsletters. 
 
2.2.4 
Place 
Place: 
● methods of distribution: retailers and e-tailers  
(e-commerce). 
 
2.2.5 
Using the marketing mix 
to make business 
decisions 
How each element of the marketing mix can influence other 
elements. 
 
Using the marketing mix to build competitive advantage. 
 
How an integrated marketing mix can influence competitive 
advantage. 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business – Specification 
Issue 2 – July 2022  © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
18 
Topic 2.3 Making operational decisions 
Subject content What students need to learn:  
2.3.1 
Business operations 
The purpose of business operations: 
● to produce goods 
● to provide services. 
 
Production processes: 
● different types: job, batch, flow 
● the impact of different types of production process: keeping 
productivity up and costs down and allowing for competitive 
prices. 
 
Impacts of technology on production: 
● balancing cost, productivity, quality and flexibility. 
 
2.3.2 
Working with suppliers 
Managing stock: 
● interpretation of bar gate stock graphs 
● the use of just in time (JIT) stock control. 
 
The role of procurement: 
● relationships with suppliers: quality, delivery (cost, speed, 
reliability), availability, cost, trust 
● the impact of logistics and supply decisions on: costs, 
reputation, customer satisfaction. 
 
2.3.3 
Managing quality 
The concept of quality and its importance in: 
● the production of goods and the provision of services: quality 
control and quality assurance 
● allowing a business to control costs and gain a competitive 
advantage. 
 
2.3.4 
The sales process 
The sales process: 
● product knowledge, speed and efficiency of service, customer 
engagement, responses to customer feedback, post-sales 
service. 
 
The importance to businesses of providing good customer 
service. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business – Specification 
Issue 2 – July 2022  © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
19 
Topic 2.4 Making financial decisions 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
2.4.1 
Business calculations 
The concept and calculation of: 
● gross profit 
● net profit 
 
Calculation and interpretation of: 
● gross profit margin 
● net profit margin  
● average rate of return. 
 
2.4.2 
Understanding business 
performance  
The use and interpretation of quantitative business data to 
support, inform and justify business decisions: 
● information from graphs and charts 
● financial data 
● marketing data 
● market data. 
 
The use and limitations of financial information in: 
● understanding business performance 
● making business decisions. 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business – Specification 
Issue 2 – July 2022  © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
20 
Topic 2.5 Making human resource decisions 
Subject content What students need to learn: 
2.5.1 
Organisational structures 
Different organisational structures and when each are 
appropriate: 
● hierarchical and flat 
● centralised and decentralised. 
 
The importance of effective communication: 
● the impact of insufficient or excessive communication on 
efficiency and motivation 
● barriers to effective communication. 
 
Different ways of working: 
● part-time, full-time and flexible hours 
● permanent, temporary, and freelance contracts 
● the impact of technology on ways of working: efficiency, 
remote working. 
 
2.5.2 
Effective recruitment 
Different job roles and responsibilities: 
● key job roles and their responsibilities: directors, senior 
managers, supervisors/team leaders, operational and support 
staff. 
 
How businesses recruit people: 
● documents: person specification and job description, 
application form, CV 
● recruitment methods used to meet different business needs 
(internal and external recruitment). 
 
2.5.3 
Effective training and 
development 
How businesses train and develop employees: 
● different ways of training and developing employees: formal 
and informal training, self-learning, ongoing training for all 
employees, use of target setting and performance reviews. 
 
Why businesses train and develop employees: 
● the link between training, motivation and retention 
● retraining to use new technology. 
 
2.5.4 
Motivation 
The importance of motivation in the workplace: 
● attracting employees, retaining employees, productivity. 
 
How businesses motivate employees: 
● financial methods: remuneration, bonus, commission, 
promotion, fringe benefits 
● non-financial methods: job rotation, job enrichment, 
autonomy. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business – Specification 
Issue 2 – July 2022  © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
21 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2019. 
● The assessment is 1 hour and 45 minutes. 
● The assessment is out of 90 marks. 
● Questions will relate to the content that appears in Theme 2 and students may draw on 
underpinning knowledge and understanding developed through Theme 1 as appropriate. 
● The paper is divided into three sections. 
o Section A: 35 marks 
o Section B: 30 marks 
o Section C: 25 marks. 
● Students must answer all questions. 
● The paper will consist of calculations, multiple–choice, short–answer and extended–writing 
questions. 
● The paper will include questions that target mathematics at a minimum of Key Stage 3 
level. 
● Questions in Sections B and C will be based on business contexts given in a Source 
Booklet. 
● Calculators may be used in the examination. Information on the use of calculators during 
the examinations for this qualification can be found in Appendix 4: Calculators. 
Synoptic assessment  
The subject content has been organised into themes according to business contexts to 
ensure a holistic approach is adopted throughout the course of study. This develops students’ 
understanding of the interdependent nature of business activity, business operations, 
finance, marketing and human resources as well as external influences within a business 
context. It also supports students in applying their knowledge and understanding of how 
these interdependencies underpin business decision making. 
Both themes in the subject content represent this holistic approach through the application 
to different business contexts. This approach allows students to draw on knowledge and 
understanding from across their course of study as appropriate in any question on either 
paper. It also provides the basis for contextualised responses which is a key business skill. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and mark scheme for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Command words and definitions of business terms that will be used in the examination paper 
can be found in Appendix 1: Command word taxonomy and definitions of business terms. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business – Specification 
Issue 2 – July 2022  © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
22 
Assessment Objectives 
 
Students must: 
% in 
GCSE 
AO1 Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of business concepts and 
issues 
35 
AO2 Apply knowledge and understanding of business concepts and issues 
to a variety of contexts 
35 
AO3 Analyse and evaluate business information and issues to demonstrate 
understanding of business activity, make judgements and draw 
conclusions 
30 
Total 100% 
 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
Paper  
Assessment Objectives Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives AO1 % AO2 % AO3 % 
Paper 1 17.2 17.8 15 50% 
Paper 2 17.8 17.2 15 50% 
Total for GCSE 35% 35% 30% 100% 
 
NB: totals have been rounded either up or down to one decimal point. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business – Specification 
Issue 2 – July 2022  © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
23 
3 Administration and general information 
Entries 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for this qualification can be found in 
our UK Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations officers and is 
available on our website: qualifications.pearson.com 
Discount code and performance tables 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more than one GCSE, or other Level 2 
qualifications with the same discount code, will have only the grade for their 'first entry' 
counted for the purpose of the school and college performance tables (please see 
Appendix 7: Codes). For further information about what constitutes 'first entry' and full 
details of how this policy is applied, please refer to the DfE website: 
www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-education 
Students should be advised that if they take two GCSEs with the same discount code, the 
schools and colleges to which they wish to progress are likely to take the view that this 
achievement is equivalent to only one GCSE. The same view may be taken if students take 
two GCSEs or other Level 2 qualifications that have different discount codes but which have 
significant overlap of content. Before embarking on their programmes, students or their 
advisers who have any doubts about their subject combinations should check with the 
institution to which they wish to progress.  
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, 
special consideration and malpractice 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality policy requires all students to 
have equal opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our qualifications 
to be awarded in a way that is fair to every student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the Equality Act 2010) are not, 
when they are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in comparison to 
students who do not share that characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification and that 
this achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their peers. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be available in English. All student work must be in 
English.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business – Specification 
Issue 2 – July 2022  © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
24 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with special 
educational needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to: 
● access the assessment 
● show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the assessment. 
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an individual 
student with a disability, without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding bodies comply with the duty under the 
Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students will 
then know what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for assessment. 
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable adjustments 
where a person with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in undertaking an 
assessment. The awarding organisation is required to take reasonable steps to overcome 
that disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be unique to that individual and 
therefore might not be in the list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of factors, 
including: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding 
organisation, or affects timeframes or the security or integrity of the assessment. This is 
because the adjustment is not ‘reasonable’. 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student's mark or grade to 
reflect temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the examination/ 
assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a material effect on a 
candidate’s ability to take an assessment or demonstrate their level of attainment in 
an assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to apply for access arrangements 
and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special 
consideration, please refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business – Specification 
Issue 2 – July 2022  © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
25 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that compromises or seeks to 
compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in examinations must be reported to Pearson using a JCQ Form M1 
(available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form should be emailed to 
candidatemalpractice@pearson.com. Please provide as much information and supporting 
documentation as possible. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies 
with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice constitutes staff or centre malpractice. 
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and maladministration of 
our qualifications. As with candidate malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is any act that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the 
integrity of the qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported 
immediately, before any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson on 
a JCQ Form M2(a) (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form, 
supporting documentation and as much information should be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate  
sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the document 
General and Vocational Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments Policies and Procedures, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice. 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to comply with the requirements of 
Ofqual's General Conditions of Recognition. 
This GCSE qualification will be graded and certificated on a nine-grade scale from 9 to 1 
using the total subject mark where 9 is the highest grade. Individual papers are not graded. 
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum judged by Pearson to be of 
sufficient standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U result. 
The first certification opportunity for this qualification will be 2019. 
Student recruitment and progression 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression 
● equal opportunities exist for all students. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business – Specification 
Issue 2 – July 2022  © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
26 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this qualification. 
Progression 
This qualification in business will: 
● enable students to understand more about the business world 
● motivate and challenge students, and prepare them to make informed decisions about 
further study and career pathways. 
Students can progress from this qualification to a number of different academic and 
vocational qualifications at Level 3, including GCEs in Business, History, Geography, 
Economics and Psychology and BTEC Nationals in Business. 
The knowledge and skills gained from GCSE Business support students’ entry into 
employment or other training in specific aspects of business, such as apprenticeships and 
vocational qualifications which focus on more specialised business areas. 
GCSE Business provides a strong foundation for employment, with students progressing, 
with further training, to a wide range of careers training such as banking, sales, product 
management and general management. 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business – Specification 
Issue 2 – July 2022  © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
27 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Command word taxonomy and definitions of business terms 29 
Appendix 2: Quantitative skills 31 
Appendix 3: Formulae 32 
Appendix 4: Calculators 33 
Appendix 5: The context for the development of this qualification 34 
Appendix 6: Transferable skills 36 
Appendix 7: Codes 37 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business – Specification 
Issue 2 – July 2022  © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
28 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business – Specification 
Issue 2 – July 2022  © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
29 
Appendix 1: Command word taxonomy and 
definitions of business terms  
Command word taxonomy  
The table below lists the command words that may be used in question papers for GCSE 
Business and an outline of what each type of question requires students to do. 
 
Command word  This type of question will require students to: 
Multiple choice 
question 
select one or more correct answer from a choice of answers. These 
questions test recall of knowledge from the specification content 
Define define a term from the specification content 
Give give an answer testing recall of knowledge from the specification 
content 
State give an answer, no longer than a sentence, referring to a piece of 
contextual information from which students must select the 
answer 
Identify select the correct answer from reading a graph or table of data  
Calculate use mathematical skills to reach the answer, based on given data. 
Calculators may be used and workin gs should be given 
Complete the table work out the values missing from the presented table of data  
Outline give two linked points about a business concept or issue, placed in 
context in the question 
Explain give a statement of fact, with two further exp ansion points. These 
may expand on each other, or both from the same fact. There is 
no context in these questions 
Discuss write an extended answer, requiring expansion and exploration of 
a business concept or issue. These question s will not have context 
but students may bring one in for illustration purposes 
Analyse write an extended answer, requiring expansion and exploration of 
a business concept or issue. The answer will be placed in context 
by the question 
Justify write an extended answer, using information  provided in order to 
recommend one of two options to a business owner 
Evaluate write an extended answer, using knowledge of specification 
content to reach a supported conclusion about a business 
situation. 
 
Examples of how these command words are used in Paper 1 and Paper 2 can be found in the 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business Sample Assessment Materials for 
this qualification. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business – Specification 
Issue 2 – July 2022  © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
30 
Below are definitions of key business terms that have been used in the mark schemes for 
this qualification, to show how they are being used in the context of GCSE Business.  
Concepts 
Concepts are business models or ideas that relate to business activity, influences on 
business, business operations, finance, marketing and human resources. 
Issues 
Issues in the context of this this qualification means any external or internal event which will 
impinge on the environment of an organisation. They are aspects of subject content, and 
may include causes and consequences – that is internal and external changes and the results 
of these, problems, and/or opportunities. 
Business information 
Business information is qualitative or quantitative information that relates to business, either 
directly or indirectly. It could include, but is not limited to, financial data, marketing data or 
market data or any other internal or external information that may have a bearing on 
business activity. 
Full descriptions of the skills required to access the Assessment Objectives can be found in 
the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business Sample Assessment Materials 
for this qualification.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business – Specification 
Issue 2 – July 2022  © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
31 
Appendix 2: Quantitative skills 
The list below states the range and extent of mathematical skills that students are required 
to know for this qualification. Students must be able to draw on the knowledge and 
understanding learned from the subject content to apply these skills to relevant business 
contexts. 
This list is taken from the document Business GCSE subject content published by the 
Department for Education (DfE) in December 2015. 
The minimum level of mathematics in the question papers will be equivalent to Key Stage 3 
mathematics.  
Calculation 
Calculations in a business context, including: 
● percentages and percentage changes 
● averages 
● revenue, costs and profit 
● gross profit margin and net profit margin ratios 
● average rate of return 
● cash-flow forecasts, including total costs, total revenue and net cash flow. 
Interpretation 
Interpretation and use of quantitative data in business contexts to support, inform and justify 
business decisions, including: 
● information from graphs and charts 
● profitability ratios (gross profit margin and net profit margin) 
● financial data, including profit and loss, average rate of return and 
cash-flow forecasts 
● marketing data, including market research data 
● market data, including market share, changes in costs and changes in prices. 
These quantitative skills will be assessed in both Papers 1 and Paper 2, totalling 10% of the 
marks available for the qualification. Questions involving quantitative skills will always be in 
a business context.  
These skills will be sampled in the question papers but all will be covered over the lifetime of 
the qualification. Examples of questions rewarding quantitative skills are Paper 1 Q3(b) and 
Paper 2 Q5(a) in the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business Sample 
Assessment Materials (SAMs). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business – Specification 
Issue 2 – July 2022  © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
32 
 
 
 
 
                     
 
 
         
 
 
cost)  variable    price  (sales
cost  fixed  =  units  in  point  evenBreak  −   
price  sales    units  in  point  evenbreak      revenue / costs  in  point  evenBreak  ×=  
 
Margin of safety 
sales  evenbreak      sales  budgetedor    actual  =   safety  of  Margin −  
 
Interest (on loans) 
100    amount  borrowed
 amount  borrowed    repayment  total  =  %  in  loans)  (on  Interest ×−  
 
Net cash-flow 
period  given  a  in  outflows  cash    inflows  cash  =  cash-flow  Net −  
 
Opening and closing balances 
period  previous  the  of  balance  closing  =  balance  Opening  
 
 cash-flow  net  +  balance  opening  =  balance  Closing  
 
Gross profit 
sales  of  cost    revenue  sales  =  profit  Gross −  
 
Gross profit margin 
100    revenue  sales
profit  gross  = (%)  margin  profit  Gross ×  
 
Net profit 
interest  and  expenses  operatingother      profit  gross  =  profit  Net −  
 
Net profit margin 
100    revenue  sales
profit  net  = (%)  margin  profit  Net ×  
 
Average rate of return 
100    investment  of  cost
years)  of no. / profit  (total  profit  annual  average  = (%) return  of  rate  Average ×   
Appendix 3: Formulae
The list below gives formulae for use in this qualification.  Formulae will not be provided in
the examinations for Paper 1 or Paper 2.
Total costs
TC  (total  cost)  =  TFC  (total  fixed  costs)  +  TVC  (total  variable  costs)
Revenue
Revenue  =  price  ×  quantity
Break even
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business – Specification 
Issue 2 – July 2022  © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
33 
Appendix 4: Calculators  
Students may use a calculator in assessments for this qualification. Centres are responsible 
for making sure that calculators used by their students meet the requirements highlighted in 
the table below. 
Students must be familiar with the requirements before their assessments for this 
qualification. 
 
Calculators must be: 
● of a size suitable for use on a desk 
● either battery or solar powered 
● free of lids, cases and covers that 
have printed instructions or 
formulae. 
Calculators must not: 
● be designed or adapted to offer any of these 
facilities: 
o language translators 
o symbolic algebraic manipulation 
o symbolic differentiation or integration 
o communication with other machines or 
the internet 
● be borrowed from another candidate during 
an examination for any reason* 
● have retrievable information stored in them. 
This includes: 
o databanks 
o dictionaries 
o mathematical formulae 
o text. 
The candidate is responsible for 
the following: 
● the calculator’s power supply 
● the calculator’s working condition 
● clearing anything stored in the 
calculator. 
 
*An invigilator may give a student a replacement calculator. 
Further information can be found in the JCQ documents Instructions for conducting 
examinations and Information for candidates for written examinations, available at 
www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business – Specification 
Issue 2 – July 2022  © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
34 
Appendix 5: The context for the 
development of this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] and our 
ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
● reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with those 
taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
● consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including learned bodies, 
subject associations, higher-education academics, teachers and employers to ensure this 
qualification is suitable for a UK context 
● reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in their 
documents GCSE (9 to 1) Qualification Level Conditions and Requirements and GCSE Subject 
Level Conditions and Requirements for Business, published in March 2016. 
 
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification Principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
• demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning and 
measuring higher-order skills 
• rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and valid 
assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in end users of the knowledge, skills 
and competencies of certified students 
• inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students develop at 
different rates and have different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
• empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills, see Appendix 6. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business – Specification 
Issue 2 – July 2022  © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
 
May 2014 
“ The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important change to the 
education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications will assist them in 
helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an ‘Expert 
Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or because of 
our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the world as diverse as 
Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification development 
process that has included: 
● extensive international comparability of subject content against the highest-performing 
jurisdictions in the world 
● benchmarking assessments against UK and overseas providers to ensure that they are at 
the right level of demand 
● establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-specific 
expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
● subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future oriented. The 
design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, meaning learner outcomes 
have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a learner’s success 
in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident that we have supported the 
development of qualifications that are outstanding for their coherence, thoroughness and attention 
to detail and can be regarded as representing world-class best practice. ” 
  
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Lee Sing Kong 
Director, National Institute of Education, 
Singapore 
  
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
  
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
 
All titles correct as at May 2014 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business – Specification 
Issue 2 – July 2022  © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
36 
Appendix 6: Transferable skills 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently flagged the 
need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable them to respond with 
confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines skills, or 
competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that can be learned and 
that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform an activity or task and can be 
built upon and extended through learning.’ 
[1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected and 
evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this process, we 
identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the most evidence-based and 
robust skills framework. We adapted the framework slightly to include the Program for 
International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT Literacy and Collaborative Problem Solving 
(CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves: [2]  
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve general 
cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and communicate. [3]  
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, oral communication, written communication, assertive 
communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, service 
orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared understanding, 
taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team organisation. 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work stress, 
adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, and physical 
adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual teams, 
work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and able to acquire 
new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher education, 
as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the teaching and learning of 
this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning materials, developed with 
stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
 
[1]  OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012) 
[2]  Koenig J A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop (National 
Academies Press, 2011) 
[3]  PISA – The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy (2011) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Business – Specification 
Issue 2 – July 2022  © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
37 
Appendix 7: Codes 
 
Type of code Use of code Code 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for performance 
tables is assigned a discount code indicating 
the subject area to which it belongs. 
Discount codes are published by the DfE. 
Please see the 
GOV.UK website* 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes  
Each qualification title is allocated an Ofqual 
Regulated Qualifications Framework (RQF) 
code. 
The RQF code is known as a Qualification 
Number (QN). This is the code that features in 
the DfE Section 96 and on the LARA as being 
eligible for 16–18 and 19+ funding, and is to 
be used for all qualification funding purposes. 
The QN will appear on students’ final 
certification documentation. 
The QN for this 
qualification is: 
603/0121/1 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to enter 
students for a qualification. Centres will need 
to use the entry codes only when claiming 
students’ qualifications. 
GCSE – 1BS0 
 
Paper codes These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be entered 
for individual papers. 
Paper 1: 1BS0/01 
Paper 2: 1BS0/02 
 
* https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/key-stage-4-qualifications-discount-codes-
and-point-scores 
 
DB240522 9781446932964_GCSE2017_L12_BUSINESS_ISS2.DOC.1–43/0 

 
 
 
Edexcel, BTEC and LCCI qualifications 
Edexcel, BTEC and LCCI qualifications are awarded by Pearson, the UK’s largest awarding 
body offering academic and vocational qualifications that are globally recognised and 
benchmarked. For further information, please visit our qualifications website at 
qualifications.pearson.com. Alternatively, you can get in touch with us using the details on 
our contact us page at qualifications.pearson.com/contactus 
 
About Pearson 
Pearson is the world's leading learning company, with 22,500 employees in more than 
70 countries working to help people of all ages to make measurable progress in their lives 
through learning. We put the learner at the centre of everything we do, because wherever 
learning flourishes, so do people. Find out more about how we can help you and your 
learners at qualifications.pearson.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References to third party materials made in this specification are made in good faith. Pearson 
does not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may 
be subject to change, or any opinions expressed therein. (Material may include textbooks, 
journals, magazines and other publications and websites.) 
 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
 
ISBN 978 1 446 93296 4 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2022 
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office:  80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121