Speciﬁ  cation
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9 - 1) in Greek (1GK0)
First teaching from September 2017
First certiﬁ  cation from June 2019
GCSE (9-1)
Greek
Issue 5
Speciﬁ  cation
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9 - 1) in Greek (1GK0)
GCSE (9-1)
Greek

 
 
Summary of Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2  
GCSE (9-1) in Greek Specification 
Issue 5 changes 
 
Summary of changes made between previous issue and this current 
issue  
Page 
number  
Removal of Subject Advisor name: 
‘Our subject advisor service and online community…’ 
3 
Update to Foundation tier paper timing: 
‘Foundation tier: 1 hour 20 minutes…’ 
6 and 39 
Clarification of question titles appearing in English added: 
‘The instructions to students are in Greek. The question titles appear in English.’ 
38 
Update to Foundation tier Assessment Information for Paper 4, bullet point 5: 
‘Question 2 has two options from which students have to select one. This 
question assesses students on their ability to note down key points and convey 
information. Students must use the formal register.’ 
39 
Reference to ‘GCE AS’ removed in the following sentence: 
This qualification offers a suitable progression route to GCE A level in Greek.  
66 
 
If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, contact us via our 
website at: qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/contact-us.html. 
 
 
Contents 
1 Introduction 2 
Why choose Edexcel GCSE Greek? 2 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this qualification 3 
Qualification at a glance 4 
2 Subject content 7 
Themes and topics 8 
Paper 1: Listening and understanding in Greek 10 
Paper 2: Speaking in Greek 12 
Paper 3: Reading and understanding in Greek 36 
Paper 4: Writing in Greek 38 
Assessment Objectives 62 
3 Administration and general information 63 
Entries 63 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special consideration and 
malpractice 63 
Student recruitment and progression 66 
Appendix 1: Candidate speaking examination record form 
(CS2) 69 
Appendix 2: Grammar list 70 
Appendix 3: Vocabulary list 73 
Appendix 4: The context for the development of this 
qualification 133 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 135 
Appendix 6: Codes 136 
 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
2 
1 Introduction 
Why choose Edexcel GCSE Greek? 
We believe languages should be accessible for all students. Our new Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Greek has been developed to help students of all abilities 
progress and develop a passion for languages, through culturally engaging content. 
We’ve listened to feedback from the languages community and have developed an engaging 
and inspirational course of study that will enable your students to manipulate and use the 
target language effectively, independently and creatively, so that they have a solid basis 
from which to progress to A Level or employment. 
Engaging and popular topics 
Our specification includes both familiar and new topics that you have told us you like and 
that motivate your students. 
Manageable content 
Our content has been structured across five themes. This flexible programme of study allows 
time for a focused revision period at the end of the course. 
Content and assessments that provide an engaging real-world focus 
The authentic situations and stimuli enable students to see language in context and learn 
about the culture of the target language country. Our assessments allow for spontaneity and 
test grammar as well as providing plenty of opportunities for students to apply their 
knowledge independently, creatively and in authentic situations. 
Straightforward assessments that are accessible to all students 
Special care has been taken to ensure that all our papers are designed to be clear and 
concise and, where appropriate, questions feature scaffolding to help all students’ progress 
through the assessments confidently. Reading and listening papers are structured so that 
questions set in the target language are in a separate section from those questions requiring 
responses in English. Both papers are also structured so that they are progressive in their 
level of demand with the most demanding question being the final question in the paper. 
Translation tasks are progressive in their level of difficulty and are of appropriate demand at 
each tier. 
Carefully selected texts 
We have worked closely with teachers and expert practitioners to ensure we include 
interesting and relevant texts at the right level for students at each tier and that will 
encourage the use of a wide range of texts in the classroom. 
Clear and precise assessment criteria 
Our mark schemes have been trialled with sample student answers to ensure they reward 
students appropriately and that it is clear what is expected of students at each band. 
Continuous progression 
Our content builds on the understanding developed at prior language learning experience at 
Key Stage 3 while also ensuring that students new to the subject are appropriately 
supported, and provides a firm foundation for students to make a smooth transition to 
A Level. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
3 
Supporting you in planning and implementing this 
qualification 
Planning 
● To support you in delivering this specification, our Getting Started Guide, available on 
our website, gives you an overview of the new GCSE qualification to help you to get to 
grips with the changes to content and assessment and to help you understand what these 
changes mean for you and your students. 
● We will give you an editable course planner and scheme of work that you can adapt to 
suit your department. 
● Our mapping documents highlight key differences between the new and 2009 
qualification. 
Teaching and learning 
There are lots of free teaching and learning support to help you deliver the new qualification, 
including: 
● a guide to questions in the target language 
● student guide 
● online and face-to-face training events. 
Preparing for exams 
We also provide a range of resources to help you prepare your students for the assessments, 
including: 
● marked exemplars of student work with examiner commentaries. 
ResultsPlus 
ResultsPlus provides the most detailed analysis available of your students’ exam 
performance. It can help you identify the topics and skills where further learning would 
benefit your students. 
Get help and support 
Our subject advisor service and online community will ensure you receive help and guidance 
from us and that you can share ideas and information with other teachers. You can sign up 
to receive e-newsletters to keep up to date with qualification updates and product and 
service news. 
Learn more at qualifications.pearson.com 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
4 
Qualification at a glance 
Content and assessment overview 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Greek consists of four externally 
examined papers based on the following skills: listening, speaking, reading and writing. 
Students must complete their speaking assessment in April/May and all other assessments in 
May/June in any single year. 
Each paper is available at Foundation tier or Higher tier. Students must be entered for a 
single tier across all papers. 
The use of dictionaries is not permitted. For Paper 2 this includes during the 
preparation time. 
 
Paper 1: Listening and understanding in Greek (*Paper code: 1GK0/1F and 1H) 
Written examination 
Foundation tier: 35 minutes, including 5 minutes’ reading time; 50 marks 
Higher tier: 45 minutes, including 5 minutes’ reading time; 50 marks 
25% of the total qualification 
Content overview 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes and topics. 
Assessment overview 
Students are assessed on their understanding of standard spoken Greek by one or more 
speakers in a range of public and social settings. Students will respond to multiple-response 
and short-answer open-response questions based on a recording featuring male and female 
Greek speakers. 
Students must answer all questions in both sections. 
There is no requirement for students to produce written responses in Greek. 
Foundation tier 
● Section A is set in English. The instructions to students are in English. 
● Section B is set in Greek. The instructions to students are in Greek. 
Higher tier 
● Section A is set in Greek. The instructions to students are in Greek. 
● Section B is set in English. The instructions to students are in English. 
The listening audio files are available on our website. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
5 
 
Paper 2: Speaking in Greek (*Paper code: 1GK0/2F and 2H) 
Internally conducted and externally assessed 
Foundation tier: 7–9 minutes plus 12 minutes’ preparation time; 70 marks 
Higher tier: 10–12 minutes plus 12 minutes’ preparation time; 70 marks 
25% of the total qualification 
Content overview 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes and topics. 
Assessment overview 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate and interact effectively through 
speaking in Greek for different purposes and in different settings. 
There are three tasks which must be conducted in the following order: 
Task 1 – a role play based on one topic that is allocated by Pearson 
Task 2 – questions based on a picture stimulus based on one topic that is allocated by Pearson 
Task 3 – conversation based on two themes. The first theme is based on the topic chosen by 
the student in advance of the assessment. The second theme is allocated by Pearson. 
The assessments are conducted by teachers in one session within a prescribed assessment 
window, the recordings are then submitted to Pearson for external marking. 
 
 
Paper 3: Reading and understanding in Greek (*Paper code: 1GK0/3F and 3H) 
Written examination 
Foundation tier: 50 minutes; 50 marks. Higher tier: 1 hour 5 minutes; 50 marks 
25% of the total qualification 
Content overview 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes and topics. 
Assessment overview 
Students are assessed on their understanding of written Greek across a range of different 
types of texts, including advertisements, emails, letters, articles and literary texts. Students 
are required to respond to multiple-response and short-answer questions based on these texts. 
Students must answer all questions in each of the three sections: 
Section A is set in English. The instructions to students are in English. 
Section B is set in Greek. The instructions to students are in Greek. 
Section C includes a translation passage from Greek into English with instructions in English. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
6 
 
Paper 4: Writing in Greek (*Paper code: 1GK0/4F and 4H) 
Written examination 
Foundation tier: 1 hour 20 minutes; 60 marks 
Higher tier: 1 hour 25 minutes; 60 marks 
25% of the total qualification 
Content overview 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes and topics. 
Assessment overview 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate effectively through writing in Greek for 
different purposes and audiences. Students are required to produce responses of varying 
lengths and types to express ideas and opinions in Greek. The instructions to students are in 
Greek. Word counts are specified for each question. Students must answer all questions. 
Foundation tier – three open-response questions and one translation into Greek. 
Higher tier – two open-response questions and one translation into Greek. 
 
*See Appendix 6: Codes for a description of this code and all codes related to this 
qualification 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
7 
2 Subject content 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Greek allows students to develop their 
ability to communicate with Greek native speakers in both speech and writing. Students will 
study across a variety of contexts relevant to their age and interests and will also develop a 
greater awareness of the culture of Greek-speaking communities and countries. These 
contexts are listed under Themes and topics. 
Students will need to develop and use their knowledge and understanding of Greek grammar 
progressively through their course of study. Grammar requirements are given in the 
grammar list (see Appendix 2: Grammar list). 
To help students build on their range of vocabulary, a list is provided of words that students 
are expected to use and understand (see Appendix 3: Vocabulary list). These lists are not 
exhaustive but are intended as a guide; students at both tiers will be required to understand 
and respond to familiar words (appropriate to the tier) that are not on the lists. 
Qualification aims and objectives 
The aims and objectives of this qualification are to enable students to: 
● develop their ability to communicate confidently and coherently with native speakers in 
speech and writing, conveying what they want to say with increasing accuracy 
● express and develop thoughts and ideas spontaneously and fluently 
● listen to and understand clearly articulated, standard speech at near normal speed 
● deepen their knowledge about how language works and enrich their vocabulary in order 
for them to increase their independent use and understanding of extended language in a 
wide range of contexts 
● acquire new knowledge, skills and ways of thinking through the ability to understand and 
respond to a rich range of authentic spoken and written material, adapted and abridged, 
as appropriate, including literary texts 
● develop awareness and understanding of the culture and identity of the countries and 
communities where the language is spoken 
● be encouraged to make appropriate links to other areas of the curriculum to enable 
bilingual and deeper learning, where the language may become a medium for constructing 
and applying knowledge 
● develop language-learning skills both for immediate use and to prepare them for further 
language study and use in school, higher education or employment 
● develop language strategies, including repair strategies. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
8 
Themes and topics 
Questions across all four language skills are set in common contexts, addressing a range of 
relevant contemporary and cultural themes. They are organised into five themes, each 
broken down into topics and sub-topics. 
The five themes are: 
1. Identity and culture 
2. Local area, holiday, travel 
3. School 
4. Future aspirations, study and work 
5. International and global dimension. 
All themes and topics must be studied in the context of both the students’ home 
country and that of countries and communities where Greek is spoken. 
For listening and reading assessments, the majority of contexts are based on the culture and 
countries where the assessed language is spoken. Students may also refer to the culture of 
the assessed language countries or communities in the speaking and writing papers. It is, 
therefore, important that students are exposed to materials relating to Greek-speaking 
countries throughout the course.  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
9 
Each topic has been highlighted in bold. 
All topics must be studied in the context of both the students’ home country and 
that of the countries and communities where Greek is spoken. 
 
Theme 1: Identity and culture 
● Who am I?: relationships; when I was younger; what my friends and family are like; 
what makes a good friend; interests; socialising with friends and family; role models 
● Daily life: customs and everyday life; food and drink; shopping; social media and 
technology (use of, advantages and disadvantages) 
● Cultural life: celebrations and festivals; reading; music; sport; film and television 
 
Theme 2: Local area, holiday and travel 
● Holidays: preferences; experiences; destinations 
● Travel and tourist transactions: travel and accommodation; asking for help and 
dealing with problems; directions; eating out; shopping 
● Town, region and country: weather; places to see; things to do 
 
Theme 3: School 
● What school is like: school types; school day; subjects; rules and pressures; celebrating 
success 
● School activities: school trips; events and exchanges 
 
Theme 4: Future aspirations, study and work 
● Using languages beyond the classroom: forming relationships; travel; employment 
● Ambitions: further study; volunteering; training 
● Work: jobs; careers and professions 
 
Theme 5: International and global dimension 
● Bringing the world together: sports events; music events; campaigns and good causes 
● Environmental issues: being ‘green’; access to natural resources 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
10 
Paper 1: Listening and understanding in Greek 
Content 
Students are assessed on their understanding of standard spoken Greek in a variety of 
scenarios. 
Students will need to:  
● identify the overall message, key points, details and opinions 
● deduce meaning from a variety of spoken texts 
● recognise the relationship between past, present and future events 
● recognise and respond to key information, important themes and ideas in spoken text, 
including authentic sources, adapted and abridged, as appropriate 
● be able to answer questions, extract information, evaluate and draw conclusions. 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes (see Themes and 
topics). 
Students are presented with recorded scenarios involving one or more speakers in public and 
social settings. Recordings include authentic sources and are based on the themes. Recorded 
material features both male and female voices and represents different age groups. 
Students should be given the opportunity to become accustomed to hearing the Greek 
language spoken in a range of styles and registers. 
Recordings for individual questions within the assessment vary in length, including both short 
and longer spoken passages, using both familiar language and, where appropriate, more 
complex language and abstract material, as appropriate to the tier. 
To prepare students adequately for this assessment, teachers should present and exploit a 
range of vocabulary relevant to each theme listed and build on the Key Stage 3 Programme 
of Study, where appropriate. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
11 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2019. 
● The assessment is out of 50 marks. 
● Students must be allocated five minutes in which to read through the paper before the 
first extract of the recording starts. This gives students an opportunity to familiarise 
themselves with the length and the layout of the paper and to read the questions before 
hearing the first extract. 
● Students will listen to the recording featuring Greek-language speakers who will speak at 
a rate appropriate to the expected level of student understanding. 
● Each passage is recorded twice, with pauses following the second hearing to allow each 
student sufficient time to write or note their response to each question (or part of a 
question) and to read the next question before the related extract is played. 
● Recordings will be issued as digital sound files accessed via a secure download. 
● Each question is set in a context drawn from the topics. The assessment tasks will feature 
general content that is familiar and accessible to all students. 
● Students must answer all questions in both sections.  
● Foundation tier 
o 35 minutes is given for the assessment, including 5 minutes’ reading time. 
o Section A contains 12 questions set in English. Question types comprise both multiple-
response and short-answer open-response questions. The instructions to students are 
in English. 
o Section B contains two questions set in Greek. The question type is multiple-response. 
The instructions to students are in Greek. 
● Higher tier 
o 45 minutes is given for the assessment, including 5 minutes’ reading time. 
o Section A contains two questions set in Greek. The question type is multiple-response. 
The instructions to students are in Greek. 
o Section B contains eight questions set in English. Question types comprise both 
multiple-response and short-answer open-response questions. The instructions to 
students are in English. 
● Four of the questions will be common to both tiers. 
● For both tiers, there is no requirement for students to produce written responses in Greek. 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and mark scheme for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Greek Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
12 
Paper 2: Speaking in Greek 
Content 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate and interact effectively through 
speaking in Greek for different purposes. 
Students will need to: 
● convey information and narrate events coherently and confidently, using and adapting 
language for different purposes 
● speak spontaneously, responding to unpredictable questions, points of view or situations, 
sustaining communication by using rephrasing or repair strategies, as appropriate 
● use a range of vocabulary and grammatical structures accurately, including some more 
complex forms, with reference to past, present and future events 
● make creative and more complex use of the language, as appropriate, to express and 
justify their own thoughts and points of view 
● use accurate pronunciation and intonation in order to be understood by a native speaker, 
however they will be able to access the highest marks available for each task without a 
‘perfect’ command of Greek. 
These are assessed through a series of three consecutive tasks. 
Task 1 – Role play 
The role play is an interaction requiring the student to ask and answer questions, to 
exchange information and to use different registers (see definition of registers beneath the 
Role play mark grid within the marking guidance section of the specification). The role play 
relates to either formal or informal scenarios, in turn inviting the student to use either formal 
or informal language relevant to the scenario. The task is set in the register that the student 
is required to use, so students should use that register in their responses. All role plays are 
marked for communication only. 
The role plays are set and provided by Pearson at the time of assessment together with a 
sequencing grid and instructions. For an example, please see the Pearson Edexcel  
Leve1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Greek Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document – 
Paper 2: Speaking in Greek, General instructions to the teacher section. 
Scenarios require an exchange of information. Some scenarios are transactional in nature. 
The scenarios are based on any of the topics from themes 1 to 4 (listed on page 9), i.e. not 
on the theme International and global dimension as this theme lends itself better to the 
picture-based task and the conversation. 
Task 2 – Picture-based task 
The assessment scenario is based on any of the topics (listed on page 9). The topic is 
allocated by Pearson at the time of assessment together with a sequencing grid and 
instructions. For an example, please see the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2  
GCSE (9–1) in Greek Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document – Paper 2: Speaking in 
Greek, General instructions to the teacher section.  
This assessment allows students to: 
● describe and narrate events 
● give information 
● express, justify and exchange opinions. 
Students are required to refer to past, present and future events in this assessment at both 
Foundation and Higher tiers, using different timeframes.  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
13 
Task 3 – Conversation 
The conversation allows students to cover all of the requirements outlined in the Content 
section on page 12, including conveying information, giving points of view, developing and 
initiating conversation and discussion and producing extended sequences of speech. 
The conversation is based on any two themes (see Themes and topics) and is in two parts. 
For the first part of the conversation, the student selects one topic from one theme in 
advance of the assessment. The choice of topic must be agreed between the student and the 
teacher and must be selected no later than two weeks before the assessment takes place. 
This part of the conversation task starts with this first topic and then may move on to other 
topics within the same theme. 
The second part of the conversation must be on a different theme. This will be prescribed by 
Pearson through instructions on a sequencing grid. For an example please see the Pearson 
Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Greek Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) 
document – Paper 2: Speaking in Greek, General instructions to the teacher section. 
This part of the conversation may focus on one or more topics from within the selected 
theme (see page 9). 
Students are required to refer to past, present and future events in this assessment, using a 
range of tenses and timeframes. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
14 
Assessment information 
General information  
● First assessment: April/May 2019. 
● The entire assessment must be conducted in Greek. 
● Students complete three tasks. 
o Task 1 – a role play based on one topic. This is allocated by Pearson at the time of 
assessment. 
o Task 2 – a task containing a picture and questions drawn from one topic. This is 
allocated by Pearson at the time of assessment. 
o Task 3 – conversation based on two themes. The first theme is based on the topic 
chosen by the student in advance of the assessment. The second theme is selected by 
the teacher from a choice of two themes allocated by Pearson. 
Task 1 is set in the register that the student is required to use. 
At the time of assessment, Pearson will issue a prescribed order per student for their role 
play, picture-based task and two themes for the second part of the conversation. The 
teacher does not choose the order of the cards. Pearson will provide instructions on 
sequencing and a sequencing grid. For an example please see the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Greek Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document – 
Paper 2: Speaking in Greek, General instructions to the teacher, section. 
This grid has been designed to help ensure that each student covers a broad range of 
themes from this specification. 
● Assessments are conducted by centres within a five-week assessment period in April and 
May in any single year. Dates for the assessment period will be confirmed in the UK 
Information Manual at the start of each academic year. The assessment period will not 
always be continuous or be the same period each year, for example it will need to 
accommodate the Easter break which changes each year. 
● The assessment materials provided by Pearson for all tasks may be accessed by the 
teacher no more than three working days before the prescribed five week assessment 
period. This is to enable the teacher to prepare for the assessment. The assessment 
materials in this pack must not be removed from the centre premises.   
● Assessments are conducted by teachers in one session within a prescribed assessment 
window and then submitted to Pearson for external marking. 
● Students are presented with instructions in English but must communicate entirely in 
German for the duration of the assessment. 
● Complete, unedited recordings of all assessments must be submitted to Pearson via the 
online Learner Work Transfer (LWT) portal.
 
● Each question is set in a context drawn from the topics. The assessment tasks will feature 
general content that is familiar and accessible to all students. 
● Students must be permitted 12 minutes’ preparation time to consider the questions and 
stimulus cards for Tasks 1 and 2. 
● Students are assessed on the quality of responses rather than length of assessment, 
however the assessment times are different to reflect the demand of each tier. 
● All assessments are marked against assessment criteria, please see Marking Guidance for 
Paper 2. 
● Centres must have procedures in place to verify the identity of all students at the time of 
the assessment and confirm this on the Candidate speaking examination record form 
(CS2) (see Appendix 1). Centres are required to submit to Pearson one completed CS2 
form for all students for each tier. 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted during the preparation time or during the 
assessment. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
15 
Foundation tier assessment time and marks 
● The total assessment for the three tasks is 7 to 9 minutes plus 12 minutes’ preparation 
time. 
● The assessment is worth 70 marks. 
● The assessment consists of the following three tasks, which must be conducted in the 
following order: 
o Task 1 – one role play recommended to last between one to one-and-a-half minutes for 
10 marks 
o Task 2 – one picture-based task recommended to last between two-and-a-half to three 
minutes for 24 marks 
o Task 3 – a conversation recommended to last between three-and-a-half to four-and-a-
half minutes for 36 marks. 
Higher tier assessment time and marks 
● The total assessment for the three tasks is 10 to 12 minutes plus 12 minutes’ preparation 
time. 
● The assessment is worth 70 marks. 
● The assessment consists of the following three tasks, which must be conducted in the 
following order: 
o Task 1 – one role play recommended to last between two to two-and-a-half minutes for 
10 marks 
o Task 2 – one picture-based task recommended to last between three to three-and-a-
half minutes for 24 marks 
o Task 3 – a conversation recommended to last between five to six minutes for 36 marks. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
16 
Preparation time 
Students are allocated 12 minutes’ preparation time, under supervised conditions, 
immediately prior to the assessment for Tasks 1 and 2. The purpose is to consider the 
questions and stimulus for the role play and picture-based scenarios allocated. 
Students are permitted to make notes (up to a maximum of one side of A4 for both Tasks 1 
and 2) during this period and they can refer to them during the role play and picture-based 
assessment, but not during the conversation task. Students must return their notes to the 
teacher before commencing Task 3 (conversation). 
The notes should be for reference only and students must not read out whole, prepared 
sentences in answer to questions. 
Any notes made during the preparation time must be kept securely by the centre until the 
end of October in the year the assessment is completed, after which time they should be 
securely destroyed. 
Students cannot have access to a dictionary, or any other resource, during the preparation 
time. 
Task 1 – Role play 
Pearson will set and provide ten different sets of role plays for each tier. Each role play 
consists of two cards – one for the teacher and one for the student. 
Teacher cards 
The teacher cards contain instructions on how to conduct the role play and the exact 
questions to ask. 
Each role play opens with an introduction from the teacher who then asks the first question. 
Candidate cards 
The candidate cards include prompts as a guide and highlight where the candidate needs to 
ask a question (indicated by the symbol ;), and where an unpredictable question is posed to 
them by the teacher (indicated by the symbol ‘!’). 
Students have access to this during their preparation time to help in preparing for the 
assessment. 
Each candidate card contains instructions in English and the task is in Greek. The context of 
the role play is provided in both sections. Candidates must read both sections fully to 
support understanding of each bullet point. 
At Foundation tier, the candidate cards contain five bullet points, eliciting five utterances. 
Students need to ask one question and respond to one unpredictable question. Students are 
required to speak only in the present tense for four of the prompts or they may also use a 
conditional tense if it is more natural to do so.  
At Higher tier, the candidate cards contain five bullet points, eliciting five utterances. 
Students need to ask two questions and respond to one unpredictable question. Students are 
required to speak in the present tense for four of the prompts or they may also use a 
conditional tense if it is more natural to do so and respond to one question set in a past 
tense. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
17 
Task 2 – Picture-based task 
Pearson will provide ten different sets of picture-based tasks for each tier. Each task consists 
of two cards – one for the teacher and one for the student. 
Teacher cards 
The teacher cards contain instructions on how to conduct this task and the five questions to 
ask the student. Teachers are allowed to repeat questions and use set prompts to enable 
students to give a developed response. They are not allowed to deviate from the set 
prompts. 
Each task opens with the teacher asking the first question, which is based on the picture. 
The first question is directly based on the picture; the remaining questions extend beyond 
the picture, but are based on the overall topic from which the picture is drawn, inviting an 
exchange of views or opinions. 
Candidate cards 
At Foundation tier, students are provided with a picture and five bullets in Greek to help in 
preparing for the five questions that will be asked during the assessment. Students are 
allowed to ask for questions to be repeated. 
Students have access to this during their preparation time. 
At Higher tier, students are provided with a picture and five bullets in Greek to help in 
preparing for the five questions that will be asked during the assessment. The final bullet is 
marked by the symbol ‘!’ to denote one unpredictable question. Students are allowed to ask 
for questions to be repeated. 
Students have access to this during their preparation time. 
Task 3 – Conversation 
The first part of the conversation opens with the topic chosen by the student. The student 
may choose to focus on any aspect(s) of the topic as each has a number of different 
features. For example, a student who has selected the topic What school is like may: 
● choose to focus on ‘school types’ and ‘rules and pressures’, or 
● choose to focus only on ‘rules and pressures’. 
To enable them to make a confident start, the teacher should allow the student to state their 
chosen aspect(s) from their nominated topic and to talk about this aspect/these aspects for 
up to one minute. 
The teacher continues the conversation on the chosen topic and then may move on to other 
topics within the same theme, if necessary, to ensure that students use the recommended 
time for this task most effectively. 
The second part of the conversation is based on a different theme allocated by Pearson and 
covers any of the topics across that single theme. 
Teachers must ensure that an equal amount of time is allocated to both parts of the 
conversation. 
Throughout the conversation, in order to facilitate a genuine and spontaneous interaction, 
the nature of questions from the teacher should enable students to: 
● answer questions freely, in turn allowing them to produce extended sequences of speech 
● develop conversations and discussions 
● give and justify own thoughts and opinions 
● refer to past, present and future events. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
18 
Administration and general information about the conduct of the 
speaking assessment 
Preparation time and notes for Tasks 1 and 2 only 
● The notes made during the preparation time should be a reference only, and students 
should not read out whole, prepared sentences. 
● The preparation time must be supervised. It can take place either in the examination 
room with the teacher or outside of the room with an invigilator. 
● Students are not permitted to write on the candidate cards. 
● Students must return their notes and candidate cards to the teacher at the end of the 
second task (picture-based task). 
● Any notes made during the preparation time must be kept securely by the centre until the 
end of October in the year the assessment is completed, after which time they should be 
securely destroyed. 
● Students cannot have access to a dictionary, or any other resource, during the preparation 
time. 
Sample assessment materials 
Sample candidate and teacher cards for the role-play and picture-based tasks and 
accompanying marking guidance and assessment criteria can be found in the Pearson 
Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Greek Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) 
document. 
Marking guidance and assessment criteria are also provided in this document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
19 
Marking guidance for Paper 2: Speaking in Greek 
This marking guidance is for the use of Pearson-appointed external examiners. The guidance 
has been included for teacher reference to aid understanding of how the assessment criteria 
will be applied. 
General guidance on using levels-based mark schemes 
Step 1 Decide on a band 
● The examiner will first of all consider the answer as a whole and then decide which descriptors 
most closely match the answer and place it in that band. The descriptors for each band 
indicate the different features that will be seen in the student’s answer for that band. 
● When assigning a band they will look at the overall quality of the answer and not focus 
disproportionately on small and specific parts of the answer where the student has not 
performed quite as well as the rest. If the answer covers different aspects of different 
bands of the mark scheme they will use a ‘best fit’ approach for defining the band and 
then use the variability of the response to help decide the mark within the band, for 
example if the response is predominantly band 5–8 with a small amount of band 9–12 
material, it would be placed in band 5–8 but be awarded a mark near the top of the band 
because of the band 9–12 content. 
Step 2 Decide on a mark 
● Once they have decided on a band they will then need to decide on a mark within the 
band. 
● They will decide on the mark to award based on the quality of the answer; they will award 
a mark towards the top or bottom of that band depending on how the student has 
evidenced each of the descriptor bullet points. 
● They will modify the mark based on how securely the trait descriptors are met at that band. 
● They will need to go back through the answer as they apply the mark scheme to clarify 
points and assure themselves that the band and the mark are appropriate. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
20 
Assessment criteria for the Foundation tier – Part 1 
Role play – Foundation tier (10 marks) 
For this task, students’ work is marked by Pearson using the following assessment criteria. 
The mark grid is applied once to each individual response to the prompts. There is a 
maximum of 2 marks for each of the five prompts on the role-play cards. 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable communication; highly ambiguous OR pronunciation prevents 
communication 
1 Partially clear/ambiguous OR partially appropriate within the context of the role 
play; pronunciation may affect clarity of communication 
2 Clearly communicated; appropriate within the context of the role play; 
unambiguous; pronunciation supports clear communication 
 
Exemplification of how to apply the role-play mark grid can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Greek Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Additional guidance 
Appropriate: relevant response related to the prompt, uses appropriate register for the 
scenario. 
Informal register includes language that students would use with friends and people of a 
similar age such as endearments and informal greetings and forms of address where 
appropriate. Informal register also requires the use of the informal structures when using, for 
example, verbs and possessive adjectives. 
Formal register includes language that students would use with adults in a formal context, 
for example teachers, employers, customers, officials. Formal register includes avoidance of 
slang, over-familiar language, exaggeration and endearments. It also includes formal 
greetings and forms of address where appropriate. Formal register requires formal structures 
when using, for example, verbs, personal pronouns and possessive adjectives. 
Partially clear/pronunciation may affect clarity of communication: makes speech 
difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is eventually understood)/forces the 
listener to strain to understand what is meant. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
21 
Assessment criteria for the Foundation tier – Part 2 
Picture-based task – Foundation tier (24 marks) 
There are two mark grids to be applied to this task: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
Picture-based task: communication and content – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–4 ● Limited response to set questions, likely to consist of single-word answers 
● Minimal success in adapting language to describe, narrate, inform using 
individual words/phrases; sometimes unable to respond 
● A straightforward opinion may be expressed but without justification 
● Pronunciation and intonation are inconsistently intelligible with inaccuracies that 
lead to frequent impairment in communication 
5–8 ● Responds briefly to set questions, there is much hesitation and continuous 
prompting needed 
● Some limited success in adapting language, to describe, narrate and inform in 
response to the set questions; may occasionally be unable to respond 
● Straightforward, brief opinions are given but without justification 
● Pronunciation and intonation are mostly intelligible but inaccuracies lead to 
some impairment in communication 
9–12 ● Responds to set questions with some development, some hesitation and some 
prompting necessary 
● Some effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform in 
response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions with occasional, brief justification 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, occasionally inaccuracies affect 
clarity of communication 
13–16 ● Responds to set questions with frequently developed responses, occasional 
hesitation, occasional prompting necessary 
● Frequently effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform in 
response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions and gives justification with some development 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, inaccuracies are minimal and have 
no impact on clarity of communication 
 
Additional guidance 
Adaptation of/adapting language to describe, narrate and inform: adapts language to 
achieve different purposes in the language; students may adapt language more effectively 
for one purpose than another, for example they may use language effectively to inform but 
less effectively to narrate. 
Straightforward opinions and justification are those that form part of a minimum/standard/ 
predictable response. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
22 
Picture-based task: linguistic knowledge and accuracy – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Limited accuracy when responding to set questions; minimal success when 
referring to past, present and future events 
● Individual words and phrases are coherent when responding to set 
questions; high frequency of errors prevent meaning throughout most of the 
conversation 
3–4 ● Occasionally accurate grammatical structures when responding to set 
questions; occasional success when referring to present events, limited 
success when referring to future or past events, much ambiguity 
● Some coherent phrases and sentences within responses to set questions; 
regular errors prevent coherent overall speech and frequently prevent 
meaning 
5–6 ● Some accurate grammatical structures, including some successful references 
to past, present and future events in response to the set questions, some 
ambiguity 
● Responses are partially coherent, errors occur that sometimes hinder clarity 
of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
7–8 ● Generally accurate grammatical structures, generally successful references to 
past, present and future events in response to the set questions, occasional 
ambiguity 
● Responses are generally coherent although errors occur that occasionally 
hinder clarity of communication 
Additional guidance 
Errors: the mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on 
clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements (as long as 
they do not affect the case) 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the listener from the content of what is being said. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make speech difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force listeners to strain to understand what is meant, 
for example inaccurate tense formation, inaccurate application of the conventions of case, 
mismatch of subject and the possessive adjectives 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the listener from the content of what is 
being said. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, i.e. using the incorrect person of the 
verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
23 
Assessment criteria for the Foundation tier – Part 3 
Conversation – Foundation tier (36 marks) 
There are three mark grids to be applied to this task: 
● communication and content 
● interaction and spontaneity 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
Conversation: communication and content – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Communicates limited information relevant to the topics and questions 
● Uses language to express limited, straightforward ideas and thoughts; 
occasional straightforward opinion expressed without justification 
● Uses limited, familiar vocabulary and expression with much repetition; 
communication is disjointed and frequently breaks down because of restricted 
range of vocabulary 
● Pronunciation and intonation are inconsistently intelligible with inaccuracies 
that lead to frequent impairment in communication 
4–6 ● Communicates brief information relevant to the topics and questions 
● Uses language to produce straightforward ideas and thoughts; expresses 
straightforward opinions with limited justification 
● Uses repetitive, familiar vocabulary and expression; communication is often 
constrained and occasionally breaks down because of restricted range of 
vocabulary 
● Pronunciation and intonation are mostly intelligible but inaccuracies lead to 
some impairment in communication 
7–9 ● Communicates information relevant to the topics and questions, with 
occasionally extended sequences of speech 
● Uses language to produce straightforward ideas, thoughts and opinions with 
occasional justification 
● Uses a limited variety of mainly straightforward vocabulary, communication for 
some purposes is constrained because of restricted range of vocabulary 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, occasionally inaccuracies affect 
clarity of communication  
10–12 ● Communicates information relevant to the topics and questions, with some 
extended sequences of speech 
● Occasionally uses language creatively to express some individual thoughts, 
ideas and opinions, some of which are justified 
● Occasional variety in use of vocabulary, including some examples of 
uncommon language with some variation of expression, fulfils most purposes 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, inaccuracies are minimal and 
have no impact on clarity of communication 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
24 
Additional guidance 
Uses language creatively – examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● manipulating language, including familiar, high-frequency and simple language, to 
respond to unfamiliar/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to maintain 
interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, to 
convince. 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view which go 
beyond the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
Straightforward ideas, thoughts and opinions are those that give the 
minimum/standard/predictable response. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
25 
Conversation: interaction and spontaneity – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Basic exchange where only some questions are responded to; answers rely 
on rehearsed language that is frequently irrelevant to the question 
● Short, undeveloped responses, many incomplete 
● Isolated examples of ability to sustain communication, pace is slow and 
hesitant throughout 
4–6 ● Responds with limited spontaneity; answers rely on rehearsed language that 
is occasionally irrelevant to the question 
● Short responses, any development depends on teacher prompting 
● Limited ability to sustain communication, pace is mostly slow and hesitant 
7–9 ● Occasionally able to respond spontaneously with some examples of natural 
interaction although often stilted 
● Occasionally able to initiate and develop responses independently but regular 
prompting needed 
● Occasionally able to sustain communication, using rephrasing/repair 
strategies if necessary to continue the flow; frequent hesitation 
10–12 ● Responds spontaneously to some questions, interacting naturally for parts of 
the conversation 
● Sometimes able to initiate and develop the conversation independently, 
some prompting needed 
● Sometimes able to sustain communication, using rephrasing/repair strategies 
if necessary to continue the flow; some hesitation 
Additional guidance 
Rephrasing/repair strategies: strategies that aid communication and allow the 
conversation to be sustained, for example rephrasing, circumlocution, adjusting the 
message, asking for clarification/repetition, repair strategies such as self-correction; these 
strategies enable students to deliver the message when exact vocabulary or expressions are 
not known. 
Responds/responding spontaneously: gives a relevant, impromptu response based on 
what they have heard. 
Rehearsed language: language learned by heart, which may not give a relevant, 
impromptu response based on what has been heard (not spontaneous). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
26 
Conversation: linguistic knowledge and accuracy – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Uses straightforward, individual words/phrases; limited evidence of language 
manipulation 
● Limited accuracy, minimal success when referring to past, present and future 
events 
● Individual words and phrases are coherent; high frequency of errors prevent 
meaning throughout much of the conversation 
4–6 ● Uses straightforward, repetitive, grammatical structures 
● Occasionally accurate grammatical structures, occasional success when 
referring to present events, limited success when referring to future or past 
events, much ambiguity 
● Some coherent phrases and sentences; regular errors prevent coherent 
overall speech and frequently prevent meaning 
7–9 ● Manipulates a limited variety of mainly straightforward grammatical 
structures, minimal use of complex structures 
● Some accurate grammatical structures, some successful references to past, 
present and future events, some ambiguity 
● Sequences of coherent speech although errors occur that often hinder clarity 
of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
10–12 ● Manipulates grammatical structures with occasional variation, complex 
structures used but repetitive 
● Generally accurate grammatical structures, generally successful references to 
past, present and future events 
● Generally coherent speech although errors occur that sometimes hinder 
clarity of communication 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be:  
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language. 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: the mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on 
clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements (as long as 
they do not affect the case) 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the listener from the content of what is being said. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
27 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make speech difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force listeners to strain to understand what is meant, 
for example inaccurate tense formation, inaccurate application of the conventions of case, 
mismatch of subject and the possessive adjectives 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the listener from the content of what is 
being said. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, i.e. using the incorrect person of the 
verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
28 
Assessment criteria for the Higher tier – Part 1 
Role play – Higher tier (10 marks) 
For this task, students’ work is marked by Pearson using the following assessment criteria. 
The mark grid is applied once to each individual response to the prompts. There is a 
maximum of 2 marks for each of the five prompts on the role-play cards. 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable communication; highly ambiguous OR pronunciation prevents 
communication 
1 Partially clear/ambiguous OR partially appropriate within the context of the role 
play; pronunciation may affect clarity of communication 
2 Clearly communicated; appropriate within the context of the role play; 
unambiguous; pronunciation supports clear communication 
 
Exemplification of how to apply the role-play mark grid can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
Additional guidance 
Appropriate: relevant response related to the prompt, uses appropriate register for the 
scenario. 
Informal register includes language that students would use with friends and people of a 
similar age such as endearments and informal greetings and forms of address where 
appropriate. Informal register also requires the use of the informal structures when using, for 
example, verbs and possessive adjectives. 
Formal register includes language that students would use with adults in a formal context, 
for example teachers, employers, customers, officials. Formal register includes avoidance of 
slang, over-familiar language, exaggeration and endearments. It also includes formal 
greetings and forms of address where appropriate. Formal register requires formal structures 
when using, for example, verbs, personal pronouns and possessive adjectives. 
Partially clear/pronunciation may affect clarity of communication: makes speech 
difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is eventually understood)/forces the 
listener to strain to understand what is meant. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
29 
Assessment criteria for the Higher tier – Part 2 
Picture-based task – Higher tier (24 marks) 
There are two mark grids to be applied to this task: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
Picture-based task: communication and content – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–4 ● Responds to set questions with some development, some hesitation and some 
prompting necessary 
● Some effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform in 
response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions with occasional, brief justification 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, occasionally inaccuracies affect 
clarity of communication 
5–8 ● Responds to set questions with frequently developed responses, occasional 
hesitation, occasional prompting necessary 
● Frequently effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform in 
response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions and gives justification with some development 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, inaccuracies are minimal and 
have no impact on clarity of communication 
9–12 ● Responds to set questions with mostly developed and fluent responses, 
minimal hesitation and minimal prompting necessary 
● Predominantly effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and 
inform, in response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions effectively and gives justification which is mostly 
developed  
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible and predominantly accurate  
13–16 ● Responds to the set questions with consistently fluent and developed 
responses 
● Consistently effective adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform, 
in response to the set questions 
● Expresses opinions with ease and gives fully-developed justification 
● Pronunciation and intonation are consistently accurate and intelligible 
Additional guidance 
Adaptation of language to describe, narrate and inform: adapts language to achieve 
different purposes in the language; students may adapt language more effectively for one 
purpose than another, for example they may use language effectively to inform but less 
effectively to narrate. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
30 
Picture-based task: linguistic knowledge and accuracy – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Some accurate grammatical structures, including some successful references to 
past, present and future events in response to the set questions, some ambiguity 
● Responses are partially coherent, errors occur that sometimes hinder clarity of 
communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Generally accurate grammatical structures, generally successful references to 
past, present and future events in response to the set questions, occasional 
ambiguity 
● Responses are generally coherent although errors occur that occasionally hinder 
clarity of communication 
5–6 ● Predominantly accurate grammatical structures, mostly successful references to 
past, present and future events in response to the set questions 
● Responses are predominantly coherent, errors occur but they rarely hinder 
clarity of communication 
7–8 ● Consistently accurate grammatical structures, successful references to past, 
present and future events in response to the set questions 
● Responses are coherent, any errors do not hinder the clarity of the 
communication 
Additional guidance 
Errors: the mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on 
clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements (as long as 
they do not affect the case) 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the listener from the content of what is being said. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make speech difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force listeners to strain to understand what is meant, 
for example inaccurate tense formation, inaccurate application of the conventions of case, 
mismatch of subject and the possessive adjectives 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the listener from the content of what is 
being said. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, i.e. using the incorrect person of the 
verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
31 
Assessment criteria for the Higher tier – Part 3 
Conversation – Higher tier (36 marks) 
There are three mark grids to be applied to this task: 
● communication and content 
● interaction and spontaneity 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
Conversation: communication and content – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Communicates information relevant to the topics and questions, with 
occasionally extended sequences of speech 
● Uses language to produce straightforward ideas, thoughts and opinions with 
occasional justification 
● Uses a limited variety of mainly straightforward vocabulary, communication 
for some purposes is constrained because of restricted range of vocabulary 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, occasionally inaccuracies affect 
clarity of communication 
4–6 ● Communicates information relevant to the topics and questions, with some 
extended sequences of speech 
● Occasionally uses language creatively to express some individual thoughts, 
ideas and opinions, some of which are justified 
● Occasional variety in use of vocabulary, including some examples of 
uncommon language with some variation of expression, fulfils most purposes 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible, inaccuracies are minimal and 
have no impact on clarity of communication 
7–9 ● Communicates detailed information relevant to the topics and questions, 
usually with extended sequences of speech 
● Frequently uses language creatively to express and justify a variety of 
individual thoughts, ideas and opinions 
● Uses a variety of vocabulary, including frequent use of uncommon language, 
to regularly vary expression for different purposes 
● Pronunciation and intonation are intelligible and predominantly accurate  
10–12 ● Communicates detailed information relevant to the topics and questions, 
consistently extended sequences of speech 
● Consistently uses language creatively to express and justify a wide variety of 
individual thoughts, ideas and opinions 
● Consistently uses a wide variety of vocabulary, including uncommon 
language, to consistently vary expression for different purposes 
● Pronunciation and intonation are consistently accurate and intelligible 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
32 
Additional guidance 
Uses language creatively: examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● manipulating language, including familiar, high-frequency and simple language, to 
respond to unfamiliar/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to maintain 
interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, to 
convince. 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view that go beyond 
the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
Straightforward ideas, thoughts and opinions are those that give the 
minimum/standard/predictable response. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
33 
Conversation: interaction and spontaneity – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Occasionally able to respond spontaneously with some examples of natural 
interaction although often stilted 
● Occasionally able to initiate and develop responses independently but 
regular prompting needed 
● Occasionally able to sustain communication, using rephrasing/repair 
strategies if necessary to continue the flow; frequent hesitation 
4–6 ● Responds spontaneously to some questions, interacting naturally for parts 
of the conversation 
● Sometimes able to initiate and develop the conversation independently, 
some prompting needed 
● Sometimes able to sustain communication, using rephrasing/repair 
strategies if necessary to continue the flow; some hesitation 
7–9 ● Responds to most questions spontaneously, resulting in mostly natural 
interaction 
● Mostly able to initiate and develop the conversation independently 
● Able to sustain communication throughout most of the conversation, using 
rephrasing/repair strategies if necessary to continue the flow, occasional 
hesitation 
10–12 ● Responds spontaneously and with ease to questions, resulting in natural 
interaction 
● Consistently able to initiate and develop the conversation independently 
● Able to sustain communication throughout, using rephrasing/repair 
strategies if necessary to continue the flow 
Additional guidance 
Respond(s) spontaneously: gives a relevant, impromptu response based on what they 
have heard. 
Rephrasing/repair strategies are strategies that aid communication and allow the 
conversation to be sustained, for example rephrasing, circumlocution, adjusting the 
message, asking for clarification/repetition, repair strategies such as self-correction; these 
strategies enable students to deliver the message when exact vocabulary or expressions are 
not known. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
34 
Conversation: linguistic knowledge and accuracy – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Manipulates a limited variety of mainly straightforward grammatical 
structures, minimal use of complex structures 
● Some accurate grammatical structures, some successful references to past, 
present and future events, some ambiguity 
● Sequences of coherent speech although errors occur that often hinder clarity 
of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
4–6 ● Manipulates grammatical structures with occasional variation, complex 
structures used but repetitive 
● Generally accurate grammatical structures, generally successful references to 
past, present and future events 
● Generally coherent speech although errors occur that sometimes hinder 
clarity of communication 
7–9 ● Manipulates a variety of grammatical structures, some variety of complex 
structures 
● Predominantly accurate grammatical structures, mostly successful references 
to past, present and future events 
● Predominantly coherent speech; errors occur but they rarely hinder clarity of 
communication 
10–12 ● Manipulates a wide variety of grammatical structures, frequent use of 
complex structures 
● Consistently accurate grammatical structures, consistently successful 
references to past, present and future events 
● Fully coherent speech; any errors do not hinder the clarity of the 
communication 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● all grammar and structures included in the grammar list that are specific to Higher tier 
GCSE 
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: the mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on 
clarity. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements (as long as 
they do not affect the case) 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the listener from the content of what is being said. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
35 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make speech difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force listeners to strain to understand what is meant, 
for example inaccurate tense formation, inaccurate application of the conventions of case, 
mismatch of subject and the possessive adjectives 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the listener from the content of what is 
being said. 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the listener cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, i.e. using the incorrect person of the 
verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
36 
Paper 3: Reading and understanding in Greek 
Content 
Students are assessed on their understanding of written Greek across a range of different 
types of texts. 
Students need to: 
● identify the overall message, key points, details and opinions in texts 
● deduce meaning from a variety of written texts 
● recognise the relationship between past, present and future events 
● understand texts, organise and present relevant details, and, where appropriate, draw 
inferences in context and recognise implicit meaning 
● recognise and respond to key information, important themes and ideas in more extended 
written text, including authentic sources, adapted and abridged as appropriate, by being 
able to extract information and answer questions. 
This paper draws on vocabulary and structures across all the themes (see Themes and 
topics). 
Texts for individual questions within the assessment use high-frequency language and vary 
in length, including both short- and longer written passages. Texts include authentic sources 
that introduce more complex language and unfamiliar materials.  
The range of text types include: 
● advertisements, emails, letters, articles and literary texts 
● a short passage to be translated from Greek into English. 
Literary texts consist of short extracts from texts that may have been adapted and abridged 
from authentic sources to be appropriate to this level – from letters, short stories, novels or 
plays to contemporary and historical sources. Students are also expected to translate a short 
passage of written Greek into English to demonstrate an ability to transfer meaning 
accurately into English. 
Scenarios in the texts are set either at home or, more frequently, in a Greek-speaking 
country, allowing students to develop appropriate cultural awareness and understanding. 
To prepare students adequately for this assessment, teachers should present and exploit a 
range of vocabulary relevant to each theme listed, building on the Key Stage 3 Programme 
of Study, where appropriate. 
Students should be presented with Greek language in a range of styles or registers and in a 
variety of different contexts, as appropriate to their age and level of understanding. Students 
should also be presented with different fonts and formats, for example short, printed 
messages, articles and email messages. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
37 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2019. 
● The assessment time is: 
o Foundation tier – 50 minutes in length 
o Higher tier – 1 hour 5 minutes in length. 
● The assessment is out of 50 marks. 
● The assessment consists of 10 questions. 
● Students must answer all questions from each of the three sections. 
● Students are required to respond to questions based on passages of text from a range of 
sources. Each question is set in a context drawn from the themes. 
● Section A has six questions set in English. Question types comprise both multiple-response 
and short-answer open response questions. The instructions to students are in English. 
● Section B contains three questions set in Greek. The instructions to students are in Greek: 
o for the Foundation tier there are three multiple-response questions 
o for the Higher tier, there are two multiple-response questions and one short-answer 
open-response question. 
● Section C contains one translation passage from Greek into English. The instructions to 
students are in English. 
● Four of the questions are common to both tiers. 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample paper and mark scheme for this paper can be found in the Pearson Edexcel 
Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Greek Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs) document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
38 
Paper 4: Writing in Greek 
Content 
Students are assessed on their ability to communicate effectively through writing in Greek. 
Students need to:  
● communicate effectively in writing for a variety of purposes across a range of specified 
contexts  
● write short texts, using simple sentences and familiar language accurately to convey 
meaning and exchange information 
● produce clear and coherent text of extended length to present facts and express ideas and 
opinions appropriately for different purposes and in different settings 
● make accurate use of a variety of vocabulary and grammatical structures, including some 
more complex forms, to describe and narrate with reference to past, present and future 
events 
● manipulate the language, using and adapting a variety of structures and vocabulary with 
increasing accuracy and fluency for new purposes, including using appropriate style and 
register 
● make independent, creative and more complex use of the language, as appropriate, to 
note down key points, express and justify individual thoughts and points of view, in order 
to interest, inform or convince 
● translate sentences and short texts from English into the assessed language to convey key 
messages accurately and to apply grammatical knowledge of language and structures in 
context. 
Assessment information 
● First assessment: May/June 2019. 
● The assessment is out of 60 marks. 
● Each question is set in a context drawn from the themes and topics. The assessment tasks 
feature general content that is familiar and accessible to all students. 
● Students are required to produce responses of varying lengths and types to express facts, 
ideas and opinions in Greek. 
● The length of each response required and complexity of language increases across the 
paper. Recommended word counts are specified for each question. Students will not be 
penalised for writing more or fewer words than recommended in the word count or for 
going beyond the mandatory bullets. 
● One question is a translation of a short passage from English into Greek. 
● All assessments are marked against assessment criteria, please see Marking guidance for 
Paper 4: Writing in Greek. 
● The instructions to students are in Greek. The question titles appear in English. 
● The use of dictionaries is not permitted. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
39 
● Foundation tier 
o The assessment time is 1 hour and 20 minutes in length. 
o The paper consists of three open questions and one translation from English into Greek. 
o Students must answer all questions. 
o Question 1 assesses students on their ability to write to describe and to express 
opinions. 
o Question 2 has two options from which students have to select one. This question 
assesses students on their ability to note down key points and convey information. 
Students must use the formal register, please see the definition in Marking guidance for 
Paper 4: Writing in Greek. 
o Question 3 has two options from which students have to select one. This question 
assesses students on their ability to convey information, narrate, express opinions, 
interest, and convince the reader about a certain point. Students must use the informal 
register, please see the definition in Marking guidance for Paper 4: Writing in Greek. 
This question is common to the Higher tier. 
o Question 4 is the translation question. Students are required to translate five sentences 
from English to Greek. The sentences are ordered by increasing level of difficulty. 
● Higher tier 
o The assessment time is 1 hour and 25 minutes in length. 
o The paper consists of two questions and one translation from English into Greek. 
o Students must answer all questions. 
o Question 1 has two options from which students have to select one. This question 
assesses students on their ability to convey information, narrate, express opinions, 
interest, and convince the reader about a certain point. Students must use the informal 
register, please see the definition in Marking guidance for Paper 4: Writing in Greek. 
This question is common to the Foundation tier. 
o Question 2 has two options from which students have to select one. This question 
assesses students on their ability to convey information, narrate, express and justify 
ideas and opinions, and interest or convince the reader. Students must use the formal 
register, please see the definition in Marking guidance for Paper 4: Writing in Greek. 
o Question 3 is the translation question. Students are required to translate a short 
paragraph from English into Greek. The individual sentences are ordered by increasing 
level of difficulty. 
Sample assessment materials 
A sample question paper and accompanying marking guidance and assessment criteria can 
be found in the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Greek Sample Assessment 
Materials (SAMs) document. 
Marking guidance and assessment criteria are also provided in this document. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
40 
Marking guidance for Paper 4: Writing in Greek 
This marking guidance is for the use of Pearson-appointed external examiners. The guidance 
has been included for teacher reference to aid understanding of how the assessment criteria 
will be applied. 
General guidance on using levels-based mark schemes 
Step 1 Decide on a band 
● The examiner will first of all consider the answer as a whole and then decide which descriptors 
most closely match the answer and place it in that band. The descriptors for each band 
indicate the different features that will be seen in the student’s answer for that band. 
● When assigning a band they will look at the overall quality of the answer and not focus 
disproportionately on small and specific parts of the answer where the student has not 
performed quite as well as the rest. If the answer covers different aspects of different 
bands of the mark scheme they will use a ‘best fit’ approach for defining the band and 
then use the variability of the response to help decide the mark within the band, for 
example if the response is predominantly band 5–8 with a small amount of band 9–12 
material, it would be placed in band 5–8 but be awarded a mark near the top of the band 
because of the band 9–12 content. 
Step 2 Decide on a mark 
● Once they have decided on a band they will then need to decide on a mark within the 
band. 
● They will decide on the mark to award based on the quality of the answer; they will award 
a mark towards the top or bottom of that band depending on how the student has 
evidenced each of the descriptor bullet points. 
● They will modify the mark based on how securely the trait descriptors are met at that band. 
● They will need to go back through the answer as they apply the mark scheme to clarify 
points and assure themselves that the band and the mark are appropriate. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
41 
Assessment criteria for the Foundation tier 
Question 1 – Foundation tier (12 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria given in two 
mark grids: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
The student is expected to produce 20–30 words for this task. The number of words is 
approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer words than 
recommended in the word count. All work produced by the student must be marked. 
Question 1: communication and content mark grid – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Some relevant, basic information without development 
● Uses language to inform, give short descriptions and express opinions with limited 
success 
● Uses limited selection of common, familiar vocabulary and expression with frequent 
repetition 
3–4 ● Mostly relevant information, minimal extra detail 
● Uses language to give short descriptions, simple information and opinions with 
variable success 
● Uses small selection of common, familiar vocabulary and expression with some 
repetition 
5–6 ● Relevant information with occasional extra detail 
● Uses language to give short descriptions, simple information and opinions with 
some success 
● Uses small selection of common, familiar vocabulary and expression with little 
repetition 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
42 
Question 1: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Produces simple, short sentences in isolation 
● Limited accurate application of a small selection of straightforward grammatical 
structures, limited success in referring to present events; frequently errors 
prevent meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Produces simple, short sentences with little linking 
● Inconsistently accurate application of a small selection of straightforward 
grammatical structures, inconsistently successful reference to present events; 
often errors occur that hinder clarity of communication and occasionally prevent 
meaning 
5–6 ● Produces simple sentences with some linking 
● Accurate application of a small selection of straightforward grammatical 
structures, refers successfully to present events as appropriate to the task; 
occasionally errors occur that hinder clarity of communication 
Additional guidance 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: the mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on 
coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements (as long as 
they do not affect the case) 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content of the writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inaccurate tense formation and inaccurate application of the 
conventions of case 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, i.e. using the incorrect person of the 
verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
43 
Question 2 – Foundation tier (16 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria given in two 
mark grids: 
● communication and content  
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
This question requires students to write in a formal style/register (see Additional guidance). 
The student is expected to produce 40–50 words for this task. The number of words is 
approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer words than 
recommended in the word count. All work produced by the student must be marked. 
Question 2: communication and content mark grid – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Limited information given likely to consist of single words and phrases 
● Limited ability to use language to present simple facts, inform and note down key 
points; expression is frequently constrained and communication often breaks 
down 
● Repetitive use of a limited selection of common words and phrases; heavy 
reliance on language of the stimulus material to express thoughts 
● Knowledge of register and style is rarely evident because of restricted use of 
vocabulary and expression 
3–4 ● Some brief information given, basic points made without development 
● Occasional success in using language to present simple facts, information and to 
note down key points but expression is sometimes constrained and 
communication occasionally breaks down 
● Limited use of common, familiar vocabulary and expression with frequent 
repetition; some reliance on language of the stimulus material to express 
thoughts 
● Occasional appropriate use of register and style 
5–6 ● Some relevant information given appropriate to the task, basic points made with 
little development 
● Uses language with some success, to present simple facts, information and to 
note down key points, expression is occasionally constrained 
● Uses a small range of, common, familiar vocabulary and expression, mostly 
independently selected, with some repetition; mostly goes beyond the language of 
the stimulus material 
● Mostly appropriate use of register and style, mostly sustained 
7–8 ● Relevant information given appropriate to the task, basic points made with some 
development 
● Uses language mostly with success, to present simple facts, information and to 
note down key points using simple ideas 
● Uses independently selected, common, familiar vocabulary and expression with 
little repetition; goes beyond the language of the stimulus material 
● Appropriate use of register and style sustained 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
44 
Additional guidance 
Independently selected vocabulary and expression: students may use key words from 
the stimulus material but to demonstrate their knowledge of vocabulary and ability to 
express themselves independently they must be able to use vocabulary and expression that 
is not in the stimulus material. 
Register and style definition: formal register and style includes, for example, avoidance 
of slang, over-familiar language, exaggeration, ‘text-speak’, inappropriate colloquialisms or 
writing in a conversational style. Formal register and style require the use of the formal 
structure when using, for example, verbs, personal pronouns and possessive adjectives. 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
45 
Question 2: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Repetitive use of minimal selection of straightforward grammatical structures 
● Produces individual words/set phrases 
● Limited accuracy in grammatical structures used, limited success in referring to 
present and future events; regular errors prevent meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Use of a restricted range of straightforward grammatical structures, frequent 
repetition 
● Produces simple, short sentences, which are not linked 
● Occasional accuracy in grammatical structures used, occasional success in 
referring to present and future events; sometimes errors prevent meaning being 
conveyed 
5–6 ● Uses straightforward grammatical structures, some repetition 
● Produces simple, short sentences; minimal linking 
● Some accurate use of straightforward grammatical structures, some success in 
referring to present and future events to meet the requirements of the task; 
occasionally errors prevent meaning being conveyed 
7–8 ● Uses straightforward grammatical structures, occasional repetition 
● Produces predominantly simple sentences occasionally linked together 
● Mostly accurate use of straightforward grammatical structures, mostly successful 
references to present and future events to meet the requirements of the task; 
occasionally errors hinder clarity of communication 
Additional guidance 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: the mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on 
coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements (as long as 
they do not affect the case) 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content of the writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inaccurate tense formation and inaccurate application of the 
conventions of case 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, i.e. using the incorrect person of the 
verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
46 
Question 3 – Foundation tier (20 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria given in two 
mark grids: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
This question contains four bullet points that form part of the task. Failure to cover all four 
bullet points will impact on the marks that can be awarded against the requirements of the 
two mark grids for this question. There is no requirement for even coverage of the bullet 
points in any band. However, in order to access marks in the top band, students must refer 
to all bullet points and meet the other assessment criteria in the top band. 
This question requires students to write in an informal style (see Additional guidance). 
The student is expected to produce 80–90 words for this task. The number of words is 
approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer words than 
recommended in the word count. All work produced by the student must be marked. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
47 
Question 3: communication and content mark grid – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Communicates brief information relevant to the task with little development 
● Limited adaptation of language to narrate, inform and interest; straightforward 
personal opinions are given with limited justification 
● Expresses straightforward thoughts and ideas; uses common, familiar language 
with repetition 
● Variable use of appropriate register and style 
4–6 ● Communicates information relevant to the task, with development of the 
occasional key point and idea 
● Some effective adaptation of language to narrate and inform; attempts are 
made to interest and give convincing personal opinions which are occasionally 
successful 
● Expresses mainly straightforward thoughts and ideas with the occasional 
individual thought/idea; some different examples of common, familiar language 
● Appropriate use of register and style is evident but with inconsistencies 
7–9 ● Communicates information relevant to the task, with development of some key 
points and ideas 
● Mostly effective adaptation of language to narrate and inform, some effective 
language to interest and give convincing personal opinions 
● Some examples of creative language use to express individual thoughts and 
ideas; a variety of mainly common, familiar language with the occasional 
example of uncommon language 
● Appropriate use of register and style is evident but with occasional 
inconsistency 
10–12 ● Communicates information relevant to the task with expansion of key points 
and ideas 
● Effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest and give convincing 
personal opinions 
● Frequent examples of creative language use to express individual thoughts and 
ideas; a variety of vocabulary and expression, some examples of uncommon 
language 
● Appropriate use of register and style throughout with minimal inconsistency 
Additional guidance 
Creative language use – examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● using language, including familiar, high-frequency and simple language, to respond to 
unfamiliar/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to maintain 
interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, to 
convince. 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view which go 
beyond the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
48 
Register and style definition: informal register and style – examples of informal style 
include colloquial, conversational language that students would use with friends. It also 
requires use of the informal structure when using, for example, verbs, personal pronouns 
and possessive adjectives. 
Adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest and give convincing opinions: 
adapts language to achieve different purposes in the language; students may adapt language 
more effectively for one purpose than another, for example they may use language 
effectively to narrate but less effectively to interest or give a convincing opinion. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
49 
Question 3: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Foundation tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Uses straightforward grammatical structures, some repetition 
● Produces brief, simple sentences, limited linking of sentences 
● Variable accuracy with language and structures, variable success when referring 
to past, present and future events, regular ambiguity; often errors prevent 
meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Uses mostly straightforward grammatical structures, occasional repetition 
● Produces occasionally extended sentences linked with familiar, straightforward 
conjunctions 
● Some accurate language and structures, including some successful references to 
past, present and future events, some ambiguity; often errors occur that hinder 
clarity of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
5–6 ● Different examples of straightforward grammatical structures are evident 
● Produces some extended sentences that are linked with familiar, straightforward 
conjunctions 
● Frequently accurate language and structures, including mostly successful 
references to past, present and future events, occasional ambiguity; sometimes 
errors occur that hinder clarity of communication 
7–8 ● Some variation of grammatical structures, occasional complex structure 
● Produces frequently extended sentences, well linked together 
● Generally accurate language and structures, including successful references to 
past, present and future events; occasionally errors occur that hinder clarity of 
communication 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language. 
Straightforward grammatical structures is considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
Errors: the mark grid describes the frequency of errors and the impact that errors have on 
coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements(as long as 
they do not affect the case) 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content of the writing. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
50 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inaccurate tense formation and inaccurate application of the 
conventions of case 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, i.e. using the incorrect person of the 
verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
51 
Question 4 – Foundation tier (12 marks) 
Translation mark grids and example responses 
Mark grid for sentences (a), (b) and (c), which are worth 2 marks each. The mark 
grid will be applied to each individual sentence. 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1 ● Meaning partially communicated with errors that hinder clarity or prevent meaning 
being conveyed 
2 ● Meaning fully communicated with occasional errors that do not hinder clarity 
 
Mark grid for sentences (d) and (e), which are worth 3 marks each. The mark grid 
will be applied to each individual sentence. 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1 ● Some words are communicated but the overall meaning of the sentence is not 
communicated 
2 ● The meaning of the sentence is partially communicated 
● Linguistic structures and vocabulary are mostly accurate with some errors that 
hinder clarity or prevent meaning being conveyed 
3 ● The meaning of the sentence is fully communicated 
● Linguistic structures and vocabulary are accurate with only occasional errors that 
do not hinder clarity 
Additional guidance 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements (as long as 
they do not affect the case) 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content of the writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inaccurate tense formation and inaccurate application of the 
conventions of case 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, i.e. using the incorrect person of the 
verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
52 
Assessment criteria for the Higher tier 
Question 1 – Higher tier (20 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria given in two 
mark grids: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
This question contains four bullet points that form part of the task. Failure to cover all four 
bullet points will impact on the marks that can be awarded against the requirements of the 
two mark grids for this question. There is no requirement for even coverage of the bullet 
points in any band. However, in order to access marks in the top band, students must refer 
to all bullet points and meet the other assessment criteria in the top band. 
This question requires students to write in an informal style (see Additional guidance). 
The student is expected to produce 80–90 words for this task. The number of words is 
approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer words than 
recommended in the word count. All work produced by the student must be marked. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
53 
Question 1: communication and content mark grid – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Communicates brief information relevant to the task with little development 
● Limited adaptation of language to narrate, inform and interest; straightforward 
personal opinions are given with limited justification 
● Expresses straightforward thoughts and ideas; uses common, familiar language 
with repetition 
● Variable use of appropriate register and style 
4–6 ● Communicates information relevant to the task, with development of the 
occasional key point and idea 
● Some effective adaptation of language to narrate and inform; attempts are made 
to interest and give convincing personal opinions which are occasionally 
successful 
● Expresses mainly straightforward thoughts and ideas with the occasional 
individual thought/idea; some different examples of common, familiar language 
● Appropriate use of register and style is evident but with inconsistencies 
7–9 ● Communicates information relevant to the task, with development of some key 
points and ideas 
● Mostly effective adaptation of language to narrate and inform, some effective 
language to interest and give convincing personal opinions 
● Some examples of creative language use to express individual thoughts and 
ideas; a variety of mainly common, familiar language with the occasional 
example of uncommon language 
● Appropriate use of register and style is evident but with occasional inconsistency 
10–12 ● Communicates information relevant to the task with expansion of key points and 
ideas 
● Effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest and give convincing 
personal opinions 
● Frequent examples of creative language use to express individual thoughts and 
ideas; a variety of vocabulary and expression, some examples of uncommon 
language 
● Appropriate use of register and style throughout, with minimal inconsistency 
Additional guidance 
Creative language use: examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● using language, including familiar, high frequency and simple language, to respond to 
unfamiliar/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to maintain 
interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, to 
convince. 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view that go beyond 
the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
54 
Register and style definition: informal register and style – examples of informal style 
include colloquial, conversational language that students would use with friends. It also 
requires use of the informal structure when using, for example, verbs, personal pronouns 
and possessive adjectives. 
Adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest and give convincing opinions: 
adapts language to achieve different purposes in the language; students may adapt language 
more effectively for one purpose than another, for example they may use language 
effectively to narrate but less effectively to interest or give a convincing opinion. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
55 
Question 1: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–2 ● Uses straightforward grammatical structures, some repetition 
● Produces brief, simple sentences, limited linking of sentences 
● Variable accuracy with language and structures, variable success when referring 
to past, present and future events, regular ambiguity; often errors prevent 
meaning being conveyed 
3–4 ● Uses mostly straightforward grammatical structures, occasional repetition 
● Produces occasionally extended sentences linked with familiar, straightforward 
conjunctions 
● Some accurate language and structures, including some successful references to 
past, present and future events, some ambiguity; often errors occur that hinder 
clarity of communication and occasionally prevent meaning being conveyed 
5–6 ● Different examples of straightforward grammatical structures are evident 
● Produces some extended sentences that are linked with familiar, straightforward 
conjunctions 
● Frequently accurate language and structures, including mostly successful 
references to past, present and future events, occasional ambiguity; sometimes 
errors occur that hinder clarity of communication 
7–8 ● Some variation of grammatical structures, occasional complex structure 
● Produces frequently extended sentences, well linked together 
● Generally accurate language and structures, including successful references to 
past, present and future events; occasionally errors occur that hinder clarity of 
communication 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● all grammar and structures included in the grammar list that are specific to Higher tier 
GCSE 
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language. 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements (as long as 
they do not affect the case) 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content of the writing. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
56 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inaccurate tense formation and inaccurate application of the 
conventions of case 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, i.e. using the incorrect person of the 
verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
57 
Question 2 – Higher tier (28 marks) 
For this question, students’ work is marked by Pearson using assessment criteria contained in 
two mark grids: 
● communication and content 
● linguistic knowledge and accuracy. 
This question contains four bullet points that form part of the task. Failure to cover all four 
bullet points will impact on the marks that can be awarded against the requirements of the 
two mark grids for this question (see below). There is no requirement for even coverage of 
the bullet points in any band. However, in order to access marks in the top band, students 
must refer to all bullet points and meet the other assessment criteria in the top band. 
This question requires students to write in a formal register/style (see Additional guidance). 
The student is expected to produce 130–150 words for this task. The number of words is 
approximate and students will not be penalised for writing more or fewer words than 
recommended in the word count. All work produced by the student must be marked. 
Question 2: communication and content mark grid – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–4 ● Communicates occasionally detailed information relevant to the task with 
occasionally effective development of key points and ideas 
● Some effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest/convince 
● Occasional examples of creative use of language to express individual thoughts, 
ideas and points of view, occasional justification; variety of mainly common, 
familiar language, occasional examples of uncommon language 
● Appropriate use of register and style with the occasional inconsistency 
5–8 ● Communicates some detailed information relevant to the task, frequently 
effective development of key points and ideas 
● Frequently effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest/convince 
● Examples of creative use of language to express some individual thoughts, ideas 
and points of view, some justified; some variation of vocabulary and expression 
with some examples of uncommon language 
● Appropriate use of register and style with few inconsistencies 
9–12 ● Communicates detailed information relevant to the task, with mostly effective 
development of key points and ideas 
● Mostly effective adaptation of language, to narrate, inform, interest/convince 
● Creative use of language to express a range of individual thoughts, ideas and 
points of view, most of which are justified; variety of vocabulary and expression, 
frequent examples of uncommon language 
● Predominantly appropriate use of register and style 
13–16 ● Communicates detailed information relevant to the task, with consistently 
effective development of key points and ideas 
● Consistently effective adaptation of language to narrate, inform, 
interest/convince 
● Creative use of language to express and fully justify a wide range of individual 
thoughts, ideas and points of view; wide variety of vocabulary and expression, 
many examples of uncommon language 
● Consistent use of appropriate register and style throughout 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
58 
Additional guidance 
Creative use of language: examples of creative language use are: 
● using language to create an effect 
● using language, including familiar, high frequency and simple language, to respond to 
unfamiliar/unexpected contexts and purposes 
● using language to express thoughts, ideas, feelings and emotions 
● using language to inform and narrate ideas, thoughts and points of view to maintain 
interest 
● applying a variety of vocabulary and structures to maintain interest 
● using language effectively to achieve more complex purposes, for example to interest, to 
convince. 
Individual thoughts, ideas and opinions: this is linked to creative use of language whereby 
students use language to express original thoughts, ideas and points of view that go beyond 
the minimum/standard/predictable response. 
Adaptation of language to narrate, inform, interest/convince: adapts language to 
achieve different purposes in the language; students may adapt language more effectively 
for one purpose than another, for example they may use language effectively to narrate but 
less effectively to interest/convince. 
Register and style definition: formal register and style includes, for example, avoidance 
of slang, over-familiar language, exaggeration, ‘text-speak’, inappropriate colloquialisms or 
writing in a conversational style. Formal register and style require the use of the formal 
structure when using, for example, verbs, personal pronouns and possessive adjectives. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
59 
Question 2: linguistic knowledge and accuracy mark grid – Higher tier 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Uses a variety of mainly straightforward grammatical structures, occasional 
examples of repetitive complex language 
● Occasional sequences of fluent writing, occasionally extended, well-linked 
sentences 
● Straightforward grammatical structures are largely accurate with occasional 
accurate use of complex language, some successful references to past, present 
and future events but some ambiguity; errors occur that sometimes hinder clarity 
of communication 
4–6 ● Some variation of grammatical structures, including some repetitive instances of 
complex language 
● Prolonged sequences of fluent writing, some extended, well-linked sentences 
● Generally accurate language and structures, frequently successful references to 
past, present and future events, occasional ambiguity; errors occur that 
occasionally hinder clarity of communication 
7–9 ● Uses a variety of grammatical structures including some different examples of 
complex language 
● Predominantly fluent response; frequent extended sentences, mostly well linked 
● Mostly accurate language and structures, mostly successful references to past, 
present and future events; errors occur but they rarely hinder clarity of 
communication 
10–12 ● Uses a wide variety of grammatical structures, including complex language 
● Fluent response throughout with extended, well-linked sentences 
● Consistently accurate language and structures, consistently successful references 
to past, present and future events; any errors do not hinder the clarity of the 
communication 
Additional guidance 
Complex grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● all grammar and structures included in the grammar list that are specific to Higher tier 
GCSE 
● varied and complex word order 
● using extended sentences that include a range of structures, for example conjunctions, 
pronouns, reported speech and/or a range of lexis, for example to express abstract 
ideas/convey justified arguments 
● conceptually more challenging language. 
Straightforward grammatical structures are considered to be: 
● repetitive, simple word order 
● short, simple sentences that use a repetitive range of common, high-frequency structures 
● simple ideas, opinions and thoughts that are expressed but are not justified. 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements (as long as 
they do not affect the case) 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content of the writing. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
60 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inaccurate tense formation and inaccurate application of the 
conventions of case 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, i.e. using the incorrect person of the 
verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
61 
Question 3 – Higher tier (12 marks) 
Translation mark grid and example response 
Translation mark grid assesses both communication and content and linguistic knowledge 
and accuracy. When awarding marks, the student’s response across the whole paragraph 
should be considered. 
 
Mark Descriptor 
0 No rewardable material 
1–3 ● Meaning of some individual words or phrases is conveyed; frequent 
omissions/incorrectly communicated words and phrases/mother-tongue 
interference 
● Some straightforward structures are accurate but regular errors prevent meaning 
of individual phrases/sentences being conveyed 
4–6 ● The meaning of the passage is partially communicated, some words and phrases 
are omitted/incorrectly communicated 
● Language and structures are accurate in some phrases and sentences but some 
errors prevent meaning being conveyed 
7–9 ● The meaning of the passage is mostly communicated, occasional words are 
omitted/incorrectly communicated 
● Mostly accurate language and structures; errors occur that occasionally hinder 
clarity and in rare instances prevent meaning being conveyed 
10–12 ● The meaning of the passage is fully communicated 
● Consistently accurate language and structures, any errors do not hinder clarity 
Additional guidance 
Errors: students are not expected to produce perfect, error-free writing in order to access the 
top band as errors are also made by native speakers. The mark grid describes the frequency 
of errors and the impact that errors have on coherence. 
Errors that do not hinder clarity: 
● errors that do not affect meaning, for example gender, adjectival agreements(as long as 
they do not affect the case) 
● infrequent errors that do not distract the reader from the content of the writing. 
Errors that hinder clarity: 
● errors that make writing difficult to understand immediately (even if the meaning is 
eventually understood)/errors that force readers to re-read in order to understand what is 
meant, for example inaccurate tense formation, inaccurate application of the conventions 
of case, mismatch of subject and the possessive adjectives 
● frequent errors hinder clarity as they will distract the reader from the content of the 
writing 
Errors that prevent meaning being conveyed: 
● errors that mean the reader cannot understand the message 
● errors that convey the wrong message 
● errors that make it unclear who is doing the action, i.e. using the incorrect person of the 
verb 
● mother-tongue interference. 
NB: these are examples only and do not constitute a finite list. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
62 
Assessment Objectives 
 
Students must: 
% in 
GCSE 
AO1 Listening – understand and respond to different types of spoken 
language 
25 
AO2 Speaking – communicate and interact effectively in speech 25 
AO3 Reading – understand and respond to different types of written 
language 
25 
AO4 Writing – communicate in writing 25 
Total 100% 
 
 
Breakdown of Assessment Objectives 
 
Paper 
Assessment Objectives Total for all 
Assessment 
Objectives AO1 % AO2 % AO3 % AO4 % 
Paper 1: Listening and 
understanding in Greek 
25 0 0 0 25% 
Paper 2: Speaking in Greek 0 25 0 0 25% 
Paper 3: Reading and 
understanding in Greek 
0 0 25 0 25% 
Paper 4: Writing in Greek 0 0 0 25 25% 
Total for GCSE 25% 25% 25% 25% 100% 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
63 
3 Administration and general information 
Entries 
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for this qualification can be found in 
our UK Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations officers and is 
available on our website: qualifications.pearson.com 
Discount code and performance tables 
Students taking the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Greek must take all 
assessments in either the Foundation tier or the Higher tier only. 
Centres should be aware that students who enter for more than one GCSE, or other Level 2 
qualifications with the same discount code, will have only the grade for their 'first entry' 
counted for the purpose of the school and college performance tables (please see  
Appendix 6: Codes). For further information about what constitutes 'first entry' and full 
details of how this policy is applied, please refer to the DfE website: 
www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-education 
Students should be advised that if they take two GCSEs with the same discount code, 
schools and colleges they wish to progress to are likely to take the view that this 
achievement is equivalent to only one GCSE. The same view may be taken if students take 
two GCSEs or other Level 2 qualifications that have different discount codes but have 
significant overlap of content. Students or their advisers who have any doubts about their 
subject combinations should check with the institution they wish to progress to before 
embarking on their programmes. 
Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, 
special consideration and malpractice 
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality policy requires all students to 
have equal opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our qualifications 
to be awarded in a way that is fair to every student. 
We are committed to making sure that: 
● students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the Equality Act 2010) are not, 
when they are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in comparison to 
students who do not share that characteristic 
● all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification and that 
this achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their peers. 
Language of assessment 
Assessment of this qualification will be available in English, with the exception of specific 
questions in the listening, reading and writing assessments. 
For speaking and writing assessments, all student work must be in Greek. For listening and 
reading, all student work must follow the instruction provided for the individual question. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
64 
Access arrangements 
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with special 
educational needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to: 
access the assessment 
show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the assessment. 
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an individual 
student with a disability, without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access 
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding bodies comply with the duty under the 
Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’. 
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students will 
then know what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for assessment. 
Reasonable adjustments 
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable adjustments 
where a person with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in undertaking an 
assessment. The awarding organisation is required to take reasonable steps to overcome 
that disadvantage. 
A reasonable adjustment for a particular person may be unique to that individual and 
therefore might not be in the list of available access arrangements. 
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of factors, 
including: 
● the needs of the student with the disability 
● the effectiveness of the adjustment 
● the cost of the adjustment; and 
● the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other students. 
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding 
organisation, or affects timeframes or the security or integrity of the assessment. This is 
because the adjustment is not ‘reasonable’. 
Special consideration 
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student's mark or grade to 
reflect temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the 
examination/assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a material 
effect on a candidate’s ability to take an assessment or demonstrate their level of attainment 
in an assessment. 
Further information 
Please see our website for further information about how to apply for access arrangements 
and special consideration. 
For further information about access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special 
consideration, please refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
65 
Malpractice 
Candidate malpractice 
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that compromises or seeks to 
compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the 
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
Candidate malpractice in examinations must be reported to Pearson using a JCQ Form M1 
(available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to Investigations Team, Pearson, 190 High Holborn, 
London, WC1V 7BH. Please provide as much information and supporting documentation as 
possible. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice constitutes staff or centre malpractice. 
Staff/centre malpractice 
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and maladministration of 
our qualifications. As with candidate malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is any act that 
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the 
integrity of the qualifications or the validity of results/certificates. 
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported 
immediately, before any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson on a 
JCQ Form M2(a) (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form, 
supporting documentation and as much information as possible can be emailed to 
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to Investigations Team, Pearson, 
190 High Holborn, London, WC1V 7BH. Note that the final decision regarding 
appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson. 
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice. 
More detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the document 
General and Vocational Qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and 
Assessments Policies and Procedures, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice. 
Awarding and reporting 
This qualification will be graded, awarded and certificated to comply with the requirements of 
Ofqual's General Conditions of Recognition. 
The raw marks for papers 1, 3 and 4 in this qualification will be scaled by Pearson to 
represent the relative weighting of 25% for each paper. 
Foundation and Higher tier 
Paper  Weighting  Raw marks Scaling factor Scaling mark 
1 25% 50 1.400 70 
2 25% 70 1.000 70 
3 25% 50 1.400 70 
4 25% 60 1.167 70 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
66 
This GCSE qualification will be graded and certificated on a nine-grade scale from 9 to 1 
using the total subject mark where 9 is the highest grade. Individual papers are not graded. 
For Foundation tier, grades 1–5 are available and for Higher tier, grades 4–9 are available, 
however if the mark achieved is a smaller number of marks below the 4/3 grade boundary, 
then a grade 3 may be awarded. 
The first certification opportunity for this qualification will be 2019. 
Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum judged by Pearson to be of 
sufficient standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive an unclassified U result. 
Student recruitment and progression 
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that: 
● they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard 
● they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression 
equal opportunities exist for all students. 
Prior learning and other requirements 
There are no prior learning or other requirements for this qualification. 
Progression 
The Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Greek builds on the programme of study 
at Key Stages 2 and 3, focusing on the development of all four language skills, listening, 
speaking, reading and writing. Grammar and the mastering of linguistic features are key 
elements of this specification as is the inclusion of authentic written and spoken sources. 
Students will be expected to be able to talk about themselves as well as matters that go 
beyond their immediate experience. They should be able to express and justify their own 
opinions in speech and writing, building on the fluency and spontaneity developed at 
Key Stage 3. 
The skill of translation will be developed from those skills initiated from Key Stage 3. The 
broader range of topics promotes a clear progression in grammar and vocabulary from Key 
Stage 3 and will increase linguistic and cognitive demand. The grammar and vocabulary lists 
illustrate the level required for this qualification. 
This qualification offers a suitable progression route to GCE A Level in Greek. In addition, the 
study of one language at GCSE can facilitate and help promote the learning of other 
languages. The qualification may also add to an individual’s employability profile. 
Students will be able to apply their knowledge, skills and understanding to authentic, real-life 
contexts. They will develop transferable skills that support higher education study and the 
transition to employment, together with an understanding and appreciation of Greek-
speaking countries and their cultures. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
67 
 
Appendices 
Appendix 1: Candidate speaking examination record form (CS2) 69 
Appendix 2: Grammar list 70 
Appendix 3: Vocabulary list 73 
Appendix 4: The context for the development of this qualification 133 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 135 
Appendix 6: Codes 136 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
68 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
69 
 
 
Appendix 1: Candidate speaking examination record form (CS2) 
A separate form must be submitted for Foundation tier and Higher tier candidates. Please indicate the tier below. 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Greek 1GK0:       2F/2H*                     (*Please delete as appropriate) 
Centre name:  Centre number:  
 
Candidate name and number Declaration and permissions signature 
and date* 
Role play Picture-
based 
discussion 
Conversation 
(1)                  (2) 
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
Teacher name Declaration and permissions signature 
and date* 
        
            
 
*I declare that the above examinations have been carried out in line with Pearson and JCQ documentation for the conduct of the examinations and agree to 
this work being used to support teachers and examiners. 
Please photocopy and continue on a separate sheet as necessary. Please do not write in shaded boxes – these areas are for Pearson Examiner use 
only. A ‘Word’ version of this form is available on our website to facilitate administration in centres. 
 

 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
70 
Appendix 2: Grammar list 
GCSE students will be expected to have acquired knowledge and understanding of Modern 
Greek grammar during their course. In the examination they will be required to apply their 
knowledge and understanding, drawing from the following lists. The examples in brackets are 
indicative, not exclusive. For structures marked (R) only receptive knowledge is required. 
Greek (Foundation tier) 
Nouns: 
● parisyllabic nouns; 
● common imparisyllabic nouns (μαμά, παππούς); 
● neuter imparisyllabic nouns in –μα (όνομα); 
● all cases, singular and plural. 
Articles: 
● definite and indefinite; 
● all genders and cases singular and plural.  
Adjectives: 
● agreement; 
● adjectives ending in -oς,-η,-ο and -ος,-α,-ο; 
● irregular adjectives (πολύς); 
● Regular comparative and superlative degrees; 
● all cases, singular and plural. 
Adverbs: 
● formation in -α and –ως (ακριβά, ακριβώς); 
● adverbs of place (μακριά, αριστερά); 
● adverbs of time and frequency (πάντα, συχνά); 
● adverbs of manner (έτσι, μαζί); 
● adverbs of quantity(τόσο, περίπου); 
● adverbs of certainty and possibility (βεβαίως, ίσως); 
● adverbs of negation (μη(ν)). 
Quantifiers: 
● όλος, πολύς, τόσος, το παν(R), τα πάντα (R), αρκετός, ελάχιστος (R), μερικοί, διάφοροι. 
Pronouns: 
● personal, subject (εγώ); 
● personal object, direct and indirect, strong and weak forms (με, μου, εμένα);  
● common definite and indefinite pronouns (ίδιος, κανένας); 
● common demonstrative (εκείνος); 
● common interrogative (ποιος); 
● possessive (μου); 
● common relative (που). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
71 
Verbs: 
● modes of address (εσύ, εσείς); 
● impersonal verbs (υπάρχει, πρέπει); 
● regular verbs in the indicative of the active voice: first conjugation verbs, paroxytone 
(γράφω); 
● second conjugation verbs, oxytone (αγαπώ, μπορώ); 
● high frequency contracted verbs (λέω, τρώω, ακούω); 
● high frequency irregular verbs (πίνω, παίρνω); 
● high frequency deponent verbs (έρχομαι, γίνομαι); 
● tenses of the indicative: 
● present; 
● simple future; 
● aorist; 
● imperfect; 
● common conditionals (θα ήθελα); 
● present perfect and plupeperfect: most common verbs only; 
● imperative: common forms, including negative (άνοιξε, μην έρθεις); 
● subjunctive: present and aorist  
● common medio-passive verbs (πλένομαι, λέγομαι): present, future and aorist tenses 
● conditional constructions indicating: factual conditions (αν δεν ξέρω, ρωτάω); 
● suppositional conditions (αν πήγαινες, θα περνούσες καλά) (R). 
Prepositions: 
● monosyllabic prepositions (σε, από, με); 
● common two-syllable prepositions (χωρίς, μετά). 
Conjunctions: 
● common co-ordinating (και, ούτε, αλλά, όμως); 
● common subordinating (επειδή, για να, ότι). 
Time and Date: 
● common time references in the accusative (την Τετάρτη); 
● common time references that include numbers (στη μία η ώρα, στις 26 Ιουλίου). 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
72 
Greek (Higher tier) 
All grammar and structures listed for Foundation tier, as well as: 
Nouns: 
● masculine nouns in –έας (ο συγγραφέας) (R); 
● feminine nouns in –η with plural in –εις (η κυβέρνηση); 
● nouns of common gender (ο/η συγγενής); 
● neuter nouns in –ος (το λάθος); 
● all cases, singular and plural.  
Adjectives: 
● common adjectives ending in –ύς,-ιά, -ύ (βαθύς) (R); 
o -ων, -ούσα, -ον (ενδιαφέρων, παρών); 
o -ης, -α, -ικο (τεμπέλης, πεισματάρης) (R); 
o -ός-ιά-ό (γλυκός); 
o -ης-ης-ες (ειλικρινής) (R); 
● comparatives in –ύτερος (μακρύτερος); 
● irregular superlatives (άριστος) (R). 
Adverbs: 
● comparative and superlative. 
Pronouns: 
● demonstrative (τέτοιος); 
● relative (ο οποίος, οποιοσδήποτε). 
Prepositions: 
● Common prepositions from Αncient Greek (υπέρ, υπό, συν, διά) (R). 
Verbs: 
● common oxytone and paroxytone verbs in the passive voice in the following tenses of the 
indicative: 
● imperfect; 
● future perfect (R); 
● conditional; 
● common passive imperatives (ντύσου, πλύσου) (R); 
● constructions indicating counterfactual conditions (αν είχες έρθει, θα τον είχες δει) (R). 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
73 
Appendix 3: Vocabulary list 
The following vocabulary list is intended to assist teachers in planning their work. It provides 
the core generic vocabulary that all students will need to acquire. It is an essential 
vocabulary list that students should refer to and build on when preparing for the duration of 
their study for the Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9–1) in Greek. 
However, students entered for the Foundation tier are required to understand and respond to 
common or familiar words and/or forms of words that are not on the vocabulary list. 
Similarly, students entered for the Higher tier are required to understand and respond to 
common or familiar words and/or forms of words that are not on the vocabulary list and 
which are less common or familiar than those used in relation to Foundation tier 
assessments. 
Word lists 
Section 1: High-frequency language 
Common verbs 
Common adjectives 
Common adverbs 
Prepositions 
Colours 
Numbers 
Ordinal numbers 
Quantities and measures 
Some useful connecting words 
Time expressions 
Times of day 
Days of the week 
Months and seasons of the year 
Question words 
Other useful expressions 
Other high-frequency words 
Countries 
Continents 
Nationalities 
Areas/mountains/seas 
Useful acronyms 
Social conventions 
Language used in dialogue and messages 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
74 
Section 2: Topic-specific language 
Although words are listed under specific topic headings, the words are not exclusive to those 
particular headings. Many words also relate to other themes but may be listed in only one 
theme. Many common verbs are given in the verb list, with a few others included under a 
specific topic. 
Each topic has been highlighted in bold. 
All topics must be studied in the context of both the student’s home country and 
that of countries and communities where Greek is spoken. 
 
Theme 1: Identity and culture 
● Who am I?: relationships; when I was younger; what my friends and family are like; 
what makes a good friend; interests; socialising with friends and family; role models 
● Daily life: customs and everyday life; food and drink; shopping; social media and 
technology (use of, advantages and disadvantages) 
● Cultural life: celebrations and festivals; reading; music; sport; film and television 
 
Theme 2: Local area, holiday and travel 
● Holidays: preferences, experiences and destinations 
● Travel and tourist transactions: travel and accommodation; asking for help and 
dealing with problems; directions; eating out; shopping 
● Town, region and country: weather; places to see; things to do 
 
Theme 3: School 
● What school is like: school types; school day; subjects; rules and pressures; celebrating 
success 
● School activities: school trips; events and exchanges 
 
Theme 4: Future aspirations, study and work 
● Using languages beyond the classroom: forming relationships; travel; employment 
● Ambitions: further study; volunteering; training 
● Work: jobs; careers and professions 
 
Theme 5: International and global dimension 
● Bringing the world together: sports events; music events; campaigns and good causes 
● Environmental issues: being ‘green’; access to natural resources 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
75 
 
Section 1: High-frequency language 
Common verbs 
 
going to θα/πρόκειται να 
there is υπάρχει 
to accept δέχομαι, αποδέχομαι  
to accompany συνοδεύω 
to ache πονάω 
to add προσθέτω 
to admire θαυμάζω 
to adore λατρεύω 
to advise συμβουλεύω 
to allow επιτρέπω 
to announce ανακοινώνω 
to answer απαντώ 
to apply κάνω αίτηση 
to argue/to scold μαλώνω 
to arrive φτάνω 
to ask ρωτώ 
to ask for; look for ζητώ 
to avoid αποφεύγω 
to be είμαι 
to be able to μπορώ 
to be absent απουσιάζω/λείπω 
to be born γεννιέμαι 
to be called ονομάζομαι 
to be careful προσέχω/είμαι προσεκτικός 
to be at fault φταίω 
to be host to φιλοξενώ 
to be hot/to be cold ζεσταίνομαι/κρυώνω 
to be hungry πεινάω 
to be in a hurry βιάζομαι 
to be interested in (με) ενδιαφέρει/ενδιαφέρομαι  
to be keen to είμαι πρόθυμος να/θέλω πολύ 
to be like/resemble μοιάζω 
to be located βρίσκομαι 
to be lucky είμαι τυχερός 
to be present είμαι παρών 
to be sleepy νυστάζω 
to be sorry λυπάμαι 
to be thirsty  διψώ 
to become γίνομαι 
to begin/to start αρχίζω/ξεκινώ 
to belong ανήκω 
to borrow δανείζομαι 
to bother ενοχλώ/πειράζω 
to break σπάω/χαλάω 
to bring φέρνω 
to brush (teeth) βουρτσίζω (τα δόντια μου) 
to build χτίζω/κτίζω 
to build relationships καλλιεργώ σχέσεις 
to buy αγοράζω 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
76 
 
Common verbs (cont)  
to call/to give someone a call καλώ/τηλεφωνώ 
to cancel ακυρώνω 
to carry μεταφέρω/κουβαλώ 
to catch πιάνω 
to celebrate γιορτάζω 
to change αλλάζω 
to charge φορτίζω/χρεώνω 
to chat κουβεντιάζω 
to check ελέγχω 
to choose διαλέγω, επιλέγω 
to circulate; to go along (in a car) κυκλοφορώ 
to clean καθαρίζω 
to click (ICT) κάνω κλικ (Πληροφορική) 
to climb; get on(to) σκαρφαλώνω, ανεβαίνω 
to close κλείνω 
to collect κάνω συλλογή/μαζεύω 
to comb (hair) χτενίζω/χτενίζομαι 
to combine συνδυάζω 
to come έρχομαι 
to complain παραπονιέμαι/κάνω παράπονο 
to contact; communicate επικοινωνώ 
to continue/carry on συνεχίζω 
to convince πείθω 
to cope/manage/get by αντιμετωπίζω/διαχειρίζομαι/τα βγάζω πέρα 
to copy αντιγράφω 
to cost κοστίζω 
to count, intend; count on (someone) μετρώ, σκοπεύω, βασίζομαι (σε κάποιον) 
to create δημιουργώ 
to cross, go across διασχίζω, περνώ απέναντι 
to cry κλαίω 
to damage/to go wrong/to fail χαλώ 
to dance χορεύω 
to deal (with a problem) χειρίζομαι/ αντιμετωπίζω (ένα πρόβλημα) 
to decide αποφασίζω 
to depart/leave αναχωρώ/φεύγω 
to describe περιγράφω 
to deserve αξίζω, μου αξίζει, δικαιούμαι 
to disagree διαφωνώ 
to die πεθαίνω 
to discuss συζητώ 
to dismiss απορρίπτω 
to distribute μοιράζω 
to do/to make κάνω/φτιάχνω 
to do the vacuum cleaning σκουπίζω με την ηλεκτρική σκούπα/βάζω ηλεκτρική 
(σκούπα) 
to doubt αμφιβάλλω 
to download κατεβάζω 
to draw ζωγραφίζω, σχεδιάζω 
to drink πίνω 
to drive οδηγώ 
to earn κερδίζω 
to eat (out) τρώω (έξω) 
to empty αδειάζω 
to end τελειώνω, λήγω 
to enjoy oneself; have fun απολαμβάνω, διασκεδάζω 
to enter/go in εισέρχομαι/μπαίνω μέσα 
to escape δραπετεύω, ξεφεύγω 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
77 
Common verbs (cont)  
to exchange ανταλλάσω 
to explain εξηγώ, επεξηγώ 
to fail αποτυγχάνω 
to fall πέφτω 
to fall asleep αποκοιμιέμαι 
to fear φοβάμαι 
to feed, nourish ταΐζω, θρέφω 
to feel νιώθω 
to fill/fill in γεμίζω/συμπληρώνω 
to find βρίσκω 
to finish, end τελειώνω, λήγω 
to fly πετώ 
to follow ακολουθώ 
to forget; to leave something behind ξεχνώ, αφήνω κάτι πίσω 
to forgive συγχωρώ 
to get angry θυμώνω 
to get better καλυτερεύω 
to get dressed ντύνομαι 
to get into (bus, car, train) επιβιβάζομαι, μπαίνω σε (λεωφορείο, αυτοκίνητο, 
τρένο) 
to get on well with τα πάω καλά 
to get out of (bus, car, train) αποβιβάζομαι, κατεβαίνω από (λεωφορείο, 
αυτοκίνητο, τρένο) 
to get something παίρνω 
to get up σηκώνομαι, ξυπνώ 
to get undressed ξεντύνομαι 
to give δίνω 
to give back επιστρέφω, δίνω πίσω 
to give (a gift) προσφέρω (δώρο) 
to go πηγαίνω 
to go down πέφτω (μεταφορικά), κατεβαίνω 
to go for a walk πηγαίνω περίπατο 
to go (in a car) πηγαίνω (με αυτοκίνητο) 
to go out βγαίνω έξω 
to go shopping πάω για ψώνια 
to go to bed πάω για ύπνο 
to go up ανεβαίνω 
to guide οδηγώ/καθοδηγώ 
to hand over παραδίδω 
to harm/damage χτυπώ (κάποιον), βλάπτω / βλάπτω, καταστρέφω 
to hate μισώ 
to have έχω / διαθέτω 
to have a cold κρυολογώ/είμαι κρυολογημένος 
to have to/must πρέπει, είναι υποχρεωτικό 
to hear ακούω 
to help βοηθώ 
to hold/to keep/to reserve κρατώ/ διατηρώ/ κάνω κράτηση 
to hope ελπίζω 
to hurt (oneself) τραυματίζομαι, χτυπώ 
to imagine φαντάζομαι 
to improve βελτιώνω 
to inform πληροφορώ, ενημερώνω 
to introduce (an item, an idea) παρουσιάζω (ένα προϊόν, μια ιδέα) 
to introduce (a person) συστήνω/γνωρίζω (ένα άτομο) 
to invite προσκαλώ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
78 
 
Common verbs (cont)  
to iron σιδερώνω 
to jump πηδώ 
to justify δικαιολογώ 
to kiss φιλώ 
to knit πλέκω 
to knock, hit χτυπώ 
to knock over ρίχνω κάτω (στο έδαφος) 
to know (a fact) γνωρίζω/ξέρω (κάποιο γεγονός) 
to know (person, place) γνωρίζω/ ξέρω (άτομο, τόπο) 
to land προσγειώνω, προσγειώνομαι 
to last διαρκώ 
to laugh γελώ 
to lay the table στρώνω το τραπέζι 
to learn μαθαίνω 
to leave; to depart φεύγω, αναχωρώ 
to leave (somewhere, somebody) φεύγω (από κάπου), αφήνω, παρατώ (κάποιον) 
to leave behind (an object) ξεχνώ (ένα αντικείμενο) 
to lend δανείζω 
to lift σηκώνω 
to light, turn/switch on ανάβω, ανοίγω (τηλεόραση, ραδιόφωνο, κ.λπ.) 
to like μου αρέσει 
to listen ακούω 
to live (inhabit) μένω/κατοικώ 
to live ζω 
to load φορτώνω 
to look after φροντίζω 
to look after/mind (child, dog) φροντίζω / προσέχω, φροντίζω (παιδί, σκύλο) 
to look for ψάχνω, αναζητώ 
to look like, to resemble μοιάζω 
to lose χάνω 
to love αγαπώ 
to make a mistake κάνω λάθος 
to make the bed στρώνω το κρεβάτι 
to manage, to cope καταφέρνω, αντεπεξέρχομαι, τα καταφέρνω 
to manage (business) διευθύνω, διοικώ (επιχείρηση) 
to mean to (do) σκοπεύω να (κάνω κάτι) 
to mean/to signify σημαίνω / σημαίνω (δείχνω), σηματοδοτώ 
to meet συναντώ 
to mention/ to report αναφέρω 
to miss; to be lacking χάνω, λείπει (δεν υπάρχει) 
to miss (train, bus etc) χάνω (τρένο, λεωφορείο, κ.λπ.) 
to move (to interest) κινώ/μετακινώ (κινώ το ενδιαφέρον) 
to move house μετακομίζω 
to need χρειάζομαι 
to note σημειώνω, λαμβάνω υπόψη 
to offer; to give a present προσφέρω, προσφέρω/δίνω δώρο 
to open ανοίγω 
to order παραγγέλνω, διατάζω (κάποιον) 
to organise οργανώνω 
to park σταθμεύω, παρκάρω 
to pass περνάω, προσπερνώ (οδήγηση) 
to persuade/convince πείθω 
to phone τηλεφωνώ 
to place τοποθετώ 
to plan σχεδιάζω 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
79 
 
Common verbs (cont)  
to plant φυτεύω 
to play παίζω 
to please ευχαριστώ (προσφέρω ευχαρίστηση) 
to prefer προτιμώ 
to present παρουσιάζω 
to prevent αποτρέπω 
to produce παράγω 
to publish δημοσιεύω 
to pull τραβάω 
to push σπρώχνω, ωθώ 
to put βάζω 
to put back τακτοποιώ 
to read διαβάζω 
to realise καταλαβαίνω/αντιλαμβάνομαι/διαπιστώνω 
to receive λαμβάνω/παίρνω/δέχομαι 
to recommend συστήνω/προτείνω 
to refund επιστρέφω (χρήματα) 
to regret, be sorry μετανιώνω, λυπάμαι 
to relax χαλαρώνω 
to remember θυμάμαι 
to remind θυμίζω 
to rent/to hire νοικιάζω / νοικιάζω, προσλαμβάνω 
to repair επισκευάζω/ επιδιορθώνω 
to repeat επαναλαμβάνω 
to replace αντικαθιστώ 
to reply απαντώ 
to research ερευνώ 
to reserve κάνω κράτηση, κλείνω 
to rest ξεκουράζομαι 
to return; to go back επιστρέφω, γυρίζω 
to revise κάνω επανάληψη 
to ride a horse ιππεύω 
to ring (a bell) χτυπώ (κουδούνι) 
to run τρέχω 
to save/to save (money, energy) σώζω/εξοικονομώ 
to say λέω 
to say goodbye αποχαιρετώ 
to see βλέπω 
to seem φαίνομαι 
to sell πουλάω 
to send στέλνω 
to serve εξυπηρετώ, σερβίρω 
to shake (one's head)/ to move κουνάω 
to share μοιράζομαι 
to shave ξυρίζω/ξυρίζομαι 
to show δείχνω 
to sign υπογράφω 
to sing τραγουδώ 
to sit down κάθομαι 
to skate κάνω πατίνι 
to ski κάνω σκι 
to sleep κοιμάμαι 
to smile χαμογελώ 
to smoke καπνίζω 
to speak μιλώ 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
80 
 
Common verbs (cont)  
to spend (money) ξοδεύω (χρήματα) 
to spend (time) περνώ (χρόνο) 
to squash συνθλίβω, λιώνω, ζουλώ 
to stay/to remain μένω, παραμένω 
to steal κλέβω 
to stick κολλώ 
to stop σταματώ 
to study/to study at university μελετώ, διαβάζω/σπουδάζω στο πανεπιστήμιο 
to succeed επιτυγχάνω/πετυχαίνω 
to surf the internet σερφάρω στο διαδίκτυο 
to swim κολυμπώ 
to switch off σβήνω (π.χ. ηλεκτρική συσκευή), απενεργοποιώ 
to take παίρνω 
to take advantage of εκμεταλλεύομαι/επωφελούμαι 
to take off (plane) απογειώνομαι (αεροπλάνο) 
to take off (clothes etc) βγάζω (ρούχα, κ.λπ.) 
to take photographs βγάζω φωτογραφίες/φωτογραφίζω 
to teach διδάσκω 
to tell/recount λέω / διηγούμαι, αφηγούμαι 
to tell/to say λέω (ομιλώ) 
to thank ευχαριστώ (εκφράζω ευγνωμοσύνη) 
to think (about) σκέφτομαι (για κάτι) 
to think, believe σκέφτομαι, πιστεύω, νομίζω 
to throw ρίχνω, πετώ 
to tidy up τακτοποιώ/συμμαζεύω 
to touch αγγίζω 
to travel ταξιδεύω 
to try δοκιμάζω, προσπαθώ 
to turn γυρίζω 
to turn; to twist στρίβω 
to turn off/extinguish σβήνω 
to type πληκτρολογώ 
to understand καταλαβαίνω, κατανοώ 
to use χρησιμοποιώ 
to visit (person, place) επισκέπτομαι (άτομο) 
to wait for περιμένω, αναμένω 
to wake up ξυπνώ 
to walk περπατώ 
to want θέλω 
to want, desire θέλω, επιθυμώ 
to warn προειδοποιώ 
to wash πλένω/πλένομαι 
to wear φορώ 
to weigh ζυγίζω 
to win/to earn κερδίζω 
to wish εύχομαι 
to wonder αναρωτιέμαι 
to work δουλεύω, εργάζομαι 
to work (function)/to operate λειτουργώ (μηχάνημα), χειρίζομαι 
to write γράφω 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
81 
 
Common adjectives  
active ενεργός, δραστήριος 
all όλος 
alone μόνος 
alike; the same όμοιος, ίδιος 
ambitious φιλόδοξος 
angry θυμωμένος 
anyone/no one κανένας 
athletic αθλητικός 
awful απαίσιος 
bad κακός 
beautiful όμορφος, ωραίος 
big/large μεγάλος 
big/tall ψηλός 
boring βαρετός 
brave γενναίος 
brief σύντομος 
broken χαλασμένος, σπασμένος 
chestnut brown καστανός 
clean/clear καθαρός 
clever έξυπνος 
close/nearby κοντινός 
closed κλειστός 
comfortable/convenient άνετος, βολικός 
cool δροσερός 
correct σωστός 
dedicated αφιερωμένος 
delicious νόστιμος 
different διαφορετικός 
difficult δύσκολος 
dirty βρώμικος 
full γεμάτος 
fun; amusing διασκεδαστικός 
funny (comical) αστείος (κωμικός) 
generous γενναιόδωρος 
good καλός 
good (well-behaved) ευγενικός (καλή συμπεριφορά) 
grateful ευγνώμων 
great (fantastic) υπέροχος (φανταστικός) 
great (marvellous) υπέροχος (θαυμάσιος) 
handsome/pretty/charming όμορφος, ωραίος, χαριτωμένος 
happy/cheerful ευτυχισμένος, χαρούμενος 
hard σκληρός, δύσκολος 
hardworking εργατικός 
healthy (food/way of life)/ healthy υγιεινός (τρόφιμα / τρόπος ζωής)/ υγιής 
heavy βαρύς 
high; tall (building) ψηλός, ψηλό (κτίριο) 
honest τίμιος 
hot καυτός, καυτερός, πολύ ζεστός 
ideal ιδανικός 
important σημαντικός 
in a good mood ευδιάθετος 
in a hurry βιαστικός 
independent ανεξάρτητος 
intelligent; clever ευφυής, έξυπνος 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
82 
 
Common adjectives (cont)  
intense/strong έντονος 
interesting ενδιαφέρων 
kind ευγενικός, καλόκαρδος 
last τελευταίος 
lazy τεμπέλης 
light ελαφρύς 
local ντόπιος 
locked κλειδωμένος 
long μακρύς 
lost χαμένος 
low χαμηλός 
magnificent μεγαλοπρεπής 
marvelous θαυμάσιος 
mature ώριμος 
modern σύγχρονος, μοντέρνος 
much/many πολύς 
naughty άτακτος, ζωηρός 
necessary απαραίτητος 
negative αρνητικός 
new (brand new) νέος (ολοκαινούργιος) 
new νέος, καινούριος 
next επόμενος 
nice; likeable ωραίος, καλός, συμπαθής 
noisy θορυβώδης 
normal κανονικός 
numerous πολυάριθμος 
old ηλικιωμένος 
old (former) παλαιός (τέως) 
old fashioned παλιομοδίτικος, ξεπερασμένος 
only μόνος 
open ανοιχτός 
optimistic αισιόδοξος 
original πρωτότυπος 
other άλλος 
own δικός μου 
patient/impatient υπομονετικός/ανυπόμονος 
peaceful ειρηνικός 
perfect τέλειος 
pessimistic απαισιόδοξος 
pleased ευχαριστημένος, ικανοποιημένος 
pleasant ευχάριστος 
polite/impolite (rude) ευγενικός/αγενής 
poor φτωχός 
popular δημοφιλής 
positive θετικός 
practical πρακτικός 
pretty ωραίος, όμορφος 
professional επαγγελματικός 
proud περήφανος 
quiet ήσυχος 
ready έτοιμος 
real πραγματικός 
reasonable λογικός 
recent πρόσφατος 
recognised/well known αναγνωρισμένος / ευρέως γνωστός 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
83 
 
Common adjectives (cont)  
responsible υπεύθυνος 
rich πλούσιος 
ridiculous γελοίος 
ripe ώριμος 
rotten σάπιος 
sad λυπημένος 
safe ασφαλής 
same ίδιος 
satisfied ικανοποιημένος 
selfish εγωιστής, εγωιστικός 
sensational εντυπωσιακός 
serious σοβαρός 
short κοντός 
shy ντροπαλός 
silent σιωπηλός 
silly/stupid ανόητος/ηλίθιος 
sincere ειλικρινής 
situated που βρίσκεται 
slim λεπτός, αδύνατος 
small; short (person) μικρός, κοντός 
sociable κοινωνικός 
soft μαλακός 
someone κάποιος 
sought after περιζήτητος 
standing όρθιος 
strict αυστηρός 
strong ισχυρός 
superb υπέροχος 
surprised έκπληκτος 
talkative ομιλητικός 
tasteless άνοστος/κακόγουστος 
tasty νόστιμος 
thin, narrow λεπτός, στενός 
tidy τακτοποιημένος 
tired κουρασμένος 
tiring κουραστικός 
traditional παραδοσιακός 
true  πραγματικός, αληθινός 
typical τυπικός 
ugly άσχημος 
unbelievable απίστευτος 
unfair άδικος 
unforgettable αξέχαστος 
unhappy στεναχωρημένος, δυστυχής 
unhealthy άρρωστος, ανθυγιεινός 
unpleasant δυσάρεστος 
upset στενοχωρημένος 
useful χρήσιμος 
useless άχρηστος 
valid έγκυρος 
valuable πολύτιμος 
weak αδύναμος, ασθενής 
wet υγρός 
worried ανήσυχος 
wise σοφός, συνετός 
young νεαρός, νέος 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
84 
 
Common adverbs   
again πάλι 
almost σχεδόν 
already ήδη 
around γύρω, περίπου 
at the back πίσω 
badly άσχημα 
behind πίσω 
between ανάμεσα 
beyond πέρα (από) 
cheap(ly) φτηνά 
downstairs κάτω  
enough αρκετά 
especially ειδικά 
everywhere παντού 
far μακριά 
fairly; quite αρκετά 
fortunately/unfortunately ευτυχώς/δυστυχώς 
hardly μόλις 
here εδώ 
in front  μπροστά 
in front of μπροστά από 
in the background; at the back στο βάθος, στο πίσω μέρος 
in the foreground σε πρώτο πλάνο, στο προσκήνιο 
in the middle (of) στη μέση (του) 
inside μέσα 
loud(ly) δυνατά 
mainly/importantly κυρίως 
nearby κοντά 
next to δίπλα από 
nowhere πουθενά 
on the corner of στη γωνία 
on the left αριστερά 
on the right δεξιά 
opposite απέναντι 
outside έξω 
over/above πάνω από 
over there εκεί πέρα 
perhaps ίσως 
rather/most likely μάλλον 
really πραγματικά 
slowly αργά 
somewhere κάπου 
soon σύντομα 
standing όρθια στάση 
still ακόμη 
straight ahead ίσια/ευθεία 
straight away αμέσως 
there εκεί 
together μαζί 
too πάρα πολύ, υπερβολικά 
up there εκεί πάνω 
under κάτω 
upstairs πάνω 
very πολύ 
very much πάρα πολύ  
well καλά 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
85 
 
Prepositions  
above πάνω από 
after μετά από 
against εναντίον, κατά 
among μεταξύ 
around γύρω 
at (someone’s house) στο (π.χ. είναι στο σπίτι) 
at the end of στο τέλος (του, της) 
at, to σε, προς 
before πριν  
behind πίσω από 
between μεταξύ, ανάμεσα 
beyond πέρα από / εκτός 
far from μακριά από 
from από 
in (inside) σε (εντός, μέσα) 
in front of; in the front μπροστά από, μπροστά 
near (to) κοντά (σε) 
next to δίπλα (σε) 
on (on top of) επάνω (επάνω σε κάτι) 
opposite απέναντι 
outside έξω από 
through διά μέσου, μέσω 
towards προς 
under κάτω από 
Colours  
black μαύρο 
blue μπλε 
brown καφέ 
chestnut brown καστανό 
colour χρώμα 
dark σκούρο 
dark (hair, skin) μελαχρινός 
fair (hair, skin) ανοιχτόχρωμος 
green πράσινο 
grey γκρι 
light ανοιχτό 
light blue γαλάζιο, γαλανό 
orange πορτοκαλί 
pink ροζ 
red κόκκινο 
violet μοβ, βιολετί 
white άσπρο, λευκό 
yellow κίτρινο 
Numbers  
1 ένα 
2 δύο 
3 τρία 
4 τέσσερα 
5 πέντε 
6 έξι 
7 επτά 
8 οκτώ 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
86 
 
Numbers (cont)  
9 εννέα 
10 δέκα 
11 έντεκα 
12 δώδεκα 
13 δεκατρία 
14 δεκατέσσερα 
15 δεκαπέντε 
16 δεκαέξι 
17 δεκαεπτά 
18 δεκαοκτώ 
19 δεκαεννιά 
20 είκοσι 
21 είκοσι ένα 
22 είκοσι δύο 
23 είκοσι τρία 
24 είκοσι τέσσερα 
25 είκοσι πέντε 
26 είκοσι έξι 
27 είκοσι επτά 
28 είικοσι οκτώ 
29 είκοσι εννιά 
30 τριάντα 
31 τριάντα ένα 
32 etc. τριάντα δύο, κ.λπ. 
40 σαράντα 
50 πενήντα 
60 εξήντα 
70 εβδομήντα 
80 ογδόντα 
90 ενενήντα 
100 εκατό 
101 εκατόν ένα 
102 etc. εκατόν δύο, κ.λπ. 
110 εκατόν δέκα, κ.λπ. 
120 etc. εκατόν είκοσι, κ.λπ. 
200 διακόσια 
201 etc. διακόσια ένα, κ.λπ. 
300 τριακόσια 
400 τετρακόσια 
500 πεντακόσια 
600 εξακόσια 
700 επτακόσια 
800 οκτακόσια 
900 εννιακόσια 
1000 χίλια 
1001 etc. χίλια ένα, κ.λπ. 
1100 etc. χίλια εκατό, κ.λπ. 
2000 δύο χιλιάδες 
100000 εκατό χιλιάδες 
200000 διακόσιες χιλιάδες 
1.000.000 ένα εκατομμύριο 
2.000.000 δύο εκατομμύρια 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
87 
 
Ordinal numbers  
first πρώτος 
second δεύτερος 
third τρίτος 
forth τέταρτος 
fifth πέμπτος 
sixth έκτος 
seventh έβδομος 
eighth όγδοος 
ninth ένατος 
tenth δέκατος 
eleventh ενδέκατος 
twenty first εικοστός πρώτος 
Quantities and measures  
a bottle (of) ένα μπουκάλι, μία φιάλη 
a box of ένα κουτί 
about twenty περίπου είκοσι 
about a hundred περίπου εκατό 
a dozen μια δωδεκάδα 
a jar (of) ένα βάζο 
a little of/few λίγο / λίγα 
a litre (of) ένα λίτρο 
a lot (of) πολλά 
a little (of) λίγο 
a kilo (of) ένα κιλό 
a part of ένα μέρος 
(a) quarter of (ένα) τέταρτο 
a third of ένα τρίτο 
double/twice διπλό/δύο φορές 
enough αρκετά 
exactly ακριβώς 
gramme γραμμάριο 
centilitre εκατοστόλιτρο 
centimetre εκατοστόμετρο/εκατοστό 
half of μισό 
kilometre χιλιόμετρο 
less λιγότερο 
maximum ανώτατο όριο 
metre μέτρο 
minimum ελάχιστο όριο 
more περισσότερο 
(some) more (λίγο) περισσότερο 
a packet (of) ένα πακέτο 
a piece (of) ένα κομμάτι 
a slice (of) μια φέτα 
a tin, box (of) μια κονσέρβα, ένα μεταλλικό κουτί, ένα κουτί 
enough αρκετά 
half μισό 
many πολλά 
nothing τίποτα, καθόλου 
only μόνο 
to what extent σε ποιο βαθμό/κατά πόσο(ν) 
quantity ποσότητα 
quite a few αρκετά 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
88 
 
Quantities and measures (cont)  
several αρκετά 
some μερικά 
too much; too many πάρα πολύ, πάρα πολλοί 
weight το βάρος 
Some useful connecting words  
according to σύμφωνα με 
also επίσης 
although παρόλο που 
and και 
because επειδή, γιατί 
because of εξαιτίας 
but αλλά/μα 
either or είτε είτε 
even if ακόμα κι αν 
finally τελικά 
first of all πρώτα απ' όλα 
however ωστόσο 
if αν 
in order to ώστε να, για να 
neither nor ούτε ούτε 
or ή 
perhaps ίσως 
since εφόσον, αφού, καθώς 
so οπότε, έτσι 
then έπειτα 
therefore συνεπώς, επομένως 
this is why γι' αυτό 
Time expressions  
after μετά, έπειτα, στη συνέχεια 
afternoon το απόγευμα 
ago πριν 
all the time συνέχεια 
already ήδη 
always πάντα, πάντοτε 
as soon as αμέσως μόλις 
at the end στο τέλος 
at the start στην αρχή 
at the same time την ίδια στιγμή 
before πριν 
for a long time για πολύ καιρό 
day η ημέρα 
day (a whole day) ημέρα (μια ολόκληρη ημέρα) 
duration/length of time η διάρκεια 
during/for κατά τη διάρκεια / για 
early νωρίς 
evening το βράδυ 
evening (a whole evening) το βράδυ (ένα ολόκληρο βράδυ) 
every day κάθε μέρα 
every now and then πότε πότε/ που και που 
fortnight το δεκαπενθήμερο 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
89 
 
Time expressions (cont)  
from ... until/to από ... μέχρι/έως 
from time to time κατά καιρούς 
how often πόσο συχνά 
how long πόσο καιρό 
just now, in a little while μόλις τώρα, σε λίγο 
in the beginning στην αρχή 
in the meantime εν τω μεταξύ 
immediately αμέσως 
late αργά 
later αργότερα 
last night (yesterday evening) χθες το βράδυ 
last night (during the night) χθες το βράδυ (κατά τη διάρκεια της νύχτας) 
last year πέρσι 
midday/noon το μεσημέρι 
midnight  μεσάνυχτα  
morning (the whole morning) το πρωί (όλο το πρωί) 
never ποτέ 
next year του χρόνου 
night η νύχτα 
not yet όχι ακόμα 
now τώρα 
often συχνά 
once μια φορά 
on time στην ώρα μου, έγκαιρα 
quickly γρήγορα 
past/last περασμένος 
rarely σπανίως, σπάνια 
recently/lately πρόσφατα/τελευταία 
since από, από τότε (χρονικό) 
sometimes μερικές φορές 
soon σύντομα 
the day after tomorrow μεθαύριο 
the day before yesterday προχθές 
the next day; following day η επόμενη μέρα 
the night before; eve το προηγούμενο βράδυ, η παραμονή 
this year φέτος 
time ο χρόνος, η ώρα, η φορά 
today σήμερα 
tomorrow αύριο 
twice δυο φορές 
until μέχρι 
usually συνήθως 
week η εβδομάδα 
weekend το σαββατοκύριακο 
year ο χρόνος/το έτος/η χρονιά 
yesterday χτες 
Times of day  
(at) 1 a.m. (στη) μία π.μ. 
1 p.m. μία μ.μ. 
(at) nine o’clock in the evening (στις) εννιά η ώρα (βράδυ) 
13.00 13.00 
at exactly 2 o’clock ακριβώς στις 2 (η ώρα) 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
90 
 
Times of day (cont)  
at about ……. o’clock περίπου στις……. ώρα 
five to three τρεις παρά πέντε 
half past ten δέκα και μισή 
ten past four τέσσερις και δέκα 
ten to four τέσσερις παρά δέκα 
quarter to six έξι παρά τέταρτο 
quarter past seven εφτά και τέταρτο 
hour ώρα 
midnight  τα μεσάνυχτα 
noon το μεσημέρι 
in the afternoon/midday το μεσημέρι 
in the afternoon/after midday το απόγευμα 
in the evening το βράδυ 
in the morning το πρωί 
minute το λεπτό 
second το δευτερόλεπτο 
Days of the week  
Monday η Δευτέρα 
Tuesday η Τρίτη 
Wednesday η Τετάρτη 
Thursday η Πέμπτη 
Friday η Παρασκευή 
Saturday το Σάββατο 
Sunday η Κυριακή 
(on) Monday  (τη) Δευτέρα  
(on) Monday morning (τη) Δευτέρα το πρωί 
(on) Monday evening (τη) Δευτέρα το βράδυ 
on Mondays τις Δευτέρες 
every Monday κάθε Δευτέρα 
Months and seasons of the year   
month ο μήνας 
January ο Ιανουάριος 
February ο Φεβρουάριος 
March ο Μάρτιος 
April ο Απρίλιος 
May ο Μάιος 
June ο Ιούνιος 
July ο Ιούλιος 
August ο Αύγουστος 
September ο Σεπτέμβριος 
October ο Οκτώβριος 
November ο Νοέμβριος 
December ο Δεκέμβριος 
season η εποχή 
spring η άνοιξη 
summer το καλοκαίρι 
autumn το φθινόπωρο 
winter ο χειμώνας 
(in) autumn (το) φθινόπωρο 
(in) spring (την) άνοιξη 
(in) summer (το) καλοκαίρι 
(in) winter (τον) χειμώνα 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
91 
 
Question words  
how? πώς; 
how often? κάθε πότε; 
how much, how many? πόσο, πόσα; πόσοι; 
what? τι; 
what? (as subject) ποιος; (ως υποκείμενο)  
what? (as object) τι; (ως αντικείμενο) 
what colour? τι χρώμα; 
what for? για ποιο λόγο; 
what like? πώς είναι; 
(at) what time? τι ώρα; 
what/which? τι/ποιoς; 
when? πότε; 
where? πού; 
which one (s)? ποιος (από πολλούς), ποιοι; 
who? ποιος; 
why? γιατί; 
Other useful expressions  
all the better τόσο το καλύτερο 
excuse me συγγνώμη 
excuse me/forgive me με συγχωρείς/με συγχωρείτε 
description η περιγραφή 
for free δωρεάν 
good luck καλή τύχη 
here is/are ορίστε 
how do you say this in Greek? πώς λέγεται αυτό/πώς το λένε αυτό στα Ελληνικά; 
how do you spell that? πώς γράφεται αυτό; 
I don't care δεν με νοιαζει 
I don’t know δεν ξέρω, δεν γνωρίζω 
I don’t mind δεν με πειράζει 
I don’t understand δεν καταλαβαίνω 
I’m fine; it’s OK είμαι μια χαρά, δεν υπάρχει πρόβλημα, κανένα 
πρόβλημα 
I’ve had enough δεν αντέχω άλλο 
I like it μου αρέσει 
in my opinion κατά τη γνώμη μου 
it annoys me με ενοχλεί 
it depends εξαρτάται 
it doesn’t matter δεν πειράζει 
it’s all the same to me το ίδιο μου κάνει 
it makes me laugh με κάνει να γελάω 
it’s not worth it δεν αξίζει τον κόπο 
nowhere/anywhere πουθενά 
personally προσωπικά 
of course φυσικά 
okay (in agreement) εντάξει (σε συμφωνία) 
once again άλλη μια φορά 
opinion η γνώμη 
so, so έτσι και έτσι 
so much the better τόσο το καλύτερο 
that doesn’t interest/appeal to me αυτό δεν με ενδιαφέρει / δεν μου είναι ελκυστικό 
that’s enough αρκετά, φτάνει πια 
there is/are υπάρχει / υπάρχουν 
there is/are (i.e.over there) υπάρχει / υπάρχουν (π.χ. εκεί) 
to be about to είμαι έτοιμος να 
to be in the process of είμαι σε διαδικασία 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
92 
 
Other useful expressions (cont)  
too bad, what a shame δυστυχώς, κρίμα 
what a shame τι κρίμα 
what does that mean? τι σημαίνει αυτό; 
with pleasure με ευχαρίστηση/ευχαρίστως 
you are not allowed to δεν επιτρέπεται να, απαγορεύεται 
you must (one must) πρέπει 
Other high-frequency words  
as, like καθώς, όπως/σαν 
at least τουλάχιστον 
end τέλος 
everybody καθένας 
except εκτός 
figure (number) το ψηφίο (ο αριθμός) 
for example για παράδειγμα 
middle η μέση 
Miss η δεσποινίς 
Mr (also Sir) Κος (επίσης ο κύριος) 
Mrs (also Madam) Κα (επίσης η κυρία) 
no όχι 
number (e.g. phone number) ο αριθμός (π.χ. αριθμός τηλεφώνου) 
shape το σχήμα 
reason η αιτία/ ο λόγος 
someone κάποιος 
something κάτι 
somewhere κάπου 
that ότι 
thing το πράγμα 
time (occasion) η φορά (η περίσταση) 
type (kind of) ο τύπος (το είδος) 
way (manner) ο τρόπος  
with με 
without χωρίς 
yes ναι 
Countries  
Austria  η Αυστρία  
Belgium το Βέλγιο 
China η Κίνα 
Cyprus η Κύπρος 
Denmark  η Δανία  
England  η Αγγλία  
France  η Γαλλία  
Germany  η Γερμανία  
Great Britain  η Μεγάλη Βρετανία  
Greece  η Ελλάδα  
Holland  η Ολλανδία  
India η Ινδία 
Ireland  η Ιρλανδία  
Italy  η Ιταλία  
Netherlands  η Ολλανδία  
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
93 
 
Countries (cont)  
Russia  η Ρωσία  
Scotland  η Σκωτία  
Spain  η Ισπανία  
Switzerland η Ελβετία 
Turkey η Τουρκία 
United Kingdom  το Ηνωμένο Βασίλειο  
United States  οι Ηνωμένες Πολιτείες  
Wales η Ουαλία 
Continents  
Africa η Αφρική 
Asia η Ασία 
Australia η Αυστραλία 
Europe η Ευρώπη 
North America η Βόρεια Αμερική 
South America η Νότια Αμερική 
Nationalities  
American Αμερικανός 
Austrian Αυστριακός 
Belgian Βέλγος 
British Βρετανός 
Chinese Κινέζος 
Cypriot Κύπριος 
Danish Δανός 
Dutch Ολλανδός 
English Άγγλος 
European Ευρωπαίος 
French Γάλλος 
German Γερμανός 
Greek Έλληνας 
Indian Ινδός 
Irish Ιρλανδός 
Italian Ιταλός 
Russian Ρώσος 
Scottish Σκωτσέζος 
Spanish Ισπανός 
Swiss Ελβετός 
Turkish Τούρκος 
Welsh Ουαλός 
Areas/mountains/seas 
 
Attica η Αττική 
Athens η Αθήνα 
Central Greece η Στερεά Ελλάδα 
Crete η Κρήτη 
Epirus η Ήπειρος 
Macedonia η Μακεδονία 
Larnaca η Λάρνακα 
Limassol η Λεμεσός 
mount Olympus το όρος (βουνό) Όλυμπος 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
94 
 
Areas/mountains/seas (cont)  
Nicosia η Λευκωσία 
Paphos η Πάφος 
Peloponnese η Πελοπόννησος 
the Aegean islands τα νησιά του Αιγαίου πελάγους 
the Cyclades οι Κυκλάδες 
the Dodecanese τα Δωδεκάνησα 
the Ionian islands τα νησιά του Ιονίου πελάγους 
the Mediterranean sea η Μεσόγειος θάλασσα 
the port of Piraeus  το λιμάνι του Πειραιά 
Thessaloniki η Θεσσαλονίκη 
Thessaly η Θεσσαλία 
Thrace η Θράκη 
Troodos mountains το Τρόοδος (οροσειρά) 
north ο βορράς 
south ο νότος 
east η ανατολή 
west η δύση 
Useful acronyms  
e.g. π.χ. 
etc κ.τ.λ., κ.λπ., κ.α. 
European Union ΕΕ (Ευρωπαϊκή Ένωση) 
Greek railway company ΟΣΕ 
Greek telecommunications ΟΤΕ 
Greek television company ΕΡΤ 
klm χλμ 
P.C. Η/Υ 
St Άγ. 
value added tax Φ.Π.Α. 
Social conventions  
best wishes πολλές ευχές 
best wishes (birthdays, name days, festive 
occasions) χρόνια πολλά 
best wishes (for birthdays) να ζήσεις, να τα εκατοστίσεις, χρόνια πολλά 
best wishes (for a new born and at a 
christening) να σας ζήσει 
best wishes (for weddings) να ζήσετε 
bon apetit καλή όρεξη 
condolences συλλυπητήρια 
congratulations συγχαρητήρια 
don’t mention it δεν είναι τίποτα, τίποτα, παρακαλώ (ως απάντηση στο 
ευχαριστώ) 
get well soon περαστικά 
good evening καλησπέρα 
goodbye αντίο 
goodnight καληνύχτα 
greetings χαίρετε 
have a good journey καλό ταξίδι 
have a good day/evening καλημέρα / καλό βράδυ 
hello (on the telephone) εμπρός, παρακαλώ (στο τηλέφωνο) 
hello; good morning γεια σας, καλημέρα 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
95 
 
Social conventions (cont)  
help! βοήθεια! 
hi γεια 
I beg your pardon? Pardon? με συγχωρείτε; συγγνώμη; 
It’s a pleasure ευχαρίστησή μου 
meeting; meeting place η συνάντηση, το ραντεβού, ο τόπος συνάντησης 
meet you at 6 o’clock θα σε συναντήσω στις 6 η ώρα 
no thank you όχι ευχαριστώ 
of course φυσικά 
please (request) παρακαλώ 
see you later τα λέμε αργότερα 
see you soon τα λέμε σύντομα 
see you tomorrow/on Friday τα λέμε αύριο / την Παρασκευή 
(I’m) sorry λυπάμαι, συγγνώμη  
thank you (very much) ευχαριστώ (πολύ) 
welcome καλωσορίσατε/καλωσήρθατε 
you are welcome παρακαλώ 
Language used in dialogues and messages  
address η διεύθυνση 
agreed σύμφωνοι/έγινε/εντάξει 
area code ο κωδικός 
be quiet κάνε/κάντε ησυχία 
call me (informal/formal) πάρε με/τηλεφωνήστε μου 
dial the number καλέστε τον αριθμό 
email e-mail (ηλεκτρονικό μήνυμα) 
for the attention of υπόψη 
for the moment προς το παρόν 
further to/following σε συνέχεια του/της/των 
I will put you through θα σας συνδέσω 
I’ll be right back επιστρέφω αμέσως 
in fact για να πούμε την αλήθεια 
I’m listening ακούω 
May I help you? μπορώ να σας βοηθήσω; 
message το μήνυμα 
mobile phone το κινητό τηλέφωνο 
more slowly πιο αργά, παρακαλώ 
one moment μια στιγμή 
on line on line (σε σύνδεση) 
on the line/speaking (είμαι) στη γραμμή / παρακαλώ,  
ορίστε (στο τηλέφωνο) 
please repeat that μπορείτε να επαναλάβετε 
postcode ο ταχυδρομικός κώδικας 
receiver (telephone) το ακουστικό (τηλέφωνο) 
repeat please επαναλάβετε παρακαλώ 
sent by στάλθηκε από 
stay on the line παραμείνετε στη γραμμή 
telephone το τηλέφωνο 
text message το γραπτό μήνυμα 
tone ο τόνος 
voice mail το φωνητικό μήνυμα 
wait η αναμονή 
wrong number το λάθος νούμερο/ο λάθος αριθμός 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
96 
 
Section 2 – Topic-specific vocabulary 
Identity and culture - daily life, food and drink, including eating out 
Foundation tier  
appetite η όρεξη 
appetiser το ορεκτικό 
apple το μήλο 
apricot το βερίκοκο 
aubergine η μελιτζάνα 
based on με βάση/βασισμένος 
banana η μπανάνα 
barbecue (e.g. in charcoal) η ψησταριά/το ψητό στη σούβλα (στα κάρβουνα) 
beans τα φασόλια 
beer η μπύρα 
beef το βοδινό/μοσχαρίσιο κρέας 
bill ο λογαριασμός 
birthday cake η τούρτα 
biscuit το μπισκότο/το κουλουράκι 
boiled βραστό/βρασμένο 
bottle το μπουκάλι 
bread (e.g. white, brown, country loaf) το ψωμί (π.χ. άσπρο, μαύρο, χωριάτικο) 
breakfast το πρωινό 
butter το βούτυρο 
cabbage το λάχανο 
café η καφετέρια, το καφέ 
cake το κέικ 
carrot το καρότο 
cauliflower το κουνουπίδι 
cereals τα δημητριακά 
champagne η σαμπάνια 
cheese (e.g feta) το τυρί (π.χ. φέτα) 
cherry το κεράσι 
chicken το κοτόπουλο 
chips οι τηγανητές πατάτες 
chocolate η σοκολάτα 
choice η επιλογή 
chop (e.g. pork/lamb) η μπριζόλα (π.χ. χοιρινή / αρνίσια) 
closed (on Mondays) κλειστά (τις Δευτέρες) 
cocoa το κακάο 
coffee ο καφές 
cold sliced meat (e.g. salami, ham) τα αλλαντικά (π.χ. σαλάμι, ζαμπόν) 
cooked  μαγειρεμένος  
courgette το κολοκυθάκι 
cream η κρέμα 
crisps τα πατατάκια 
cucumber το αγγούρι 
cup το φλιτζάνι 
daily life/everyday life η καθημερινότητα/η καθημερινή ζωή 
delicious νόστιμος 
dessert το επιδόρπιο/το γλυκό/το γλύκισμα 
dining room η τραπεζαρία 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
97 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
dish of the day το πιάτο ημέρας 
drink το ποτό 
egg το αυγό 
enjoy your meal! καλή όρεξη! 
euro το ευρώ 
evening meal, dinner το βραδινό γεύμα, δείπνο 
fatty foods οι παχυντικές τροφές, οι λιπαρές τροφές 
fish το ψάρι 
food το φαγητό 
food η τροφή/ τα τρόφιμα 
food shopping τα ψώνια (για φαγητό) 
fork το πιρούνι 
fried τηγανητός 
fruit το φρούτο 
fruit juice ο φρουτοχυμός 
glass το ποτήρι 
grapes τα σταφύλια 
green beans τα φασολάκια 
grilled Ψητό/ψημένο στο γκριλ/στη σχάρα 
ham το ζαμπόν 
hamburger το χάμπουργκερ 
health  η υγεία 
healthy eating η υγιεινή διατροφή 
honey το μέλι 
hot chocolate η ζεστή σοκολάτα 
ice cream το παγωτό 
jar το βάζο 
jam η μαρμελάδα 
juice ο χυμός 
kebab το σουβλάκι 
knife το μαχαίρι  
lamb το αρνί 
lemon το λεμόνι 
lemonade η λεμονάδα 
lettuce το μαρούλι 
lunch το μεσημεριανό 
main course το κύριο πιάτο 
meal το γεύμα 
meat το κρέας 
meatball ο κεφτές/ το κεφτεδάκι 
melon το πεπόνι 
menu το μενού/ο κατάλογος 
milk το γάλα 
mince ο κιμάς 
mineral water το μεταλλικό νερό 
money τα χρήματα 
mushroom το μανιτάρι 
mustard η μουστάρδα 
napkin η πετσέτα/ η χαρτοπετσέτα 
oil (e.g. olive oil) το λάδι (π.χ. ελαιόλαδο) 
olive/olive tree η ελιά 
onion το κρεμμύδι 
omelette η ομελέτα 
orange το πορτοκάλι 
organic (e.g. produce) βιολογικό (π.χ. προϊόν) 
packet το πακέτο, το δέμα 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
98 
Foundation tier (cont)  
pasta τα ζυμαρικά 
pastries τα αρτοσκευάσματα, τα γλυκίσματα 
patisserie το ζαχαροπλαστείο 
peanut το φιστίκι 
peas ο αρακάς 
peach το ροδάκινο 
pear το αχλάδι 
pepper το πιπέρι 
pepper (vegetable) η πιπεριά (λαχανικό) 
pie (e.g. apple pie, spinach pie, cheese pie) η πίτα (π.χ. μηλόπιτα, σπανακόπιτα, τυρόπιτα) 
piece of bread (with butter/ jam often for 
breakfast) 
η φέτα ψωμί (με βούτυρο / μαρμελάδα συχνά για 
πρωινό) 
pineapple ο ανανάς 
pizza η πίτσα 
pizzeria, pizza restaurant η πιτσαρία, εστιατόριο-πιτσαρία 
place setting το στρώσιμο τραπεζιού 
plate το πιάτο 
plum το δαμάσκηνο 
pork το χοιρινό 
portion η μερίδα 
potato η πατάτα 
product το προϊόν 
ready meal/take away έτοιμο γεύμα/ φαγητό σε πακέτο 
restaurant το εστιατόριο 
rice το ρύζι 
roast ψητό (φαγητό) 
roll (bread) το ψωμάκι 
salt το αλάτι 
salty/savoury αλατισμένα/αλμυρά 
salad (e.g. greek salad) η σαλάτα (π.χ. χωριάτικη) 
sandwich το σάντουιτς 
sausage το λουκάνικο 
self-service σελφ-σέρβις 
service η υπηρεσία/ η εξυπηρέτηση/το σέρβις 
slice η φέτα, το κομμάτι 
snack σνακ, μικρό γεύμα 
snack bar το σνακ μπαρ 
soft drinks τα αναψυκτικά 
shopping τα ψώνια 
soup η σούπα 
speciality η σπεσιαλιτέ 
spoon το κουτάλι 
starter το πρώτο πιάτο 
steam ο ατμός 
strawberry η φράουλα 
steak (e.g. beef) η μπριζόλα (π.χ. μοσχαρίσια) 
stuffed (e.g. tomatoes, peppers) τα γεμιστά (π.χ. ντομάτες, πιπεριές) 
sweet το γλυκό 
sweet (tasting) γλυκό (γεύση) 
sugar  η ζάχαρη 
supermarket το σουπερμάρκετ 
table το τραπέζι 
table cloth το τραπεζομάντιλο 
tart η τάρτα 
taste η γεύση (π.χ. γλυκό, ξινό, πικρό, αλμυρό) 
tasty νόστιμος/γευστικός 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
99 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
tea το τσάι 
tea spoon το κουταλάκι του γλυκού 
tip (money) το φιλοδώρημα (χρήματα) 
toasted sandwich το τοστ 
to be hungry πεινάω 
to be on a diet κάνω δίαιτα 
to be thirtsy διψώ 
to boil βράζω 
to fry τηγανίζω 
to lay the table στρώνω το τραπέζι 
to order παραγγέλνω 
to pay πληρώνω 
to roast ψήνω 
to serve εξυπηρετώ/σερβίρω 
to taste δοκιμάζω (φαγητό) 
tomato η ντομάτα 
tuna ο τόνος 
vanilla η βανίλια 
vegetable το λαχανικό 
vegetables cooked in olive oil τα λαδερά 
vegetarian χορτοφάγος 
vegetarian food το χορτοφαγικό φαγητό 
vinegar το ξύδι 
waiter/waitress ο σερβιτόρος/η σερβιτόρα 
walnut το καρύδι 
water το νερό 
watermelon το καρπούζι 
wine το κρασί 
yoghurt το γιαούρτι 
Higher tier  
beer (from the pump) η μπίρα (από βαρέλι) 
boiled egg; hard-boiled egg το βραστό αυγό, αυγό βραστό σκληρό 
bottled water το εμφιαλωμένο νερό 
broad (giant) beans φασόλια γίγαντες 
can η κονσέρβα 
dried fruit/nuts οι ξηροί καρποί 
fried egg το τηγανητό αυγό 
full fat milk το πλήρες γάλα 
garlic το σκόρδο 
goat’s cheese το κατσικίσιο τυρί 
homemade σπιτικός 
leeks τα πράσα 
loaf το καρβέλι 
low fat με χαμηλά λιπαρά 
medium (steak) η μπριζόλα, μέτρια ψημένη 
mixed starters η ποικιλία/ οι μεζέδες 
mussels τα μύδια 
octopus το χταπόδι 
organic food τα βιολογικά τρόφιμα 
pistachio το φιστίκι Αιγίνης 
radish το ραπανάκι 
rare (steak) η μισοψημένη μπριζόλα 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
100 
 
Higher tier (cont)  
raw ωμός 
salmon ο σολομός 
saucer το πιατάκι 
sea food τα θαλασσινά 
(semi-)skimmed milk το (ημι-) αποβουτυρωμένο γάλα 
spicy πικάντικος, καυτερός 
spinach το σπανάκι 
squid το καλαμαράκι 
steamed  στον ατμό  
supper το βραδινό/δείπνο 
tray ο δίσκος 
turkey η γαλοπούλα 
veal το μοσχαράκι 
well-cooked καλά μαγειρεμένος 
  
Identity and culture - what my friends and family are like 
Words relating to dress and style 
Foundation tier 
belt η ζώνη 
boots οι μπότες 
bra το σουτιέν 
bracelet το βραχιόλι 
cap ο σκούφος, το σκουφί 
cardigan η ζακέτα 
casual jacket το σακάκι, μπουφάν (όχι επίσημο) 
changing room το δοκιμαστήριο 
clothes τα ρούχα 
clothes shop (e.g. menswear/womenswear) το κατάστημα ρούχων (ανδρικών/γυναικείων 
ενδυμάτων) 
coat/overcoat το παλτό/πανωφόρι 
company (group of friends) η παρέα 
cosmetics τα καλλυντικά 
cotton (made of cotton) το βαμβάκι (από βαμβάκι/βαμβακερός) 
dress το φόρεμα 
dressed in ντυμένος με 
dressing gown η ρόμπα 
earring το σκουλαρίκι 
fashion η μόδα 
fashionable της μόδας/ στυλάτος 
fitting room το δοκιμαστήριο 
formal επίσημος 
fun/joy/cheerfulness το κέφι 
glasses τα γυαλιά/γυαλιά ηλίου 
glove το γάντι 
hairdresser's το κομμωτήριο 
handbag η τσάντα 
hat το καπέλο 
identity η ταυτότητα 
importance η σημασία 
informal ανεπίσημος, φιλικός 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
101 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
it fits/suits you σας κάνει / σας πάει 
jacket το σακάκι 
jeans το τζιν 
jeweller’s (shop); jewellery (craft) το κοσμηματοπωλείο, τα κοσμήματα (τέχνη) 
leather/made of leather το δέρμα / δερμάτινος 
leggings το κολάν 
linen (made of linen) τα λινά είδη (λινό),  
lipstick το κραγιόν 
loose (i.e. too big) φαρδύς (π.χ. υπερβολικά μεγάλος) 
make, brand η μάρκα 
makeup το μακιγιάζ 
medium (size) μεσαίος (μέγεθος) 
necklace το κολιέ 
nightdress το νυχτικό, η νυχτικιά 
old fashioned παλιομοδίτικος, ντεμοντέ 
old fashioned (vintage, retro style) παλιομοδίτικος (vintage, ρετρό στυλ) 
pants, briefs το κιλοτάκι (γυναικείο), το σλιπ (αντρικό) 
perfume το άρωμα 
photo η φωτογραφία 
poloshirt το μπλουζάκι (πόλο) 
purse το πορτοφόλι 
pyjamas οι πιτζάμες 
relationship η σχέση 
ring το δαχτυλίδι 
scarf το κασκόλ 
shirt το πουκάμισο 
shoe το παπούτσι 
shoe shop το κατάστημα υποδημάτων 
shorts το σορτς/το κοντό παντελονάκι 
size (general); shoe size το μέγεθος (γενικά), μέγεθος παπουτσιού 
skirt η φούστα 
slipper η παντόφλα 
small μικρός 
smart καλοντυμένος 
sock η κάλτσα 
sports kit τα αθλητικά ρούχα/η στολή, ο αθλητικός εξοπλισμός, 
η αθλητική φόρμα 
sports shirt η αθλητική μπλούζα, η φανέλα 
spotted πουά 
striped ριγέ 
suit το κοστούμι 
style το στυλ 
sweater, jumper το πουλόβερ 
sweatshirt η αθλητική μπλούζα, φούτερ 
swimming costume/trunks το μαγιό  
tattoo το τατουάζ 
tee shirt το κοντομάνικο μπλουζάκι 
tie η γραβάτα 
tights το καλσόν, κολάν 
tracksuit η αθλητική φόρμα 
trainers τα αθλητικά παπούτσια 
trousers το παντελόνι 
underwear τα εσώρουχα 
umbrella η ομπρέλα 
wallet το πορτοφόλι 
watch (verb)/ watch (noun) βλέπω, παρακολουθώ/ το ρολόι 
wool (woollen) το μαλλί (μάλλινος) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
102 
Words relating to dress and style 
Higher tier  
cardigan η ζακέτα 
catwalk η πασαρέλα 
dyed/made up βαμμένος 
model το μοντέλο 
silk (made of silk) το μετάξι (μεταξωτός) 
straw hat το ψάθινο καπέλο 
tight (for clothes) στενός, -ή, -ό 
to have one’s hair cut κόβω τα μαλλιά μου 
to have one’s hair done φτιάχνω τα μαλλιά μου 
to put on makeup βάζω μέικ απ 
velvet (made of velvet) το βελούδο (βελούδινος) 
  
Identity and culture - what my friends and family are like 
Words on relations, relationships, personal and physical characteristics 
Foundation tier  
adolescent o έφηβος, η έφηβη 
adult, grown-up ενήλικας, μεγάλος  
age η ηλικία 
alone μόνος 
aunt η θεία 
armchair η πολυθρόνα 
at home στο σπίτι 
baby το μωρό 
bald φαλακρός 
bathroom το μπάνιο, το λουτρό, η τουαλέτα 
bedroom το υπνοδωμάτιο, η κρεβατοκάμαρα 
beard το μούσι, το γένι, η γενειάδα  
beautiful όμορφος/ ωραίος 
date of birth η ημερομηνία γέννησης 
birthday τα γενέθλια 
birthplace η γενέτειρα/ το μέρος που γεννήθηκα 
block of flats η πολυκατοικία 
born γεννημένος 
boy το αγόρι 
brother ο αδελφός 
brother-in-law/sister-in-law 
 
ο γαμπρός (σύζυγος αδελφής), ο κουνιάδος (αδελφός 
συζύγου) /η νύφη (σύζυγος αδελφού), η κουνιάδα 
(αδελφή συζύγου) 
brothers and sisters, siblings οι αδελφοί και οι αδελφές, τα αδέλφια 
cat η γάτα 
celebrity η διασημότητα 
chair η καρέκλα 
character ο χαρακτήρας 
character, personality ο χαρακτήρας, η προσωπικότητα 
charming γοητευτικός 
chatty ομιλητικός 
child το παιδί 
clothes τα ρούχα 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
103 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
comfortable (house, furniture) άνετο (σπίτι, έπιπλα) 
contact details τα στοιχεία επικοινωνίας 
cousin ο εξάδελφος 
curly σγουρός/κατσαρός 
dad ο μπαμπάς 
daughter η κόρη 
dead νεκρός 
divorced διαζευγμένος 
dog ο σκύλος 
engaged αρραβωνιασμένος 
eyes τα μάτια 
face το πρόσωπο 
family η οικογένεια 
famous διάσημος 
father ο πατέρας 
feeling το συναίσθημα 
first name το όνομα 
flat; apartment το διαμέρισμα 
flower το λουλούδι 
friend ο φίλος 
friend (also boyfriend, girlfriend) ο φίλος/ η φίλη [επίσης φίλος, φίλη (ερωτικός 
σύντροφος)] 
friendly φιλικός 
friendship η φιλία 
furniture τα έπιπλα 
garden ο κήπος 
garage το γκαράζ 
girl το κορίτσι 
glasses τα γυαλιά 
goldfish το χρυσόψαρο 
grandad/grandfather ο παππούς 
grandchild το εγγόνι, ο εγγονός 
grandma, granny η γιαγιά 
grandmother η γιαγιά 
grandparents o παππούς και η γιαγιά 
guy, dude, bloke ο τύπος, ο μάγκας 
hair τα μαλλιά 
half (half-sister etc) μισός (ετεροθαλής αδελφή, κ.λπ.) 
house το σπίτι 
husband ο σύζυγος (άνδρας) 
ideal ιδανικός 
identity(card) η ταυτότητα 
in a good/bad mood σε καλή / κακή διάθεση 
in love ερωτευμένος 
intelligent έξυπνος 
interest το ενδιαφέρον 
invitation η πρόσκληση 
kitchen η κουζίνα 
kiss το φιλί 
lazy τεμπέλης 
life η ζωή 
light 
lively 
το φως/ το φωτιστικό 
ζωηρός, ζωντανός (δραστήριος) 
living room, front room το καθιστικό 
lounge το σαλόνι 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
104 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
loveable αξιαγάπητος 
man ο άνδρας 
married παντρεμένος 
mean, nasty κακός  
member of the family το μέλος της οικογένειας 
mood η διάθεση 
mother η μητέρα 
moustache το μουστάκι 
mouth το στόμα 
multicultural πολυπολιτισμικός 
mum η μαμά 
naughty άτακτος, ζωηρός 
neighbour ο γείτονας 
nephew ο ανιψιός 
nice, kind καλός/ευγενικός, ευγενικός 
nice, likeable καλός (ωραίος,) συμπαθής 
nickname το χαϊδευτικό, το παρατσούκλι 
niece η ανιψιά 
normal κανονικός, φυσιολογικός 
old παλιός, μεγάλος (ηλικιωμένος) 
old fashioned παλιομοδίτικος, ξεπερασμένος 
older παλιότερος, μεγαλύτερος 
oldest (brother/sister) ο πιο μεγάλος (αδελφός / αδελφή) 
only child το μοναχοπαίδι 
only daughter η μοναχοκόρη 
only son ο μοναχογιός 
optimistic αισιόδοξος 
parents οι γονείς 
party το πάρτι, η γιορτή 
party το κόμμα (πολιτικό) 
penfriend ο φίλος δι' αλληλογραφίας 
people οι άνθρωποι 
person το άτομο, το πρόσωπο 
personal details τα προσωπικά στοιχεία 
pessimistic απαισιόδοξος 
pet το κατοικίδιο ζώο 
place of residence ο τόπος κατοικίας 
present; gift το δώρο 
profession το επάγγελμα 
rabbit το κουνέλι 
reasonable λογικός, εύλογος 
relationship η σχέση 
religion η θρησκεία 
role model το πρότυπο 
room το δωμάτιο  
self (myself, yourself etc) εαυτός (ο εαυτός μου, ο εαυτός σου, κ.λπ.) 
selfish εγωιστικός, εγωιστής 
sense of humour η αίσθηση του χιούμορ 
separated χωρισμένος 
serious σοβαρός 
single μόνο ένας, μοναδικός, ελεύθερος (ανύπαντρος) 
sister η αδελφή 
sofa; settee ο καναπές 
son ο γιος 
son-in-law/daughter-in-law ο γαμπρός (άνδρας της κόρης) / η νύφη (γυναίκα του 
γιου) 
step (members of family) θετός, ετεροθαλής (μέλη της οικογένειας) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
105 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
straight (hair) ίσια (μαλλιά) 
study (room) το δωμάτιο (μελέτης)/γραφείο 
surname το επώνυμο 
survey η έρευνα 
thin/slim λεπτός / λεπτός, αδύνατος 
tidy; neat τακτοποιημένος, καθαρός 
to annoy ενοχλώ 
to argue, to quarrel μαλώνω, καβγαδίζω 
to babysit προσέχω μωρό, κάνω μπέιμπι σίτινγκ 
to be called ονομάζεται/λέγεται 
to be in a good / bad mood είμαι σε καλή / κακή διάθεση 
to care for, to look after φροντίζω, περιποιούμαι / φροντίζω, προσέχω 
to chat κουβεντιάζω 
to get divorced παίρνω διαζύγιο 
to get on (well) with τα πάω καλά με κάποιον 
to keep fit διατηρούμαι σε φόρμα 
to look (e.g. angry/happy etc)  φαίνομαι (π.χ. θυμωμένος / χαρούμενος, κ.λπ.)  
to respect σέβομαι 
to separate, to split up χωρίζω / χωρίζω, παίρνω διαζύγιο 
tortoise η χελώνα 
tropical fish τα τροπικά ψάρια 
twin δίδυμος 
twin brothers τα δίδυμα αδέλφια 
ugly άσχημος 
uncle ο θείος 
unemployed άνεργος 
unbearable ανυπόφορος 
untidy ακατάστατος 
visit η επίσκεψη 
well behaved που συμπεριφέρεται καλά (για άτομο)/φρόνιμος 
wife, woman η σύζυγος (η γυναίκα) 
youth (i.e the time of life) η νεολαία, τα νιάτα 
Higher tier  
a good deed η καλή πράξη 
acquaintance, friend ο γνωστός, ο φίλος 
adopted υιοθετημένος 
adventurous περιπετειώδης 
annoying ενοχλητικός 
argument η διαφωνία 
bossy αυταρχικός 
career η καριέρα 
character trait το γνώρισμα του χαρακτήρα, το χαρακτηριστικό 
cheeky θρασύς 
comfortable (at ease) άνετος (άνετα, βολικά) 
conceited αλαζόνας, φαντασμένος 
depressed στεναχωρημένος, μελαγχολικός 
discrimination η διάκριση 
faith (religious) η πίστη (θρησκευτική) 
fiancé(e) o αρραβωνιαστικός, η αρραβωνιαστικιά 
furnished επιπλωμένος 
gang η συμμορία 
gender, sex το φύλο, φύλο/γένος (βιολογία), το σεξ 
generous γενναιόδωρος 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
106 
 
Higher tier (cont)  
hall (in house); lobby/waiting room το χολ (σε σπίτι) / η αίθουσα αναμονής 
independent ανεξάρτητος 
jealous ζηλιάρης 
loyal, faithful πιστός (αφοσιωμένος), πιστός 
mad, crazy τρελός 
meeting η συνάντηση/η σύσκεψη 
old age/third age τα γηρατειά / η τρίτη ηλικία 
old people’s home το γηροκομείο 
pensioner, senior citizen συνταξιούχος, άτομο τρίτης ηλικίας 
pretentious επιτηδευμένος, επιδεικτικός 
priest ο ιερέας, ο παπάς 
racist ρατσιστής 
relationship η σχέση, ο δεσμός 
relative, relation σχετικός, σχέση (συσχέτιση) 
reliable αξιόπιστος 
self- confident με αυτοπεποίθηση 
sensitive ευαίσθητος 
sexist σεξιστής 
similar παρόμοιος 
single parent μονογονέας 
single person; single ελεύθερος (χωρίς δεσμό), ελεύθερος, μόνος 
spoilt κακομαθημένος (καλομαθημένος) 
spot/pimple το σπυράκι 
stubborn πεισματάρης 
to disadvantage φέρνω σε μειονεκτική θέση 
to experience βιώνω (εμπειρία) 
to pick on, to harass, to bully πειράζω, παρενοχλώ, εκφοβίζω 
to ressemble/look like μοιάζω/φαίνομαι 
to support υποστηρίζω 
to thank ευχαριστώ (κάποιον) 
twins οι δίδυμοι/τα δίδυμα 
underage ο ανήλικος, η ανήλικη 
understanding η κατανόηση 
well-balanced ισορροπημένος 
  
Identity and culture - cultural life 
Foundation tier  
activity η δραστηριότητα 
actor ο/η ηθοποιός 
adventure film η περιπέτεια (κινηματογραφική ταινία) 
athletics ο αθλητισμός/ο στίβος 
badminton το μπάντμιντον (αντιπτέριση) 
ball η μπάλα 
band/group το συγκρότημα (μουσικό) 
basketball το μπάσκετ, η καλαθοσφαίριση 
book το βιβλίο 
boxing η πυγμαχία, το μποξ 
bride/groom η νύφη/ ο γαμπρός 
camera η φωτογραφική μηχανή 
canoeing το κανό (άθλημα) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
107 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
cartoon τα κινούμενα σχέδια 
cat η γάτα 
CD (compact disc) CD 
celebration, party η γιορτή, το πάρτι 
changing rooms τα αποδυτήρια/ τα δοκιμαστήρια 
chess το σκάκι 
Christmas τα Χριστούγεννα 
Christmas Eve η παραμονή Χριστουγέννων 
clarinet το κλαρινέτο 
classical, classic κλασικός 
climbing η αναρρίχηση, η ορειβασία  
club ο σύλλογος, ο όμιλος /το  κλαμπ 
collect συλλέγω/μαζεύω 
collection η συλλογή 
comic (magazine) κωμικός, κόμικ (περιοδικό) 
competition ο διαγωνισμός, ο ανταγωνισμός 
computer game παιχνίδι για υπολογιστή 
concert η συναυλία, το κονσέρτο 
crossword puzzle το σταυρόλεξο 
culture η κουλτούρα, ο πολιτισμός, η καλλιέργεια 
cultural life η πολιτιστική κίνηση 
customs τα έθιμα 
cycling η ποδηλασία 
dance/dancing χορεύω, χορός / χορός 
detective/police (story) αστυνομική (ιστορία) 
disco  η ντίσκο 
documentary το ντοκιμαντέρ 
drums τα τύμπανα, ντραμς 
Easter το Πάσχα 
Easter Monday η Δευτέρα του Πάσχα 
Easter Saturday το Μεγάλο Σάββατο/ η Ανάσταση 
entertainment η ψυχαγωγία, η διασκέδαση 
equipment ο εξοπλισμός 
extreme sports τα ακραία αθλήματα 
fanatical about φανατικός/παθιασμένος για (κάτι) 
fantasy film η ταινία φαντασίας 
fatherland/homeland η πατρίδα 
film η ταινία 
final ο τελικός 
flute το φλάουτο 
folk music/songs η παραδοσιακή μουσική/τα δημοτικά τραγούδια 
football το ποδόσφαιρο 
free time ο ελεύθερος χρόνος 
game το παιχνίδι 
games console η κονσόλα παιχνιδιών 
Good Friday η Μεγάλη Παρασκευή 
guitar η κιθάρα 
gymnastics η γυμναστική 
handball το χάντμπολ 
Happy birthday!  Χρόνια Πολλά! Χαρούμενα γενέθλια!  
Happy New Year! Καλή Χρονιά!/Ευτυχισμένο το Νέο Έτος 
hobby; leisure activity το χόμπι, η ψυχαγωγική δραστηριότητα 
hockey το χόκεϊ 
horror film η ταινία τρόμου 
ice skating το πατινάζ 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
108 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
judo το τζούντο 
karate το καράτε 
keyboard το πληκτρολόγιο 
leisure ελεύθερος χρόνος 
Lent (period leading up to Easter) η Σαρακοστή  
life η ζωή 
magazine το περιοδικό 
marriage; wedding ο γάμος, γάμος (η τελετή) 
martial arts οι πολεμικές τέχνες 
mothers’ day η ημέρα της μητέρας 
mountaineering η ορειβασία, ο αλπινισμός 
MP3 player η συσκευή αναπαραγωγής MP3 
music η μουσική 
New Year το Νέο Έτος 
New Year's Day η Πρωτοχρονιά (ανήμερα) 
New Year's Eve η παραμονή Πρωτοχρονιάς 
news οι ειδήσεις,τα νέα 
nightclub το νυχτερινό κέντρο, το κλαμπ 
orchestra η ορχήστρα 
piano το πιάνο 
play (theatre) το έργο (θεατρικό) 
player o παίκτης 
pleasure/amusement η ευχαρίστηση /η ψυχαγωγία 
pocket money το χαρτζιλίκι 
pop music η ποπ μουσική 
programme/broadcast η εκπομπή 
quiz show το τηλεπαιχνίδι ερωτήσεων 
race ο αγώνας  
rap η ραπ (μουσική) 
reading η ανάγνωση/το διάβασμα 
recorder (instrument) η φλογέρα (όργανο) 
referee ο διαιτητής 
riding η ιππασία 
rock music η ροκ μουσική 
roller blading το πατινάζ (με πατίνια) 
romantic ρομαντικός 
romantic film/love film η ρομαντική ταινία / η αισθηματική ταινία 
rugby το ράγκμπι 
sailing η ιστιοπλοΐα 
saxophone το σαξόφωνο 
science fiction film η ταινία επιστημονικής φαντασίας 
series η σειρά 
show (theatre etc); TV show η παράσταση (θέατρο, κ.λπ.), το τηλεοπτικό σόου 
singer ο τραγουδιστής 
skate boarding το σκέιτμπορντ 
skiing το σκι 
soap (opera) η σαπουνόπερα 
song το τραγούδι 
sport το άθλημα, το αγώνισμα, το σπορ 
sports ground το γήπεδο 
sporty αθλητικός 
spy story η ιστορία κατασκοπίας 
stage η σκηνή 
stereo system/music centre το στερεοφωνικό σύστημα / κέντρο μουσικής 
straight (hair) ίσια (μαλλιά) 
swimming η κολύμβηση 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
109 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
table tennis το πινγκ πονγκ/επιτραπέζια αντισφαίριση 
team η ομάδα 
television η τηλεόραση 
tennis το τένις/η αντισφαίριση 
thriller το θρίλερ 
title ο τίτλος 
to take out for a walk (dog) βγάζω βόλτα (σκύλο) 
toy το παιχνίδι 
tradition η παράδοση 
trumpet η τρομπέτα 
TV channel το τηλεοπτικό κανάλι 
violin το βιολί 
volleyball το βόλεϊ 
water skiing το θαλάσσιο σκι 
Western (film etc) το Γουέστερν (ταινία, κ.λπ.) 
windsurfing η ιστιοσανίδα, γουίντ σέρφινγκ, η κυματοδρομία 
X box X box 
youth club το κέντρο/ο σύλλογος νέων 
Higher tier  
board game, electronic game το επιτραπέζιο παιχνίδι, το ηλεκτρονικό παιχνίδι 
cable TV η καλωδιακή τηλεόραση 
camcorder/video camera η κάμερα / βιντεοκάμερα 
championship το πρωτάθλημα 
detective/mystery/police (film) η ταινία μυστηρίου / αστυνομική ταινία 
director ο σκηνοθέτης, η σκηνοθέτρια 
Do it yourself; DIY Κάντο μόνος σου 
drama (TV etc) η δραματική σειρά (τηλεόραση, κ.λπ.) 
dubbed (film) η μεταγλωττισμένη (ταινία) 
earphones τα ακουστικά 
engagement ο αρραβώνας 
fishing rod το καλάμι ψαρέματος 
goal το τέρμα, γκολ 
half-time το ημίχρονο 
keyboard  το πληκτρολόγιο 
knowledge η γνώση 
league; division (sports) η κατηγορία (σπορ)/ η Εθνική (π.χ. πρώτη, δεύτερη) 
marriage ceremony; wedding η γαμήλια τελετή, ο γάμος 
melody/tune η μελωδία/ ο σκοπός 
musical comedy (a musical) μουσική κωμωδία (μιούζικαλ) 
original version η αρχική έκδοση/ το πρωτότυπο 
remote control το τηλεχειριστήριο 
rowing η κωπηλασία 
sailing boat το ιστιοφόρο 
satellite TV η δορυφορική τηλεόραση 
scuba diving η κατάδυση (αυτόνομη) 
sitcom κωμική σειρά (τηλεόραση) 
sports equipment ο αθλητικός εξοπλισμός 
subtitles οι υπότιτλοι 
tournament το τουρνουά 
viewer/audience ο θεατής/ το κοινό 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
110 
 
Verbs associated with cultural life  
to attend (match etc) παρακολουθώ (αγώνα, κ.λπ.) 
to be a member of είμαι μέλος 
to congratulate συγχαίρω 
to get married παντρεύομαι 
to go bowling (tenpin) παίζω μπόουλινγκ (κορύνες) 
to dance χορεύω 
to do sport κάνω σπορ 
to do gymnastics κάνω γυμναστική 
to exercise ασκούμαι, γυμνάζομαι 
to fish/go fishing ψαρεύω / πάω για ψάρεμα 
to go for a walk/stroll πηγαίνω περίπατο / βόλτα 
to go horse riding κάνω ιππασία 
to hike, ramble κάνω πεζοπορία, περίπατο 
to roller-skate κάνω πατινάζ 
to sail πλέω, ταξιδεύω με πλοίο 
to score a goal σκοράρω, βάζω γκολ 
to shoot σουτάρω 
to skateboard κάνω σκέιτμπορντ 
to socialise κάνω παρέα (με) 
to swim κολυμπώ 
to take part (in) παίρνω μέρος (σε κάτι) / συμμετέχω (σε κάτι) 
to train εκπαιδεύω 
use η χρήση 
  
Identity and culture: using social media 
Foundation tier  
blog το μπλογκ, το ιστολόγιο 
chatroom τσατ ρουμ /αίθουσα τηλεσυνδιάσκεψης 
(to) chat on line κάνω διαδικτυακό τσατ/ κάνω διαδικτυακή συνομιλία 
communication η επικοινωνία 
computer ο ηλεκτρονικός υπολογιστής 
connection η σύνδεση 
cyber bullying ο κυβερνοεκφοβισμός 
digital ψηφιακός 
disk ο δίσκος/η δισκέττα 
e-mail e-mail, το ηλεκτρονικό ταχυδρομείο 
file το αρχείο 
homepage η αρχική σελίδα 
internet το ίντερνετ / το διαδίκτυο 
internet page/webpage η σελίδα στο διαδίκτυο/η ιστοσελίδα 
mobile phone shop το κατάστημα κινητής τηλεφωνίας 
mouse το ποντίκι 
new technology η νέα τεχνολογία 
password ο κωδικός πρόσβασης 
printer ο εκτυπωτής 
reader ο αναγνώστης 
risk ο κίνδυνος 
screen η οθόνη 
security η ασφάλεια 
social network/social media το κοινωνικό δίκτυο/τα μέσα κοινωνικής δικτύωσης 
software το λογισμικό 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
111 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
to burn γράφω (π.χ. σε CD) 
to download κατεβάζω 
to erase, delete διαγράφω, σβήνω 
to load φορτώνω 
to save, to store αποθηκεύω/σώζω 
to surf (the net) σερφάρω (στο διαδίκτυο) 
to type πληκτρολογώ 
to upload ανεβάζω 
videogame το βιντεοπαιχνίδι 
virus ο ιός 
web o ιστός  
webcam web κάμερα 
web page η ιστοσελίδα 
website o δικτυακός τόπος, o ιστότοπος 
wi-fi η ασύρματη σύνδεση 
  
Local area, holiday and travel 
 
Foundation tier  
abroad στο εξωτερικό 
accident το δυστύχημα, το ατύχημα 
accommodation το κατάλυμα, η διαμονή 
adult ο ενήλικας 
agricultural γεωργικός, αγροτικός 
air conditioning/air-con ο κλιματισμός 
airport το αεροδρόμιο 
area (in town) η περιοχή (σε πόλη) 
archaeological site ο αρχαιολογικός χώρος 
arrival η άφιξη 
art gallery η γκαλερί τέχνης 
bakery; baker’s shop το αρτοποιείο, ο φούρνος, το αρτοπωλείο 
balcony το μπαλκόνι 
bank η τράπεζα 
bar το μπαρ 
basement το υπόγειο 
bath το λουτρό, το μπάνιο 
bathroom η τουαλέτα 
beach η παραλία, η αμμουδιά 
bed το κρεβάτι 
bed linen τα κλινοσκεπάσματα 
bicycle/bike το ποδήλατο 
blanket η κουβέρτα 
boat το σκάφος 
book of tickets το καρνέ εισιτηρίων 
bookshop το βιβλιοπωλείο 
border το σύνορο 
bowling alley η αίθουσα μπόουλινγκ 
brand/make η επωνυμία/ η μάρκα 
bridge η γέφυρα 
brochure/leaflet το φυλλάδιο 
building το κτίριο 
bus (by bus) το λεωφορείο, (πηγαίνω με λεωφορείο) 
bus/coach station ο σταθμός λεωφορείων 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
112 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
bus stop η στάση λεωφορείου 
business/trade οι επιχειρηματικές δραστηριότητες / το εμπόριο 
butcher’s shop το κρεοπωλείο, ο χασάπης, ο κρεοπώλης 
café το καφέ (κατάστημα) 
calm/peaceful ήρεμος/ειρηνικός 
camp leader ο/η αρχηγός της κατασκήνωσης 
campsite το κάμπινγκ/ η κατασκήνωση 
to camp κατασκηνώνω 
car το αυτοκίνητο 
caravan το τροχόσπιτο 
car park το πάρκινγκ, o χώρος στάθμευσης 
castle το κάστρο 
cathedral ο καθεδρικός ναός 
church η εκκλησία, ο ναός 
cinema ο κινηματογράφος, το σινεμά 
closed κλειστός 
closing το κλείσιμο 
coach ο προπονητής 
coast η ακτή 
comfortable άνετος 
commercial εμπορικός 
compartment το διαμέρισμα, το χώρισμα 
concert η συναυλία, το κονσέρτο 
connection η σύνδεση 
corner η γωνία 
cost το κόστος 
country (i.e. nation) η χώρα (π.χ. έθνος) 
countryside η εξοχή, η ύπαιθρος 
crossing (ferry) η διέλευση (με φέρι μποτ) 
crossroads το σταυροδρόμι 
cycle path ο ποδηλατοδρόμος 
degree ο βαθμός, το πτυχίο (π.χ. πανεπιστημιακό) 
delay η καθυστέρηση 
department (in a shop) το τμήμα (σε κατάστημα) 
department store το πολυκατάστημα 
departure η αναχώρηση 
destination ο προορισμός 
diesel (fuel) το πετρέλαιο (καύσιμο) 
direct άμεσος, απευθείας 
director/ head teacher ο διευθυντής 
direction η φορά, η κατεύθυνση 
disco η ντίσκο, η ντισκοτέκ 
double room δωμάτιο με διπλό κρεβάτι/ το δίκλινο 
driver ο οδηγός 
driving licence το δίπλωμα οδήγησης 
electrical goods (retailer) τα ηλεκτρικά είδη (κατάστημα λιανικής) 
emergency το επείγον περιστατικό, η έκτακτη ανάγκη 
enjoy your stay! καλά να περάσετε! 
entertainment  η διασκέδαση/ η ψυχαγωγία 
entrance η είσοδος 
event η εκδήλωση, το γεγονός 
exhibition η έκθεση 
exit η έξοδος 
expenses τα έξοδα 
experiences οι εμπειρίες 
factory το εργοστάσιο 
fare το εισιτήριο 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
113 
Foundation tier (cont)  
farm το αγρόκτημα 
ferry το φέρι μποτ 
free (available, vacant) ελεύθερος (διαθέσιμος, κενός) 
flight η πτήση 
floor (1st, 2nd) ο όροφος (1ος, 2ος) 
(it is) forbidden to… απαγορεύεται να/ απαγορεύεται ο/η/το ... 
foreigner ο ξένος 
form η μορφή 
full (hotel etc) πλήρες (ξενοδοχείο, κ.λπ.) 
full board (all meals included) πλήρης διατροφή (όλα τα γεύματα 
συμπεριλαμβάνονται) 
garage, service station, petrol station το γκαράζ, το πρατήριο υγρών καυσίμων, το πρατήριο 
καυσίμων 
grocery; grocer’s shop το παντοπωλείο, το μπακάλικο 
ground floor το ισόγειο 
guest (in a hotel); guest (at someon'es 
home); customer 
ο πελάτης (σε ξενοδοχείο), φιλοξενούμενος, ο 
πελάτης 
guided tour η ξενάγηση με ξεναγό 
half board (B and B and evening meal) η ημιδιατροφή (πρωινό και βραδινό γεύμα) 
heating η θέρμανση 
hill ο λόφος 
hire of/hiring/renting (e.g. bike; house) η ενοικίαση / ενοικίαση / ενοικίαση (π.χ. ποδήλατο, 
σπίτι) 
to hire ενοικιάζω, νοικιάζω 
historic ιστορικός 
holidays, holiday, holiday (bank) fair οι διακοπές, η αργία, το πανηγύρι 
holiday home/country cottage 
hospital 
το εξοχικό 
το νοσοκομείο 
hotel το ξενοδοχείο 
household goods shop (cleaning materials etc) το κατάστημα ειδών οικιακής χρήσης (υλικά 
καθαρισμού, κ.λπ.) 
hypermarket η υπεραγορά 
ice rink το παγοδρόμιο 
identification; ID η ταυτότητα 
in advance εκ των προτέρων/ από πριν 
included συμπεριλαμβανόμενος/ είναι μέσα 
(συμπεριλαμβάνεται) 
indoor swimming pool η κλειστή πισίνα 
industry η βιομηχανία 
industrial βιομηχανικός 
information η πληροφορία 
information office το γραφείο πληροφοριών 
inside μέσα, το εσωτερικό 
instruction η οδηγία 
island το νησί 
journey/travel το ταξίδι 
key το κλειδί 
lake η λίμνη 
left luggage office/locker το γραφείο αποσκευών / ντουλάπι 
leisure centre το κέντρο αναψυχής 
library η βιβλιοθήκη 
lift ο ανελκυστήρας, ασανσέρ 
line/route η γραμμή/ η διαδρομή 
litter/rubbish bin τα σκουπίδια/ ο κάδος απορριμμάτων 
lively ζωηρός, ζωντανός (δραστήριος) 
local  τοπικός/ ντόπιος 
local inhabitant ντόπιος κάτοικος 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
114 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
location η τοποθεσία 
lorry το φορτηγό 
lost property office το γραφείο απολεσθέντων αντικειμένων 
luggage οι αποσκευές 
luxurious πολυτελής 
map (of a country, road map) ο χάρτης (χώρας, οδικός χάρτης) 
map (of the town) ο χάρτης (της πόλης) 
market η αγορά 
means of transport τα μέσα μεταφοράς 
monument το μνημείο 
moped το μοτοποδήλατο 
motorbike η μοτοσικλέτα 
motorway ο αυτοκινητόδρομος 
mountain το βουνό 
mosque το τζαμί 
museum το μουσείο 
neighbourhood η γειτονιά 
newspaper stall το κιόσκι εφημερίδων, το περίπτερο  
night club το νυχτερινό κέντρο, το κλαμπ 
occupied/taken κατειλημμένος / πιασμένος 
office το γραφείο 
on foot με τα πόδια 
on the left στα αριστερά 
on the right στα δεξιά 
one way street ο μονόδρομος 
open ανοιχτός 
opening hours οι ώρες λειτουργίας 
outing; trip η εκδρομή, η βόλτα (π.χ. με το αυτοκίνητο), ταξίδι 
outside έξω 
outside/in the open air έξω / στο ύπαιθρο 
outskirts τα προάστια 
owner ο ιδιοκτήτης 
to pack συσκευάζω, πακετάρω  
palace το παλάτι 
park το πάρκο 
passenger ο επιβάτης 
passport το διαβατήριο 
passport control ο έλεγχος διαβατηρίων 
pavement το πεζοδρόμιο 
pedestrian ο πεζός 
pedestrian area η περιοχή πεζών, ο πεζόδρομος 
pedestrian crossing η διάβαση πεζών 
petrol η βενζίνη 
picturesque γραφικός 
pillow το μαξιλάρι 
pitch (for tent) στήνω (σκηνή) 
place η θέση/το μέρος/ο τόπος 
places to see/sites τα αξιοθέατα 
playground η παιδική χαρά 
plane το αεροπλάνο 
platform η πλατφόρμα 
policeman ο, η αστυνομικός 
police station το αστυνομικό τμήμα 
port το λιμάνι 
postcard η καρτ ποστάλ, η κάρτα 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
115 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
poster/notice η αφίσα / η ειδοποίηση 
post office το ταχυδρομείο 
preference η προτίμηση 
press ο Τύπος 
price  η τιμή 
price list ο τιμοκατάλογος 
priority  η προτεραιότητα  
problem το πρόβλημα 
province η επαρχία 
public δημόσιος / δημοτικός 
public holiday η αργία 
public transport η δημόσια συγκοινωνία 
railway ο σιδηρόδρομος 
reception η ρεσεψιόν/ το γραφείο υποδοχής 
receptionist ο, η ρεσεψιονίστ 
reduction η μείωση 
region η περιοχή 
rent; rental το ενοίκιο, η ενοικίαση 
reservation η κράτηση 
return ticket το εισιτήριο επιστροφής 
river το ποτάμι 
road ο δρόμος 
road map ο οδικός χάρτης 
road/street ο δρόμος/η οδός 
(bed)room (in a hotel) το δωμάτιο (σε ξενοδοχείο) 
sales (reduction) οι εκπτώσεις (η έκπτωση) 
sea η θάλασσα 
(at the) seaside (στην) παραλία 
season η εποχή 
seat η θέση/το κάθισμα 
sheet το σεντόνι, το φύλλο 
ship το πλοίο 
shop το κατάστημα, το μαγαζί 
shopping centre το εμπορικό κέντρο 
show η παράσταση 
shower το ντους 
shower block (e.g.on campsite) οι ντουζιέρες (σε κάμπινγκ) 
sign η πινακίδα/το σήμα 
single ticket το απλό εισιτήριο 
single room το μονό δωμάτιο 
situated που βρίσκεται 
ski resort το χιονοδρομικό κέντρο 
sleeping bag ο υπνόσακος, το σλίπιν μπαγκ 
sleeping car (in a train) το βαγόνι ύπνου (σε τρένο) 
snack bar, buffet (on a train) το σνακ μπαρ, ο μπουφές (σε τρένο) 
soap το σαπούνι 
souvenir το αναμνηστικό 
sports centre το αθλητικό κέντρο 
space (including chronological period) ο χώρος, το διάστημα  
spacious ευρύχωρος 
square (in town) η πλατεία (σε πόλη) 
stadium το στάδιο (το γήπεδο) 
star το αστέρι 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
116 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
stairs; staircase οι σκάλες, η σκάλα 
state το κράτος 
station (railway) ο σταθμός (σιδηροδρομικός) 
statue το άγαλμα 
stop (bus, tram etc) η στάση (λεωφορείου, τραμ, κ.λπ.) 
suburb; outskirts of town το προάστιο, τα προάστια της πόλης 
suitable for drinking πόσιμο 
suitcase η βαλίτσα 
summer camp η κατασκήνωση 
supplement το συμπλήρωμα 
supermarket το σουπερμάρκετ 
swimming pool η πισίνα, το κολυμβητήριο 
taxi το ταξί 
television set η τηλεοπτική συσκευή/η τηλεόραση 
tent η σκηνή 
tennis court το γήπεδο τένις 
theatre το θέατρο 
ticket; tram, bus or metro ticket το εισιτήριο, το εισιτήριο τραμ, λεωφορείου ή μετρό 
ticket inspector ο ελεγκτής εισιτηρίων 
ticket office το εκδοτήριο εισιτηρίων 
till; cash desk το ταμείο 
timetable ο πίνακας δρομολογίων 
toilets οι τουαλέτες 
toilet paper το χαρτί υγείας 
toothbrush η οδοντόβουρτσα 
toothpaste η οδοντόκρεμα 
tour το οργανωμένο ταξίδι, η περιήγηση 
tourist ο τουρίστας 
tourist (adjective) τουριστικός (επίθετο) 
tourist attraction το τουριστικό αξιοθέατο 
tourist information office το γραφείο τουριστικών πληροφοριών 
tower o πύργος 
town η πόλη/ η κωμόπολη 
town centre το κέντρο της πόλης 
town hall το δημαρχείο 
traffic η κυκλοφορία, η κίνηση (στους δρόμους) 
traffic jam το μποτιλιάρισμα 
traffic lights οι φωτεινοί σηματοδότες 
train το τρένο 
tram το τραμ 
transaction η συναλλαγή 
travel agency το ταξιδιωτικό γραφείο / πρακτορείο, το γραφείο 
ταξιδίων 
traveller ο ταξιδιώτης, η ταξιδιώτισσα 
to ask for help ζητώ βοήθεια 
(to) turn/switch on ανάβω/ανοίγω (τηλεόραση, ραδιόφωνο, κ.λπ.) 
(to) turn/switch off σβήνω/κλείνω (τηλεόραση, ραδιόφωνο, κ.λπ.) 
underground railway ο υπόγειος σιδηρόδρομος 
underground station ο σταθμός μετρό 
unleaded petrol η αμόλυβδη βενζίνη 
view (over) η θέα (σε) 
village το χωριό 
waiting period η περίοδος αναμονής  
waiting room η αίθουσα αναμονής 
wash basin ο νιπτήρας 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
117 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
way out/exit η έξοδος 
welcome καλωσήρθατε/καλωσορίσατε 
window το παράθυρο 
(shop) window η βιτρίνα (καταστήματος) 
winter holidays οι χειμερινές διακοπές 
youth hostel o ξενώνας (νέων) 
Higher tier   
ATM/ cash point ATM / το μηχάνημα αυτόματης ανάληψης χρημάτων 
air (by) αεροπορικώς 
arrival η άφιξη 
(to) board (plane, ship) επιβιβάζομαι (σε αεροπλάνο, πλοίο) 
(to) brake φρενάρω 
brakes τα φρένα 
burglary η διάρρηξη 
canal το κανάλι 
Customs το τελωνείο 
dry cleaner’s; dry cleaning το καθαριστήριο, το στεγνό καθάρισμα 
emergency exit η έξοδος κινδύνου 
fast train η ταχεία αμαξοστοιχία 
fire exit η έξοδος κινδύνου 
fireworks τα πυροτεχνήματα 
fountain το συντριβάνι 
hall (reception, waiting, etc) η αίθουσα (υποδοχής, αναμονής κ.τ.λ.) 
helicopter το ελικόπτερο 
hospitality η φιλοξενία 
hypermarket η υπεραγορά 
ironmonger’s/hardware shop το κατάστημα σιδηρικών 
launderette το πλυντήριο (κοινής χρήσης) 
(level) pedestrian crossing η διάβαση πεζών 
no entry  απαγορεύεται η είσοδος  
no parking απαγορεύεται η στάθμευση 
noise ο θόρυβος 
(to) overtake προσπερνώ (οδήγηση) 
package holiday το πακέτο διακοπών 
park; green space το πάρκο, το πράσινο 
passport το διαβατήριο 
passport control ο έλεγχος διαβατηρίων 
police η αστυνομία 
policeman ο αστυνομικός 
registration/booking  η εγγραφή / η κράτηση 
run over (traffic accident) πατώ, χτυπώ (τροχαίο ατύχημα) 
rush hour η ώρα αιχμής 
savings bank το ταμιευτήριο 
seaside resort το παραθαλάσσιο θέρετρο 
seat belt η ζώνη ασφαλείας 
sound 
speed 
ο ήχος 
η ταχύτητα 
speed limit το όριο ταχύτητας 
summer το καλοκαίρι 
summer cinema το θερινό σινεμά 
summer holiday οι θερινές/καλοκαιρινές διακοπές 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
118 
 
Higher tier (cont)  
surrounding area, vicinity ο περιβάλλων χώρος, η γύρω περιοχή 
to put someone up φιλοξενώ  
to take place συμβαίνω, γίνομαι  
to stay (for a holiday) μένω, διαμένω (για διακοπές) 
toll τα διόδια 
(to) validate a ticket (e.g. train, tram) επικυρώνω/θεωρώ ένα εισιτήριο (π.χ. σε τρένο, τραμ) 
winter/skiing holiday οι χειμωνιάτικες (χειμερινές) διακοπές / διακοπές σκι 
vehicle το όχημα 
zoo ο ζωολογικός τύπος 
  
Phrases associated with weather 
Foundation tier  
bad (weather) κακός/άσχημος καιρός/ η κακοκαιρία 
bright (day) λαμπερή/φωτεινή μέρα 
climate το κλίμα 
cloud το σύννεφο 
cloudy συννεφιασμένος, νεφελώδης 
cold κρύος, το κρύο 
degree (temperature) ο βαθμός (θερμοκρασία) 
dry στεγνός, ξηρός 
fog η ομίχλη 
heat η θερμότητα/ η ζέστη 
highest temperature η πιο υψηλή θερμοκρασία 
hot καυτός, ζεστός 
in the east στην ανατολή, στα ανατολικά 
in the north στα βόρεια, στον βορρά 
in the south στα νότια, στο νότο 
in the west στη δύση, στα δυτικά 
it is freezing κάνει/έχει παγωνιά 
it is lightning αστράφτει 
it is raining βρέχει 
it is snowing χιονίζει 
it is thundering βροντάει 
it is windy φυσάει/έχει αέρα 
lightning η αστραπή 
lowest temperature η πιο χαμηλή θερμοκρασία 
nice (weather) ωραίος (καιρός) 
overcast συννεφιασμένος, νεφελώδης 
rain η βροχή 
season η εποχή 
sky ο ουρανός 
snow το χιόνι 
storm η καταιγίδα 
sun ο ήλιος 
sunny ηλιόλουστος 
the sun is shining ο ήλιος λάμπει 
to freeze παγώνω, ξεπαγιάζω 
to rain βρέχει 
to shine λάμπω 
to snow χιονίζει 
weather ο καιρός 
weather report το δελτίο καιρού 
wind ο άνεμος/ο αέρας 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
119 
Higher tier  
average temperature η μέση θερμοκρασία 
changeable μεταβλητός (καιρός) 
hail το χαλάζι 
high temperature υψηλή θερμοκρασία 
low temperature χαμηλή θερμοκρασία 
rainy βροχερός 
showers η μπόρα (βροχή) 
stormy θυελλώδης 
thunder η βροντή 
to brighten up (ο καιρός) ανοίγει 
to hail ρίχνει χαλάζι 
weather forecast το δελτίο καιρού 
Asking for directions 
 
are you going on foot/in a car? πας με τα πόδια / με το αυτοκίνητο; 
at the traffic lights στα φανάρια 
to continue  συνεχίζω  
cross (over) διασχίζω, περνώ απέναντι/το δρόμο 
directions οι οδηγίες/οι κατευθύνσεις 
to go straight on  πηγαίνω ευθεία  
high street/main street εμπορικός/κεντρικός δρόμος πόλης 
how do I get to? πώς θα πάω στο; 
it is 100 metres away είναι 100 μέτρα μακριά, απέχει 100 μέτρα 
it is next to είναι δίπλα 
it is opposite είναι απέναντι 
it is very close/far είναι πολύ κοντά/μακριά 
side street το στενό 
take the first road on the left στρίψτε στον πρώτο δρόμο αριστερά 
turn left στρίψτε αριστερά 
turn right στρίψτε δεξιά 
Dealing with problems 
 
Foundation tier  
address η διεύθυνση 
advertisement η διαφήμιση 
bill (invoice) ο λογαριασμός (το τιμολόγιο) 
breakdown η βλάβη 
broken χαλασμένος, σπασμένος 
colour το χρώμα 
complaint το παράπονο, η ενόχληση/ η δυσφορία, η καταγγελία 
complaints (department) η υπηρεσία παραπόνων 
correct number ο σωστός αριθμός 
customer ο πελάτης 
customer service η εξυπηρέτηση πελατών 
damage η ζημιά, η βλάβη 
delivery η παράδοση (σε παραλήπτη)  
email address η διεύθυνση e-mail, η διεύθυνση ηλεκτρονικού 
ταχυδρομείου 
faulty ελαττωματικός 
form το έντυπο (αίτησης), η μορφή 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
120 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
guarantee η εγγύηση 
mistake το λάθος 
mistake/fault το λάθος/το σφάλμα 
payment method η μέθοδος πληρωμής 
possibility η πιθανότητα 
purse το πορτοφόλι 
quantity η ποσότητα 
receipt η απόδειξη, η παραλαβή 
reduction η μείωση 
repair η επισκευή / η επιδιόρθωση 
replacement (part) το ανταλλακτικό 
size το μέγεθος 
theft; robbery η κλοπή, η ληστεία 
to complain παραπονιέμαι 
to deal with problems αντιμετωπίζω τα προβλήματα  
to deliver παραδίνω/παραδίδω 
to exchange ανταλλάσσω 
to guarantee εγγυώμαι 
to kick up a fuss/make noise κάνω φασαρία 
to pay πληρώνω 
to repair επισκευάζω 
to replace αντικαθιστώ 
telephone number o αριθμός τηλεφώνου 
to work, function εργάζομαι, λειτουργώ 
turn (my) η σειρά (μου) 
waiting time o χρόνος αναμονής 
wallet το πορτοφόλι 
wrong number o λάθος αριθμός 
Higher tier  
ambition/aspiration ο στόχος/η φιλοδοξία 
compensation η αποζημίωση 
instructions for use οι οδηγίες χρήσης 
insurance η ασφάλιση/η ασφάλεια 
progress, improvement η πρόοδος, η βελτίωση 
to bring back; take back δίνω πίσω, παίρνω πίσω 
to return/give back/change επιστρέφω / δίνω πίσω/αλλάζω 
to insure ασφαλίζω 
School 
 
Foundation tier  
A levels exams (equivalent) 
οι Πανελλήνιες εξετάσεις/οι Πανελλαδικές εξετάσεις 
(εξετάσεις για την εισαγωγή μαθητών στην 
τριτοβάθμια εκπαίδευση στην Ελλάδα) 
Ancient Greek τα Αρχαία Ελληνικά 
achievement, performance το επίτευγμα, η επίδοση, η απόδοση 
answer η απάντηση 
answer to a problem/of an exercise η λύση (ενός προβλήματος, μιας άσκησης) 
art η τέχνη, οι εικαστικές τέχνες, τα καλλιτεχνικά 
attendance register το απουσιολόγιο 
author/writer ο συγγραφέας 
average 
award/prize 
μέτριος/μέτρια 
το βραβείο 
beyond the classroom  εκτός σχολείου 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
121 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
biology η Βιολογία 
board (blackboard, whiteboard, interactive 
etc) 
ο πίνακας (μαυροπίνακας, λευκός πίνακας, 
διαδραστικός κ.λπ.) 
book το βιβλίο 
break το διάλειμμα 
building το κτίριο 
calculator η αριθμομηχανή, το κομπιουτεράκι 
canteen η καντίνα 
careers adviser ο σύμβουλος επαγγελματικού προσανατολισμού 
caretaker ο επιστάτης 
changing room τα αποδυτήρια 
chemistry η Χημεία 
choir η χορωδία 
class test, assessment το διαγώνισμα, το τεστ, η αξιολόγηση 
classroom η αίθουσα διδασκαλίας 
clever έξυπνος 
club ο όμιλος, ο σύλλογος, η ομάδα 
competition ο διαγωνισμός/ο συναγωνισμός 
corridor ο διάδρομος 
desk το θρανίο/το γραφείο 
detention/punishment η τιμωρία 
dictionary το λεξικό 
daily routine η καθημερινότητα 
drama η Θεατρολογία/το θέατρο 
drama group, acting group η θεατρική ομάδα 
drawing η ζωγραφική 
DT (design technology) η Τεχνολογία 
education η εκπαίδευση 
English τα Αγγλικά 
event η εκδήλωση 
examination η εξέταση 
exam paper/script 
exchange 
το γραπτό 
η ανταλλαγή 
excellent άριστος/άριστα 
exercise book το τετράδιο ασκήσεων 
exercise, practice η άσκηση, η πρακτική, η εξάσκηση, η γυμναστική 
experiment το πείραμα 
favourite αγαπημένος 
fellow student (school) ο συμμαθητής, η συμμαθήτρια 
fellow student (university) ο συμφοιτητής, η συμφοιτήτρια 
felt tip ο μαρκαδόρος 
food technology η τεχνολογία τροφίμων 
foreign languages οι ξένες γλώσσες 
fountain pen η πένα 
French τα Γαλλικά 
future plans τα μελλοντικά σχέδια/τα σχέδια για το μέλλον 
GCSE equivalent το απολυτήριο Γυμνασίου 
geography η Γεωγραφία 
German τα Γερμανικά 
glue η κόλλα 
gym το γυμναστήριο 
grades οι βαθμοί 
very good λίαν καλώς/πολύ καλά 
good καλώς/καλά 
satisfactory ικανοποιητικά 
adequate αρκετά καλά 
poor, unsatisfactory μη ικανοποιητικά 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
122 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
inadequate κάκιστα 
half-term οι σχολικές διακοπές στη μέση κάθε τριμήνου 
(Ηνωμένο Βασίλειο) 
(school) holidays (σχολικές) διακοπές 
homework η εργασία για το σπίτι, το διάβασμα (κατ' οίκον 
εργασία) 
ICT η Πληροφορική 
Greek τα Ελληνικά 
kindergarten, nursery school το νηπιαγωγείο 
knowledge η γνώση 
laboratory το εργαστήριο 
latin τα Λατινικά 
lazy τεμπέλης 
lesson  το μάθημα  
leaving certificate το απολυτήριο 
library η βιβλιοθήκη 
line/row η σειρά 
literature η λογοτεχνία 
lunch break το διάλειμμα για μεσημεριανό 
Lower Secondary school το γυμνάσιο 
mark, grade ο βαθμός 
maths τα Μαθηματικά 
medal (gold, silver, bronze) το μετάλλιο (χρυσό, αργυρό/ασημένιο, χάλκινο) 
media studies οι σπουδές στα μέσα μαζικής ενημέρωσης 
mixed μεικτός 
nonsense η βλακεία 
note, slip of paper το σημείωμα 
novel το μυθιστόρημα 
oral προφορικός 
pad of paper το σημειωματάριο 
page η σελίδα 
PE η Φυσική Αγωγή, η Γυμναστική 
PE teacher / sports instructor ο γυμναστής / ο προπονητής 
pen, ballpoint pen το στυλό 
pencil το μολύβι 
pencil case η μολυβοθήκη, η κασετίνα 
physics η Φυσική 
plan/project το σχέδιο, το σχεδιάγραμμα/ η εργασία, η μελέτη, το 
πρότζεκτ 
playground (school) η αυλή, το προαύλιο 
poetry η ποίηση 
preschool/daycare nursery ο παιδικός σταθμός, ο βρεφονηπιακός σταθμός 
present (in school) παρών (στο σχολείο) 
primary school το δημοτικό σχολείο 
private school το ιδιωτικό σχολείο 
progress η πρόοδος 
projector ο προβολέας 
personal and social education (PSE) η προσωπική και η κοινωνική εκπαίδευση (PSE) 
pupil ο μαθητής, η μαθήτρια  
qualification ο τίτλος (σπουδών), το προσόν 
question η ερώτηση 
rehearsal η πρόβα 
religion, Religious Studies η θρησκεία, τα Θρησκευτικά 
representative ο αντιπρόσωπος 
result το αποτέλεσμα 
rubber η σβήστρα 
rule ο κανόνας 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
123 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
ruler ο χάρακας 
secondary school το σχολείο δευτεροβάθμιας εκπαίδευσης, το γυμνάσιο 
και το λύκειο 
school το σχολείο/σχολικός 
school activity η σχολική δραστηριότητα 
school bag η σχολική τσάντα 
school bell το κουδούνι 
school book το σχολικό βιβλίο 
school bus το σχολικό λεωφορείο 
school day η σχολική ημέρα 
school exchange το πρόγραμμα ανταλλαγής μαθητών 
school group/party η σχολική ομάδα 
school hall η σχολική αίθουσα (για εκδηλώσεις) 
school keeper; caretaker ο σχολικός φύλακας, ο επιστάτης 
school leaving certificate το απολυτήριο λυκείου 
school newspaper η σχολική εφημερίδα 
school office το γραφείο 
school play η σχολική παράσταση 
school report/certificate ο σχολικός έλεγχος,το ενδεικτικό/το απολυτήριο 
school trip (e.g. one day trip, 5 day trip, 
educational) 
η σχολική εκδρομή (π.χ. ημερήσια εκδρομή, 
πενθήμερη εκδρομή (η πενταήμερη), εκπαιδευτική 
εκδρομή) 
school year η σχολική χρονιά 
sciences (school subject) οι θετικές επιστήμες (η Φυσική, η Χημεία, η Βιολογία) 
science  η επιστήμη 
scientist ο, η επιστήμονας 
scissors το ψαλίδι 
script 
serious (hardworking) 
το κείμενο/το γραπτό 
σοβαρός (εργατικός) 
semester το ακαδημαϊκό εξάμηνο 
sharpener η ξύστρα 
sixth form οι δύο τελευταίες τάξεις του λυκείου στο Ηνωμένο 
Βασίλειο, δευτέρα και τρίτη λυκείου στην Ελλάδα 
Spanish τα Ισπανικά 
sports field το γήπεδο 
sports hall, gym το αθλητικό κέντρο, το γυμναστήριο 
staff room η αίθουσα καθηγητών 
state δημόσιο 
state school το δημόσιο σχολείο 
strict αυστηρός 
strong, good at (subject) καλός σε (κάποιο μάθημα) 
student (school) ο μαθητής, η μαθήτρια  
student (university) ο φοιτητής, η φοιτήτρια 
student council το μαθητικό συμβούλιο 
subject το μάθημα/το θέμα/το αντικείμενο 
success η επιτυχία 
successful επιτυχημένος 
summer holidays οι καλοκαιρινές/οι θερινές διακοπές 
supply teacher; cover teacher ο αναπληρωτής δάσκαλος 
team η ομάδα 
technology η τεχνολογία 
term (part of the school year) το τρίμηνο 
term (terminology) ο όρος 
test η δοκιμή, το τεστ 
textbook (e.g. Maths book) το βιβλίο/το εγχειρίδιο (π.χ. των Μαθηματικών) 
tie η γραβάτα, η ισοπαλία (σε αγώνα) 
timetable το ωρολόγιο πρόγραμμα (μαθημάτων) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
124 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
to answer απαντώ 
to attend school πηγαίνω σχολείο 
to calculate υπολογίζω 
to carry on συνεχίζω 
to copy αντιγράφω 
to correct διορθώνω 
to discuss συζητώ, κάνω συζήτηση 
to do my homework διαβάζω/κάνω τα μαθήματά μου ή τη δουλειά για το 
σχολείο 
to draw ζωγραφίζω, σχεδιάζω 
to explain εξηγώ 
to fail (an exam) αποτυγχάνω (κόβομαι) 
to fill out/fill in/complete συμπληρώνω 
to learn μαθαίνω 
to pass (exam) περνώ (εξετάσεις) 
to pay attention; to be careful προσέχω, δίνω προσοχή, είμαι προσεκτικός 
to practise εξασκούμαι/εξασκώ 
to read διαβάζω  
to repeat επαναλαμβάνω 
to repeat a year μένω στην ίδια τάξη 
to revise κάνω επανάληψη 
to ring the bell (school) χτυπώ το κουδούνι 
to sing τραγουδώ 
to sit an exam δίνω εξετάσεις 
to study μελετώ/σπουδάζω 
to take the attendance register παίρνω παρουσίες 
to teach διδάσκω 
to translate μεταφράζω 
to understand καταλαβαίνω 
to work hard εργάζομαι σκληρά 
training (education) η εκπαίδευση, η επιμόρφωση, το επιμορφωτικό 
σεμινάριο 
training (sport) η προπόνηση 
translation η μετάφραση 
unfair αθέμιτος, άδικος 
uniform η στολή 
university το πανεπιστήμιο 
Upper Secondary school το λύκειο 
vocational school; technical college η επαγγελματική σχολή, το τεχνικό λύκειο 
weak, bad at (subject) αδύναμος, δεν είμαι καλός σε (κάποιο μάθημα) 
willing πρόθυμος 
written γραπτός 
work experience η εργασιακή εμπειρία 
worksheet το φυλλάδιο  
yr 7 Α' τάξη δευτεροβάθμιας εκπαίδευσης (Ηνωμένο 
Βασίλειο) 
yr 8 B' τάξη δευτεροβάθμιας εκπαίδευσης (Ηνωμένο 
Βασίλειο) 
yr 9 Γ' τάξη δευτεροβάθμιας εκπαίδευσης (Ηνωμένο 
Βασίλειο) 
yr 10 Δ' τάξη δευτεροβάθμιας εκπαίδευσης (Ηνωμένο 
Βασίλειο) 
yr 11 Ε' τάξη δευτεροβάθμιας εκπαίδευσης (Ηνωμένο 
Βασίλειο) 
yr 12 ΣΤ' τάξη δευτεροβάθμιας εκπαίδευσης (Ηνωμένο 
Βασίλειο) 
yr 13 Ζ' τάξη δευτεροβάθμιας εκπαίδευσης (Ηνωμένο 
Βασίλειο) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
125 
 
Higher tier  
absent απών 
anxiety η αγωνία/ η ανησυχία/ το άγχος 
boarding school το οικοτροφείο (σχολείο) 
business studies οι επιχειρηματικές σπουδές 
class register το απουσιολόγιο 
core/compulsory subject βασικό/υποχρεωτικό μάθημα 
diligent/studious επιμελής, μελετηρός 
discipline η πειθαρχία 
do badly; fail αποτυγχάνω 
economics τα Οικονομικά/οι Οικονομικές Επιστήμες 
essay η έκθεση 
european ευρωπαϊκός/πανευρωπαϊκός 
expulsion η αποβολή 
final exam οι τελικές εξετάσεις 
forgiving επιεικής 
gifted προικισμένος 
graduate απόφοιτος 
headphones τα ακουστικά 
home economics η Οικιακή Οικονομία 
ink το μελάνι 
international διεθνής 
law ο νόμος 
meeting, discussion η συνάντηση, η συζήτηση 
national εθνικός/πανελλήνιος 
necessary απαραίτητος 
optional (subject) το προαιρετικό μάθημα / το μάθημα επιλογής  
parents’ evening ενημερωτική συγκέντρωση γονέων  
permission η άδεια 
pressure η πίεση 
pronunciation η προφορά 
query η απορία, η ερώτηση, το ερώτημα 
report ο έλεγχος, η αναφορά 
school assembly η σχολική (πρωινή) συγκέντρωση/η προσευχή 
sociology η Κοινωνιολογία 
studies οι σπουδές 
supervisor (exams) ο επιτηρητής, η επιτηρήτρια 
to agree συμφωνώ 
to be cancelled (lessons) ακυρώνεται (μάθημα) 
to expell a student αποβάλλω έναν μαθητή 
to have a detention μπαίνω τιμωρία/ με βάζουν τιμωρία 
to keep contact with κρατώ επαφή/διατηρώ επαφή 
to improve (one’s knowledge/skills in) βελτιώνω (τις γνώσεις / τις δεξιότητές μου) 
to last (duration) κρατώ, διαρκώ 
to move up (to the next form/year) πηγαίνω/περνώ στην επόμενη τάξη / έτος 
to pronounce προφέρω 
to skive/to skip/bunk lessons κάνω κοπάνα 
to spell γράφω (ορθογραφία) 
to teach διδάσκω 
training centre το εκπαιδευτικό κέντρο 
waste of time το χάσιμο χρόνου 
worldwide παγκόσμιος 
(to do a) written punishment, lines η γραπτή τιμωρία 
  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
126 
 
Future aspirations, study and work 
Foundation tier  
actor, actress ο, η ηθοποιός 
accountant ο λογιστής, η λογίστρια 
advertisement η διαφήμιση, η αγγελία 
air hostess/air steward ο, η αεροσυνοδός  
answerphone ο αυτόματος τηλεφωνητής 
application η αίτηση 
appointment το ραντεβού 
architect ο αρχιτέκτονας 
artist ο, η καλλιτέχνης 
badly paid κακοπληρωμένος 
baker ο αρτοποιός, ο φούρναρης 
boss το αφεντικό, ο προϊστάμενος 
builder ο οικοδόμος, ο χτίστης 
business/shop η επιχείρηση/το κατάστημα 
businessman, bussineswoman ο, η επιχειρηματίας  
busy απασχολημένος 
butcher ο κρεοπώλης, ο χασάπης 
candidate ο υποψήφιος, η υποψήφια 
career η καριέρα, η σταδιοδρομία 
cashier ο ταμίας 
charity η φιλανθρωπία, η φιλανθρωπική οργάνωση 
civil servant ο, η δημόσιος υπάλληλος 
coffee (tea/lunch) break το διάλειμμα για καφέ (τσάι/μεσημεριανό) 
colleague ο, η συνάδελφος 
communication η επικοινωνία 
company η εταιρεία 
computer science η Πληροφορική 
computer scientist ο επιστήμονας πληροφορικής 
conference το συνέδριο, η σύσκεψη, η διάσκεψη 
cook/chef ο μάγειρας, η μαγείρισσα/ ο, η σεφ 
CV το βιογραφικό σημείωμα 
(a) day’s leave η ημερήσια άδεια/ μια μέρα άδεια 
dentist ο, η οδοντίατρος 
designer ο σχεδιαστής/η σχεδιάστρια 
doctor ο, η γιατρός 
dream το όνειρο 
driver ο, η οδηγός 
educational ο, η εκπαιδευτικός 
electrician ο ηλεκτρολόγος 
(bank) employee ο, η υπάλληλος (τράπεζας) 
employer ο εργοδότης, η εργοδότρια 
employment η εργασία 
engineer ο, η μηχανικός 
enthusiasm ο ενθουσιασμός 
experience  η εμπειρία/η πείρα 
experienced έμπειρος 
factory το εργοστάσιο 
farmer ο γεωργός 
fashion η μόδα 
file ο φάκελος, το αρχείο 
fireman ο πυροσβέστης 
florist('s) ο, η ανθοπώλης ( το ανθοπωλείo) 
folder ο φάκελος, το ντοσιέ 
form το έντυπο/η αίτηση 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
127 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
full time η πλήρης απασχόληση 
future το μέλλον 
gardener ο κηπουρός 
hours of work οι εργάσιμες ώρες 
impression η εντύπωση 
interview (job) η συνέντευξη (για εργασία) 
interview (TV or magazine) η συνέντευξη (για τηλεόραση ή περιοδικό) 
instructor ο δάσκαλος, η δασκάλα 
job, post, position η θέση εργασίας 
job, profession, occupation η δουλειά, η εργασία, το επάγγελμα, η απασχόληση 
job advert η αγγελία θέσεων εργασίας 
journalist o, η δημοσιογράφος 
language η γλώσσα 
lawyer ο, η δικηγόρος 
leaving certificate το απολυτήριο 
letter  το γράμμα, η επιστολή 
letterbox το γραμματοκιβώτιο 
lunch break το μεσημεριανό διάλειμμα 
manager ο διευθυντής, η διευθύντρια 
marketing το μάρκετινγκ 
mechanic ο μηχανικός (αυτοκινήτων) 
meeting η συνάντηση 
message το μήνυμα 
mistake το λάθος 
mouse το ποντίκι 
musician ο, η μουσικός 
nurse η νοσοκόμα 
opportunity η ευκαιρία 
owner ο ιδιοκτήτης, η ιδιοκτήτρια 
painter ο, η ζωγράφος 
paper το χαρτί 
part time η μερική απασχόληση 
pay η πληρωμή 
per hour ανά ώρα, την ώρα 
pharmacist ο, η φαρμακοποιός 
pilot ο, η πιλότος 
plan, project το σχέδιο, η εργασία, το πρότζεκτ 
planned σχεδιασμένος 
plumber ο υδραυλικός 
poet ο ποιητής, η ποιήτρια 
police officer ο, η αστυνομικός 
post/post office το ταχυδρομείο 
postman ο ταχυδρόμος 
presenter ο παρουσιαστής, η παρουσιάστρια 
qualified με προσόντα, αρμόδιος 
rep, sales representative ο, η αντιπρόσωπος/ ο, η αντιπρόσωπος πωλήσεων 
result το αποτέλεσμα 
salary ο μισθός 
sales οι πωλήσεις 
sales assistant ο πωλητής, η πωλήτρια 
screen η οθόνη 
secretary ο, η γραμματέας 
sewing, tailoring το ράψιμο, η ραπτική 
shop το μαγαζί, το κατάστημα 
situation wanted ζητείται εργασία 
skills οι δεξιότητες 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
128 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
society η κοινωνία 
soldier ο στρατιώτης 
strike η απεργία 
student (school)/student (University) ο μαθητής, η μαθήτρια/ο φοιτητής, η φοιτήτρια  
superior ο ανώτερος, η ανώτερη 
teacher (primary) ο δάσκαλος, η δασκάλα 
teacher (secondary school, university) ο καθηγητής, η καθηγήτρια 
technician ο, η τεχνικός 
telephone directory, telephone book ο τηλεφωνικός κατάλογος 
telephone call το τηλεφώνημα 
terms of employment οι όροι απασχόλησης 
to apply for a job κάνω αίτηση για θέση εργασίας 
to appoint διορίζω 
to decide αποφασίζω 
to do a course παρακολουθώ μαθήματα  
to do casual work δουλεύω περιστασιακά 
to earn βγάζω, κερδίζω 
to fill in a form συμπληρώνω ένα έντυπο 
to file αρχειοθετώ 
to fire απολύω 
to hang up κλείνω το τηλέφωνο 
to organise οργανώνω 
to pay πληρώνω 
to practise εξασκούμαι 
to pre pay προπληρώνω 
to print εκτυπώνω 
to send στέλνω 
to study μελετώ, σπουδάζω 
to type πληκτρολογώ 
training η εκπαίδευση, η επιμόρφωση, η πρακτική 
travel agency το ταξιδιωτικό πρακτορείο, το γραφείο ταξιδίων 
unemployment η ανεργία 
university το πανεπιστήμιο 
voluntarily, without pay εθελοντικά, χωρίς αμοιβή 
volunteer ο εθελοντής, η εθελόντρια 
volunteering ο εθελοντισμός 
waiter/waitress ο σερβιτόρος/η σερβιτόρα 
web page/web site η ιστοσελίδα 
well paid καλοπληρωμένος 
work η εργασία, η δουλειά 
work experience η προϋπηρεσία, η εργασιακή εμπειρία, η 
επαγγελματική πείρα 
worker  ο εργάτης, η εργάτρια 
Higher tier  
(data) file το αρχείο (δεδομένων) 
aim; goal ο σκοπός, ο στόχος 
applicant ο υποψήφιος, η υποψήφια/ ο αιτών, η αιτούσα 
apply at/go to e.g. ask at reception κάνετε αίτηση στο / πηγαίνετε στο, π.χ. ρωτήστε στη 
ρεσεψιόν 
to apply; enroll κάνω αίτηση, γράφομαι 
appointment το ραντεβού, ο διορισμός 
apprentice ο μαθητευόμενος, η μαθητευόμενη 
apprenticeship η μαθητεία/η εκπαίδευση 
at (in email address @) το παπάκι 
attached (email) συνημμένος 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
129 
 
Higher tier (cont)   
author ο, η συγγραφέας 
charity sale (e.g. bake sale) η αγορά για φιλανθρωπικό σκοπό (π.χ. πώληση 
αρτοσκευασμάτων) 
contract το συμβόλαιο 
data base η βάση δεδομένων 
enclosed εσώκλειστος 
equality η ισότητα 
flexitime το ευέλικτο ωράριο 
forward slash η πλάγια μπάρα 
further study η επιμόρφωση, η μετεκπαίδευση 
hard disk ο σκληρός δίσκος 
higher education η τριτοβάθμια εκπαίδευση 
impression η εντύπωση 
in aid of υπέρ, προς όφελος 
internship η πρακτική (εξάσκηση) 
job advert; vacancy η αγγελία εργασίας, η κενή θέση εργασίας 
job; position η θέση εργασίας 
job centre το κέντρο/γραφείο εύρεσης εργασίας 
key (on keyboard) το πλήκτρο (στο πληκτρολόγιο) 
keyboard το πληκτρολόγιο 
law (study of the subject) νομικά, η Νομική 
letter of application η επιστολή αίτησης 
link ο σύνδεσμος 
lorry driver ο φορτηγατζής 
medicine (study of the subject) η ιατρική (η μελέτη του αντικειμένου) 
memory card η κάρτα μνήμης 
opinion poll η δημοσκόπηση 
password ο κωδικός πρόσβασης 
printer ο εκτυπωτής 
profession, job, occupation το επάγγελμα (που χρειάζεται εξειδίκευση, π.χ. 
γιατρός), δουλειά/εργασία, η απασχόληση 
programmer ο προγραμματιστής, η προγραμματίστρια 
promotion prospects οι προοπτικές προαγωγής 
qualified αρμόδιος,καταρτισμένος, εξειδικευμένος 
school education η σχολική εκπαίδευση 
sift work η βάρδια 
signature η υπογραφή 
situations vacant οι κενές θέσεις εργασίας 
study (noun) η μελέτη, η έρευνα 
success η επιτυχία 
successful επιτυχής 
teaching η διδασκαλία 
to apply for a job κάνω αίτηση για θέση εργασίας 
to cut/to be cut off (phone) κόβεται η γραμμή 
to enclose, to attach εσωκλείω, επισυνάπτω 
to introduce oneself συστήνομαι 
to put someone through συνδέω κάποιον 
trade fair η εμπορική έκθεση 
underscore υπογραμμίζω 
unemployed ο άνεργος, η άνεργη 
vet ο, η κτηνίατρος 
voluntary work η εθελοντική εργασία 
volunteer ο εθελοντής, η εθελόντρια 
word processing η επεξεργασία κειμένου 
work (informal) η εργασία, η δουλειά 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
130 
 
International and global dimension: bringing the world together, 
environmental issues 
Foundation tier  
access η πρόσβαση 
activity η δραστηριότητα 
advantages/disadvantages τα πλεονεκτήματα/τα μειονεκτήματα 
advertising campaign η διαφημιστική εκστρατεία/η καμπάνια 
admission η είσοδος /το εισιτήριο εισόδου 
animal το ζώο 
athlete ο αθλητής, η αθλήτρια 
athletics ο στίβος 
atmosphere η ατμόσφαιρα 
being green η πράσινη συνείδηση 
benefit 
campaign (e.g against smoking, cancer) 
το όφελος 
η εκστρατεία/η καμπάνια (αντικαπνιστική, 
αντικαρκινική) 
cancer ο καρκίνος 
championship το πρωτάθλημα 
charity η φιλανθρωπία, η φιλανθρωπική οργάνωση 
coal ο άνθρακας 
community η κοινότητα 
concert η συναυλία 
country η χώρα 
demonstration η διαδήλωση 
disaster η καταστροφή 
doctors without borders οι γιατροί χωρίς σύνορα 
drinking water το πόσιμο νερό 
drought η ξηρασία 
earth η γη 
ecology η οικολογία  
electricity ο ηλεκτρισμός 
energy; power η ενέργεια, ο ηλεκτρισμός 
environment το περιβάλλον 
environmental περιβαλλοντικός 
environmental issues τα περιβαλλοντικά ζητήματα / θέματα, τα θέματα 
περιβάλλοντος 
European championship το ευρωπαϊκό πρωτάθλημα 
factory το εργοστάσιο 
(music) festival το (μουσικό) φεστιβάλ 
fires (e.g. forest) η πυρκαγιά, οι φωτιές στα δάση  
flood; flooding η πλημμύρα 
for/against υπέρ/κατά 
(rain)forest το τροπικό δάσος 
free (entry) η δωρεάν είσοδος 
gas το αέριο 
global dimension η παγκόσμια διάσταση 
global; world wide παγκόσμιος 
good cause ο καλός σκοπός 
homeless ο άστεγος, η άστεγη 
hunger η πείνα, ο λιμός 
hurricane ο τυφώνας 
information leaflet το ενημερωτικό φυλλάδιο 
international διεθνής 
lack (of) η έλλειψη 
lake η λίμνη 
match (football) ο αγώνας (π.χ. ποδοσφαιρικός) 
migrant ο μετανάστης, η μετανάστρια 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
131 
 
Foundation tier (cont)  
mountain το βουνό, το όρος 
music event η μουσική εκδήλωση 
music group/band το μουσικό συγκρότημα 
natural disaster η φυσική καταστροφή 
natural resources οι φυσικοί πόροι 
nature η φύση 
ocean ο ωκεανός 
oil το πετρέλαιο 
Olympic games οι Ολυμπιακοί αγώνες 
organisation ο οργανισμός/η οργάνωση 
outcome το αποτέλεσμα 
people οι άνθρωποι/ο λαός 
planet ο πλανήτης 
pollution η ρύπανση 
poverty η φτώχεια 
protection η προστασία 
protest η διαμαρτυρία 
quality η ποιότητα 
race ο αγώνας  
recycling η ανακύκλωση 
recycling bin ο κάδος ανακύκλωσης 
refugee ο, η πρόσφυγας 
river ο ποταμός, το ποτάμι 
rubbish τα σκουπίδια 
singer ο τραγουδιστής, η τραγουδίστρια 
smoking το κάπνισμα 
society η κοινωνία 
song το τραγούδι 
sport ο αθλητισμός/ τα σπορ 
sport events οι αθλητικές εκδηλώσεις, οι αθλητικές διοργανώσεις 
sports fan ο, η φίλαθλος 
sports ground το γήπεδο 
to breathe αναπνέω 
to clean καθαρίζω 
to die πεθαίνω 
to distribute μοιράζω 
to live ζω 
to pick up (rubbish) μαζεύω 
to pollute ρυπαίνω 
to protect προστατεύω 
to protest διαμαρτύρομαι 
to recycle ανακυκλώνω 
to save (water) εξοικονομώ (νερό) 
to smoke καπνίζω 
to support υποστηρίζω 
tree το δέντρο 
war ο πόλεμος 
world o κόσμος /παγκόσμιος 
world cup (football) το παγκόσμιο κύπελλο (ποδόσφαιρο) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
132 
 
Higher tier  
climate (adjective) κλιματικός (επίθετο) 
danger ο κίνδυνος 
disability η αναπηρία 
earthquake ο σεισμός 
endangered species (e.g. bear, sea turtle) το είδος προς εξαφάνιση (π.χ.η αρκούδα, η θαλάσσια 
χελώνα) 
equality η ισότητα 
fresh water το φρέσκο νερό 
fair trade το δίκαιο εμπόριο 
fundraising ο έρανος 
global warming το φαινόμενο του θερμοκηπίου 
globalisation η παγκοσμιοποίηση 
industry η βιομηχανία 
inequality η ανισότητα 
instant άμεσος 
malnourished υποσιτισμένος 
ozon layer το στρώμα του όζοντος 
racism ο ρατσισμός 
rights of man; peoples’ rights τα δικαιώματα του ανθρώπου, τα ανθρώπινα 
δικαιώματα 
salt water το αλατόνερο 
security η ασφάλεια 
solar power η ηλιακή ενέργεια 
species το είδος (φυτού, ζώου) 
sports event το αθλητικό γεγονός 
spying η κατασκοπεία 
starving (που) λιμοκτονεί, πεθαίνει από την πείνα 
to (make) compost φτιάχνω κομπόστ, κομποστοποιώ 
to benefit ωφελώ, ωφελούμαι, επωφελούμαι 
to cause/to provoke προκαλώ 
to contaminate μολύνω 
to contribute συμβάλλω/συνεισφέρω 
to disappear εξαφανίζομαι 
to harm βλάπτω 
to lack στερούμαι, δεν έχω, λείπει 
to save; to keep safe σώζω, διατηρώ ασφαλές 
to sort/separate (e.g. rubbish) ταξινομώ/ξεχωρίζω (π.χ. σκουπίδια) 
to stay in contact διατηρώ επαφή 
to survive επιβιώνω 
to threaten απειλώ 
unfortunate; needy ατυχής, δυστυχής / φτωχός, άπορος 
volcano το ηφαίστειο 
waste τα απόβλητα εργοστασίων 
wheelchair η αναπηρική καρέκλα 
 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
133 
Appendix 4: The context for the 
development of this qualification 
All our qualifications are designed to meet our World Class Qualification Principles[1] and our 
ambition to put the student at the heart of everything we do. 
We have developed and designed this qualification by: 
● reviewing other curricula and qualifications to ensure that it is comparable with those 
taken in high-performing jurisdictions overseas 
● consulting with key stakeholders on content and assessment, including subject 
associations, academics and advisors, teachers and students to ensure this qualification is 
suitable for a UK context 
● reviewing the legacy qualification and building on its positive attributes. 
This qualification has also been developed to meet criteria stipulated by Ofqual in their 
documents GCSE (9 to 1) Subject Level Guidance and GCSE Subject Level Conditions and 
Requirements for Modern Foreign Languages, published in April 2016.  
 
 
[1] Pearson’s World Class Qualification Principles ensure that our qualifications are: 
● demanding, through internationally benchmarked standards, encouraging deep learning and 
measuring higher-order skills 
● rigorous, through setting and maintaining standards over time, developing reliable and valid 
assessment tasks and processes, and generating confidence in end users of the knowledge, skills 
and competencies of certified students 
● inclusive, through conceptualising learning as continuous, recognising that students develop at 
different rates and have different learning needs, and focusing on progression 
● empowering, through promoting the development of transferable skills, see Appendix 5.  
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
134 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class Qualifications 
May 2014 
“ The reform of the qualifications system in England is a profoundly important change to the 
education system. Teachers need to know that the new qualifications will assist them in 
helping their learners make progress in their lives. 
When these changes were first proposed we were approached by Pearson to join an ‘Expert 
Panel’ that would advise them on the development of the new qualifications. 
We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or because of 
our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the world as diverse as 
Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries across Europe. 
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous qualification development 
process that has included: 
● extensive international comparability of subject content against the highest-performing 
jurisdictions in the world 
● benchmarking assessments against UK and overseas providers to ensure that they are at 
the right level of demand 
● establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-specific 
expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications 
● subjecting the final qualifications to scrutiny against the DfE content and Ofqual 
accreditation criteria in advance of submission.  
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future oriented. The 
design has been guided by what is called an ‘Efficacy Framework’, meaning learner outcomes 
have been at the heart of this development throughout.  
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a learner’s 
success in education. As a result of our work as a panel we are confident that we have 
supported the development of qualifications that are outstanding for their coherence, 
thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as representing world-class best 
practice. 
”    
  
Sir Michael Barber (Chair) 
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc 
Professor Lee Sing Kong 
Director, National Institute of Education, 
Singapore 
  
Bahram Bekhradnia 
President, Higher Education Policy Institute 
Professor Jonathan Osborne 
Stanford University 
  
Dame Sally Coates 
Principal, Burlington Danes Academy 
Professor Dr Ursula Renold 
Federal Institute of Technology, 
Switzerland 
  
Professor Robin Coningham 
Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Durham 
Professor Bob Schwartz 
Harvard Graduate School of Education 
  
Dr Peter Hill 
Former Chief Executive ACARA 
 
 
All titles correct as at May 2014 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
135 
Appendix 5: Transferable skills 
The need for transferable skills 
In recent years, higher education institutions and employers have consistently flagged the 
need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable them to respond with 
confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the world of work. 
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines skills, or 
competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that can be learned and 
that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform an activity or task and can be 
built upon and extended through learning.’[1] 
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected and 
evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this process, we 
identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework as the most evidence-based and 
robust skills framework. We adapted the framework slightly to include the Program for 
International Student Assessment (PISA) ICT Literacy and Collaborative Problem Solving 
(CPS) Skills. 
The adapted National Research Council’s framework of skills involves:[2] 
Cognitive skills 
● Non-routine problem solving – expert thinking, metacognition, creativity. 
● Systems thinking – decision making and reasoning. 
● Critical thinking – definitions of critical thinking are broad and usually involve general 
cognitive skills such as analysing, synthesising and reasoning skills. 
● ICT literacy – access, manage, integrate, evaluate, construct and communicate.[3]  
Interpersonal skills 
● Communication – active listening, oral communication, written communication, assertive 
communication and non-verbal communication. 
● Relationship-building skills – teamwork, trust, intercultural sensitivity, service 
orientation, self-presentation, social influence, conflict resolution and negotiation. 
● Collaborative problem solving – establishing and maintaining shared understanding, 
taking appropriate action, establishing and maintaining team organisation. 
Intrapersonal skills 
● Adaptability – ability and willingness to cope with the uncertain, handling work stress, 
adapting to different personalities, communication styles and cultures, and physical 
adaptability to various indoor and outdoor work environments. 
● Self-management and self-development – ability to work remotely in virtual teams, 
work autonomously, be self-motivating and self-monitoring, willing and able to acquire 
new information and skills related to work. 
Transferable skills enable young people to face the demands of further and higher education, 
as well as the demands of the workplace, and are important in the teaching and learning of 
this qualification. We will provide teaching and learning materials, developed with 
stakeholders, to support our qualifications. 
 
 
[1]  OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012) 
[2]  Koenig J A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop 
(National Academies Press, 2011) 
[3]  PISA – The PISA Framework for Assessment of ICT Literacy (2011) 
 
Pearson Edexcel Level 1/Level 2 GCSE (9-1) in Greek – Specification 
Issue 5 – October 2022 © Pearson Education Limited 2022 
136 
Appendix 6: Codes 
 
Type of code Use of code Code 
Discount codes Every qualification eligible for performance 
tables is assigned a discount code 
indicating the subject area to which it 
belongs. 
Discount codes are published by the DfE.  
Please see the GOV.UK 
website* 
Regulated 
Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) 
codes 
Each qualification title is allocated an 
Ofqual Regulated Qualifications 
Framework (RQF) code. 
The RQF code is known as a Qualification 
Number (QN). This is the code that 
features in the DfE Section 96 and on the 
LARA as being eligible for 16–18 and 19+ 
funding, and is to be used for all 
qualification funding purposes. The QN will 
appear on students’ final certification 
documentation. 
The QN for this 
qualification is: 
603/1184/8 
Subject codes The subject code is used by centres to 
enter students for a qualification. Centres 
will need to use the entry codes only when 
claiming students’ qualifications. 
GCSE – 1GK0 
 
Paper codes These codes are provided for reference 
purposes. Students do not need to be 
entered for individual papers. 
Paper 1: 1GK0/01 
Paper 2: 1GK0/02 
Paper 3: 1GK0/03 
Paper 4: 1GK0/04 
 
*www.gov.uk/government/publications/2018-performance-tables-discount-codes 
 
 
TM290922 9781446956427_GCSE2017_L12_GREEK_ISSUE5.DOC.1–142/0 
 
 
About Pearson 
We are the world’s leading learning company operating in countries all around the world. We 
provide content, assessment and digital services to schools, colleges and universities, as well 
as professional and vocational education to learners to help increase their skills and lifelong 
employability prospects. We believe that wherever learning flourishes so do people. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This specification is Issue 5. We will inform centres of any changes to this issue. The latest 
issue can be found on the Pearson website: qualifications.pearson.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References to third party materials made in this specification are made in good faith. Pearson 
does not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may 
be subject to change, or any opinions expressed therein. (Materials may include textbooks, 
journals, magazines and other publications and websites.) 
 
All information in this specification is correct at time of publication. 
 
Original origami artwork: Mark Bolitho  
Origami photography: Pearson Education Ltd/Naki Kouyioumtzis 
 
ISBN 978 1 446 95642 7 
All the material in this publication is copyright 
© Pearson Education Limited 2022 
 
For information about Pearson Qualifications, including Pearson Edexcel, 
BTEC and LCCI qualifications visit qualifications.pearson.com
Edexcel and BTEC are registered trademarks of Pearson Education Limited
Pearson Education Limited. Registered in England and Wales No. 872828 
Registered Office:  80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL
VAT Reg No GB 278 537121